
























































Hansard: March 04, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 4, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4541 
 March 4, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the Assembly is 
resumed. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I appreciate the . . . It’s always a little livelier 
when you start back into the evening sitting and I appreciate the 
words of encouragement opposite. 
 
It’s a pleasure to enter into discussion as it relates to Bill No. 
118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. This Act, as I’ve read 
through it at first glance and had some brief conversations with 
some of the sector on this front, is something that is seeming to 
be embraced within the sector, seems to make sense on a lot of 
fronts. There’s some practical changes that come with this Act 
and a few others. Certainly we’ll continue to consult as it relates 
to these changes with the sector. 
 
But it’s worth noting that these changes relate directly back to 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology]. And of course SIAST has a long, proud history in 
Saskatchewan and one that I’d like to recognize, be thankful 
for. And certainly this allows that role to continue to evolve, 
allows SIAST with a new name and with a bit of a changed 
mandate to continue to serve Saskatchewan for many years 
forward. 
 
You know, certainly SIAST itself, I always recognize is such a 
nimble organization. One that listens, I believe, to the needs of 
the community, listens to economic stakeholders, works well 
with worker . . . organizations of workers, works really well 
with businesses. Mr. Speaker, it’s a dynamic organization that’s 
responded to needs in our economy and has really equipped 
many, many Saskatchewan people with the skills they need to 
enter into a career and to build a life, of course, in our province. 
 
The role of a polytechnic or of a technical education and skills 
training facility is really important in this province. It’s vital to 
meeting the needs of our labour force. It’s critical to meeting 
the needs of the economy and it’s important in meeting the 
social potential of Saskatchewan people. And certainly the 
changes that I see here today certainly don’t seem to impede the 
good work of that board and their administration. 
 
I would like to recognize just some of their leadership. They do 

have an exceptional board. We meet with their board Chair and 
with their board members. I’d like to thank them for their 
service. I’d like to thank the current board for their service to 
Saskatchewan. I’d also like to thank really all board members 
present and past for their contributions to our province and in 
building SIAST to what it has become here in our province. 
 
I’d also like to recognize Dr. Rosia for his leadership to the 
organization. I’m not sure if he . . . with these changes if he’s 
CEO [chief executive officer] or if he’s president. I believe he’d 
be a president would be the title of the new organization. And 
certainly he’s somebody that will take on that role and continue 
his service and his leadership in an exceptional way, and 
something that we should all be thankful for. 
 
The actual changes are sometimes practical in nature. It changes 
the name from SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic. But in 
some ways they’re broader reaching than that, further reaching 
than that as well. Polytechnic allows this institution to partner 
and be a part of an association with polytechnics and to I guess 
be a part of that group, that organization, and potentially learn 
from those institutions or to have some shared learning and to 
have a . . . to be able to operate with certainly a high level of 
pride and distinction here in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s also some changes, I understand, that would allow the 
institution, the polytechnic or SIAST, to fundraise for 
infrastructure requirements, I believe, or for capital needs. And 
you know, this is something that can definitely make sense, but 
we also want to make sure that government never abdicates its 
important role of funding this very important institution and the 
role and purposes of that education. So we want to make sure 
that, certainly while it seems to be a common sense solution to 
allow partnerships and some funding to be able to flow back 
towards capital funding for infrastructure needs, it’s really 
important that we never forget that government has a critical 
role to play here. 
 
And when I look at SIAST right now and I think of the future 
for that polytechnic, it’s critical that this government do better 
listening to the strained realities of space within those facilities. 
And I know that SIAST has done such an exceptional job of 
recruiting students all across this province, and graduating 
students, and those students going directly, I understand at a 
very high level, into strong earning positions right across this 
province. But this government hasn’t been as supportive as they 
could be as it relates to the infrastructure needs of that facility. 
So that’s something we’ll certainly track. Just the same as we’ll 
be tracking the operating grants and funding for SIAST, or for 
now the Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
I understand that some of the changes as well will allow for 
some applied research and scholarly activity. And certainly that 
would seem to me to be important to that organization, to that 
institution. It would add to that institution. Certainly we have 
some general questions for the minister about what this means 
exactly, and how these changes will impact this institution. But 
it seems to be positive. And we’ll be following up, as I say, 
with the minister on those fronts. 
 
And importantly we’ll be, as an official opposition, continuing 
to reach out, listen to the voices of the board, the 



4542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

administration, the faculty, and as well the entire 
post-secondary sector. And I think of University of Regina and 
University of Saskatchewan and Gabriel Dumont Technical 
Institute, and SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies], and Saskatchewan Apprenticeship, as well as 
our regional colleges — these are some of the important 
partners in the post-secondary sector that provide opportunity 
for Saskatchewan students, and build lifelong careers, hopefully 
here in this province from the skills, from the learning that 
they’ve acquired through these institutions. 
 
So our consultation as an opposition will continue. We know 
that’s important. We know that far too often this government 
rams forward with changes in legislation, where they haven’t 
listened to stakeholders, where they’re pushed forward without 
asking those that are impacted what the impacts will be. And as 
a result, far too often there’s a host of unintended consequences 
that have been identified by partners in Saskatchewan, 
stakeholders that are directly affected that should have been 
heard in the first place by government. We hope that’s not the 
case with this piece of legislation. We see a lot of opportunity in 
what’s being advanced here. 
 
We do want to make sure as this Act is being changed that the 
scope of considerations and the scope of potential changes are 
adequate. Because this is a tremendous opportunity when you 
open up an Act, when you’re changing the mandate, when 
you’re changing the name, when you’re changing some of the 
focus, to make sure that this institution has been equipped with 
all it needs to be as successful as it can be for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people well into the future. 
 
So those will be the sorts of questions we’ll be engaging with 
the sector on. And we look forward to further clarification and 
detail from the minister moving forward. But as I say, I’d like 
to thank the board of SIAST, the administration at SIAST, Dr. 
Rosia, and all the faculty and all the students at that impressive 
institution. We look forward to many more years of success. At 
this point in time, I adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to follow 
up to the discussions as it relates to Bill No. 118 to speak to the 
consequential amendments Bill No. 119. I don’t have a whole 
bunch more to say to this piece of legislation at this point in 

time. As I’ve said, we’ll be consulting directly with the sector. 
We’re thankful for the leadership of SIAST. We’re thankful for 
the students. We’ll be looking for input. I have read through the 
minister’s comments in introducing this bill. I find it a tad 
disappointing that he’d choose to use that opportunity as a time 
to sort of do a partisan attack of sorts. But you know, if that’s 
his approach, so be it. 
 
What I do know is that SIAST has served Saskatchewan people 
incredibly well, that those that are around SIAST, leading 
SIAST, are certainly wanting to see its success well into the 
future. There’s some new opportunities that could be realized 
through the polytechnic status in name and the mandate and 
some of those opportunities. And certainly we know the 
importance of this institution to the future of Saskatchewan. 
And we’ll be consulting with all affected stakeholders and 
working directly with the minister throughout this process to 
seek clarity where it’s needed and make sure that all 
consequences, intended and unintended, have been 
contemplated. 
 
At this point in time I adjourn debate for Bill No. 119, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 
considerable interest that I am rising tonight to speak to this 
bill, Bill 120, The Lobbyists Act. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, 
back just after the election in November of 2011 and the end of 
the first session there, the Premier decided that it was time for 
Saskatchewan to have lobbying legislation. And so he asked the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee to take a look 
at that and come up with a report and make some 
recommendations. And I was fortunate enough to be chosen as 
the representative on that committee from our caucus, to be able 
to be part of those proceedings and part of the inquiry into the 
prospect of lobbying legislation in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you’ll also note, Mr. Speaker, that we filed our final report 
of the committee on May 16, 2012 after having gone through 
considerable research. And fortunately enough, we were able to 
attend some meetings in Ottawa where we, through the 
organization of the legislative staff, were able to meet with a 
number of registrars from varying jurisdictions, including the 
federal lobbyist register and as well as a number of provincial 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4543 

bodies. 
 
And what had happened, Mr. Speaker, at that time was that the 
federal government was undergoing its own legislative review 
of their lobbying legislation, and so various people were being 
invited to speak to committee about it. And we actually got to 
sit in on the committee hearings as well. So I think as a 
committee we were able to garner a lot of information and hear 
from some very interesting people about lobbying legislation 
across Canada. 
 
I won’t go into a lot of detail on the particulars of what we 
heard, but I do want to refer members to the report that was 
filed. A number of recommendations came out of that report, 
most of which have been incorporated into the legislation. And 
I think that’s good and appropriate. 
 
Just kind of go through a few, some of these recommendations 
that are found in the report starting with — find the first one 
here — we recommended a particular definition of lobby. And I 
think by and large that’s been incorporated. And the difference 
between a consultant lobbyist and an in-house lobbyist, and 
certainly there’s some good commentary in the report on that. 
 
I guess one of the perhaps contentious, couple of the 
contentious items that this legislation has been criticized for, 
and also were concerns in particular, was who would be 
exempt? And, Mr. Speaker, I think the whole notion of having a 
lobbying registry and having it as transparent and open and 
accountable as possible is so that the public has confidence in 
the kind of access people have to legislators and decision 
makers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And certainly everyone acknowledges that the importance of 
lobbying is critical to the effective functioning of a democracy. 
The word lobbying has taken on a bit of negative tone in years 
past, and nowadays you will find people who are doing the 
actual work of lobbying describing themselves as government 
relations. So that’s sort of the new language to describe the act 
of lobbying. 
 
And even when I speak to people who are government relations 
people for agencies or corporations or any kind of advocacy 
group, they kind of almost look a bit offended when I say that. 
And I said it’s not a bad thing. And it’s clear in the report, it’s 
clear in all the literature that we read: the effective functioning 
of a democracy relies on the ability of legislators to have access 
to people’s opinions, however that may be. 
 
I think the concern with lobbying, when people think of it in a 
negative way, is when it’s done in secret and when it’s done 
inappropriately for personal gain on the part of the legislator or 
some sort of advantage that’s being given to a particular lobby 
group because of their relationship with, personal relationship 
with a legislator. And that’s certainly not something — and 
again you’ll see it in the literature — there’s no legislation in 
the world that can actually stop that kind of behaviour because 
it’s usually done behind closed doors or in secret, Mr. Speaker. 
And certainly that’s not what lobbying legislation is intended to 
do, is root out and find all those sources of inappropriate 
lobbying, but what it does do is provide a vehicle for the public 

to be aware of how lobbying, proper lobbying, is taking place 
and who has access to the ministers. 
 
And earlier today I was talking about the very effective lobby 
that the railway industry has in Ottawa. And certainly we can 
see the success that these lobbyists have had because they are 
certainly influencing railway policy and railway legislation, and 
have been for, you know, 130 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
powerful effect of lobbying. And you know, unfortunately I 
think some groups don’t have the same access to resources as 
others and they may not be able to lobby as effectively. And 
you know, if you go onto the federal lobbyists registry you can 
see, you can actually see who is doing the lobbying. 
 
So our thought as a committee was, you know, let’s incorporate 
some of those things. Let’s make sure that people in 
Saskatchewan have access to that information so that they know 
who is speaking to our legislators and government officials who 
have the ability to make decisions. Decision makers is the key 
in any strong lobbying registry. 
 
So from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, when you are providing 
the public with that information, that information should be 
comprehensive. And I took that position all along. When we 
have a registry that we’re creating, we’re going to create a 
public registry that’s part of the bill, it’s going to have a 
registrar. There’s going to be all these provisions. 
 
The idea was to make it as simple as possible on this first go 
around, just getting into this type of registry. We’re making it 
easy to register. There’s no fees, for example. It’s going to be 
something that’s just hopefully easy for people to use and put 
their name in. When people are in doubt, they should be able to 
just register as a lobbyist — there’s no shame in that — and 
then they’re not worried about whether they are a lobbyist, 
whether they’re caught within the definition or not when it’s 
close. 
 
But I think the most important thing is that it should be every 
person, individual, organization, group that has the ear of 
government and is able to present their advocacy or their 
position to the government. And so there was a lot of discussion 
about a number of particular groups, and I don’t think we all 
came down on the same side on that. 
 
And one in particular is the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. Those two groups, in my view, Mr. Speaker, are 
lobbying the government, and there’s no reason why they . . . 
Now they receive funds from the government, but they’re also 
lobbying the government. They should be involved and 
registered in the lobbying registry. 
 
This isn’t consistent across Canada, and you can see there’s two 
sides to the argument. But my view is, if we’re making this as 
simple as possible and as broad, I always say we need to cast 
the net as wide as we can and catch as many fish as we can 
without making it too complicated. So I feel that’s an error on 
the part of the government. They should not have excluded 
some of those organizations that definitely do lobby. And why 
not put them in? 
 
Another area that I was disappointed that the government didn’t 



4544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

go was to include universities and also charities because, Mr. 
Speaker, if they’re lobbying, they should be in the registry. I 
know that, ironically, the minister was lobbied by those groups 
not to be in the lobbying legislation. And unfortunately I think 
that’s an example of where this has gone wrong. They had a 
very powerful voice, and they were able to convince the 
minister to go against the committee’s recommendations and to 
actually remove them from the requirement to register as a 
lobbyist. I was met with — and I do appreciate the minister’s 
efforts to include me in the discussion; he knows I have an 
interest in this — and I actually met with the government 
relations officer for one of the universities who was lobbying 
me to encourage the government to exclude them from those 
provisions. 
 
So my preference, Mr. Speaker, and I will maintain this as we 
go through this, is that the purpose of this is to be as open and 
transparent and as accountable as possible. That’s something 
we’re calling for on this side of the House regularly. And I 
think this is one area where we had an opportunity and I 
certainly recommended that we go that route, but sadly it’s not 
going to be open and accountable and transparent for everyone, 
just for certain groups. And I think that’s a mistake. 
 
The other area that I was happy to see the minister reconsider 
was one of the areas I had difficulty with in the report. It was 
the threshold for registering. And originally my position again 
is that you want to catch as many fish as you can, and the 
smaller the fish, that’s okay. It’s going to be easy and painless 
so they don’t have to worry about a lot of extra work. So let’s 
catch as many people as we can. You have to pick a number. If 
you’re going to have a threshold, you have to pick a number. 
 
I know that Guy Giorno wasn’t exactly happy about the number 
we picked, but I think on a compromise level I think it was a 
good number. One hundred is commonly used in other 
jurisdictions. So you have to pick a number somewhere. If an 
individual happens to pick up a phone or write a letter to a 
minister, we certainly don’t think that they would . . . if they do 
it just once and they spend two hours doing it, why would they 
have to go through the exercise of registering as a lobbyist 
because it’s not a continued sort of persistent type of advocacy. 
 
So 100 hours was picked. Makes sense just to pick a number. 
The other part of that is what kind of time goes into that 100 
hours? How do you count that? And the discussion we had at 
the committee stage was, well should we include preparation 
time? Should we include travel time? And originally I had 
recommended you include both. I thought that, you know, again 
keeping the bar as low as possible and capturing as many 
people as we can within this activity without being onerous, 
let’s make it 100 hours with travel time and preparation time.  
 
The committee saw otherwise, saw fit to recommend otherwise. 
And they recommended just using the travel time to calculate 
the hundred hours. But I think the minister and his folks had 
another look at that and, I think if I’m correct, they actually 
included the preparation time as well in the threshold for . . . 
Yes, that’s right, the minister said on his opening comments on 
November 25th that there will provide . . . Now this is going to 
be in the regulations, Mr. Speaker, not in the Act, but he’s 
indicated that the 100-hour threshold for lobbying will include 
travel and preparation time as well as time spent 

communicating. And I think that’s a very positive step, and 
again including as many people within this activity without 
making it too onerous for them. 
 
I think, based on my minority report that the committee 
graciously allowed me to submit, which I do appreciate on the 
part of the committee, those were kind of the two things that I 
was most concerned about. Pleased to see that the minister has 
agreed with one of them, but again disappointed that the 
minister chose not to . . . He actually met with lobbyists and 
they convinced him that they weren’t lobbyists. So it’s a bit 
unfortunate in that sense, Mr. Speaker, but these are important 
constituents in the relationship with the government: SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], and then 
also the universities, and other charities. 
 
Sadly and somewhat strangely enough, another group that was 
not exempted were trade unions, which seems like a little bit 
like they’re being picked on and singled out here. Not exactly 
sure why the minister chose to do that, and he hasn’t really 
explained it in his comments or in any of his communications 
with me, but there it is. The trade unions themselves do have to 
have to register as lobbyists and will be required to report their 
activity if in fact they meet the 100-hour threshold. 
 
I don’t think I’ll get into a lot of discussion tonight about the 
difference between an in-house lobbyist and a consultant 
lobbyist and an occasional lobbyist. I think all those are pretty 
well explained in the report. And I certainly would recommend, 
if people haven’t seen it yet and are interested in this type of 
legislation, that they have a good look at the report. 
 
I did it find it a bit unusual that I was actually agreeing with 
Guy Giorno. We had an opportunity to meet with him. He’s a 
former chief of staff for the current prime minister, and before 
Nigel Wright he was the chief of staff. And I actually did agree 
with him on a number of points, and I think it just goes to show 
you that the issue of lobbying is very non-partisan in many 
ways. It’s about public access to elected officials. It’s about 
how decision-making is made within government. And I think 
it’s an important activity and one that we need to recognize and 
encourage within the proper framework. 
 
And so I think this legislation is a start. Certainly there was a 
few other things that could’ve been in there like a legislative 
review. We chose as a committee not to make that 
recommendation because we are hoping it will be reviewed on a 
regular basis anyways. But once the new registrar is set up and 
running and we have an opportunity to see how the people of 
Saskatchewan will be using this and how they will react to the 
information that’s in there, then I think it’s up to the next set of 
legislators, whoever that might be, to take another look at it and 
see if any fine tuning is required. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the members of 
the committee for allowing me to be part of it and to . . . I see 
there’s some anticipated applause coming from the other side, 
Mr. Speaker. But I want to thank the committee for all their . . . 
for putting up with me, and allowing me to speak my piece and 
have my minority opinion. I want to thank the minister for his 
gracious extension of information and discussion, and certainly 
his support of some of the comments that I have provided. So in 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4545 

the end I think this is a good start. 
 
And at this point I know other colleagues of mine would like to 
comment on this bill, so I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
120, The Lobbyists Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased as 
always to enter the discussion on, this time Bill No. 122, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
What this Act does, Mr. Speaker, it has three areas, and the 
minister goes into them in her second reading speech. One of 
the first areas is this, these particular changes are providing 
authority for a First Nations gaming licensing authority to 
register on-reserve charitable gaming employees and supplies. 
 
So currently right now the First Nations gaming licensing 
authority is the Indigenous Gaming Regulators, and right now 
they can license on-reserve gaming, but not the employees and 
suppliers. So this is a move to do this. 
 
Just a little bit of background here. This stems from the 1995 
gaming framework agreement and the subsequent 2002 
agreements where the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations] had created the Indigenous Gaming Regulators. 
And since 2007 the IGR [Indigenous Gaming Regulators Inc.] 
has been responsible for the licensing and registration of 
on-reserve charitable gaming. And as the minister points out, 
registration is one tool that the gaming industry used, and used 
by gaming regulators to help ensure the integrity of the gaming 
industry. 
 
So right now SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority] registers the employees and suppliers, whether they 
are involved in gaming on- or off-reserve. So the minister has 
pointed out that SLGA and the IGR began discussions this past 
year on IGR’s authority to register on-reserve charitable gaming 
employees and supplies. So the amendments here will authorize 
a First Nations gaming licensing authority — in this case it will 
be IGR — but a First Nations gaming and licensing authority 
like IGR to register on-reserve charitable gaming employees 
and supplies. The Act lays out that the authority must have an 
agreement with SLGA, and they will provide similar powers 

and authorities as SLGA currently does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So that is one piece of that. I think another piece that the 
minister points out in her second reading speech, “The second 
[she says] is allowing SLGA to establish a subsidiary 
corporation through an order in council.” So I think that that’s 
an interesting piece, Mr. Speaker.  
 
She, in her second reading speech, says that: 
 

SLGA does not have the authority to have subsidiaries. 
Changes to the Act will provide this authority subject to 
order in council approval. [She points out that] subsidiary 
corporations are a common accounting and management 
tool used by corporations to effectively manage assets and 
operations. 

 
She goes on to say that “The ability for SLGA to have 
subsidiary corporations will allow SLGA to fully explore 
options to ensure savings and benefits are present.” 
 
But I have to . . . I think we do have some concern or at least in 
committee we’ll have an opportunity to press a little bit further 
about this. I think the question still remains, and it’s not fully 
answered in her second reading speech, is why would SLGA 
need to establish a subsidiary corporation? She doesn’t 
reference this in her comments really. Is the SLGA asking for 
this or suggesting this, or is this coming from the government? 
Perhaps as this is a government who still seems to be focused 
on a privatization agenda, thinks it’s easier to sell off a 
subsidiary than a corporation in its full . . . So these are possible 
things that we can pursue in committee, but that is something 
that we’d like to flag, that it’s not fully answered here as to why 
SLGA would need a subsidiary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A third piece of this legislation, as the minister goes on to say, 
is that she talks about ensuring effective regulation. Some of the 
. . . And she talks about the government’s red tape committee’s 
review of liquor regulations in Saskatchewan and says many of 
these amendments come from that. 
 
And obviously removing of red tape is important, making sure 
that things run smoothly and efficiently and that there’s not the 
same hoop that you have to jump through over and over again 
or different hoops to the same end. Removing red tape where 
possible is a good idea, but there’s some interesting pieces just 
to consider. Obviously removing red tape is generally a good 
thing but, on the flip side of that, there are always competing 
interests or possibilities. The minister points out that it includes 
eliminating the requirement for medical use, non-consumptive 
use, and educational use liquor permits. But the piece that I’m 
interested in here is she says “. . . and removing provisions that 
grant SLGA authority to demand explanations from permittees 
when a person has been refused entry.” 
 
Just to be the devil’s advocate here, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
perhaps is a good idea to be able to ask a permittee why a 
person has been refused entry. There’s obviously very valid 
reasons why someone might not be allowed into a facility. 
Perhaps they in fact are already intoxicated, which that would 
be a valid reason for not being permitted. But perhaps the 



4546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

occasion comes when someone is refused entry because of the 
colour of their skin. The reality is that racism is still alive and 
well here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I think removing 
this could be problematic. It’s the flip side of just getting rid of 
red tape, what comes with that. And there could be some 
negative consequences, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the other one that interests me, the minister points out 
that, she says: 
 

As a result, Bill 122 contains an amendment that places 
increased responsibility on permittees to not only refuse to 
serve alcohol to persons who appear to be intoxicated but 
to ensure that those persons are not in possession of 
beverage alcohol. 

 
Having been a former server many, many years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, I was well aware of my responsibility to not serve 
people who were intoxicated. The responsibility is huge, both 
for the individual server, for the establishment. But the piece 
that is interesting is ensuring that those persons are not in 
possession of beverage alcohol. And I know in her second 
reading speech she doesn’t outline how a permittee or an 
establishment is to ensure that people, those people are not in 
possession of beverage alcohol, but those would be questions 
that we can ask in committee. I don’t imagine the minister’s 
expecting that permittees pat down customers. Perhaps that will 
be a possibility, but these’ll be important questions to ask when 
we get to committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do know I’ve got other colleagues who will be interested in 
weighing in on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2013, but for now those are my 
comments. And I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 123 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise tonight and join in debate on Bill No. 123, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013. This one is, you 
know, there’s housekeeping and then there’s probably spring 
cleaning. And then there’s probably, you know, once every 
decade or so kind of cleaning that goes on sometimes with the 
legislation, and this one would certainly seem to fall under the 
latter category, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a bit unique in that it deals with a number of private Acts, 

and again, that they’d typically be dealt through the private 
members’ business committee. So I’m not sure if the Chair of 
the private members’ business committee is feeling like perhaps 
she’s been shortchanged in all this. But anyway this bill, I’m 
sure, is brought forward in a proper manner and deals with a 
number of organizations that over time have withdrawn from 
the delivery of health services. 
 
I was here last night, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague, the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana, gave a fine speech talking about 
various of the organizations involved in the change of the 
legislation. And not to be too much of a homer, but the one that 
stuck out for me, Mr. Speaker, was the move to repeal the old 
Grey Nuns enabling legislation — Grey Nuns Hospital here in 
the city of Regina, which is now of course Pasqua Hospital. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just in the riding of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, but is the place where I was born. And at 
the time, it was still the Grey Nuns Hospital. 
 
Anyway the march of time moves forward, and in terms of the 
bills that are affected under this miscellaneous statutes repeal 
measure here tonight, it’s pretty straightforward legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. And with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 123. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 124 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 
Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 
loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this one sort of carries on 
in the train of Bill No. 123. Again a fine speech given last night 
by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana. One 
subsection is up for repeal from The Co-operatives Act and that 
deals with: 
 

“No person shall use the words ‘community clinic’ or 
« clinique communautaire » as part of its name or on 
premises it operates unless it: 
 

was incorporated pursuant to The Mutual Medical and 
Hospital Benefit Associations Act; or 
 
is incorporated pursuant to this Act as a community 
clinic as defined in section 263”. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, not to be too much of a homer, but as a 
member of the Regina Community Clinic, I’m very interested 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4547 

to see this come forward. And this sort of resonates with the 
historic sort of evolution of health care in this province and 
medicare in this province. 
 
And certainly my colleague had talked last night about health 
district no. 1 out Swift Current way and the way that that had 
built on earlier work such as the municipal doctor payment 
scheme in Bulyea, which I’m sure my colleague across the way 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood takes a fair amount of pride in, 
in terms of the way that it’s gone . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And now the member from Regina Walsh Acres is so deprived 
of opportunities to get into the debate he is offering up some 
suggestions from his chair about pronunciations, Mr. Speaker. I 
think we’ll take the record as read. 
 
But again, this one is pretty straightforward, Mr. Speaker. It 
may touch upon certain grander debates and evolutions that 
have taken place in this province, but this legislation is not that, 
as the saying might go. Anyway with that, Mr. Speaker, I move 
to adjourn debates on Bill No. 124. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 125 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Picking 
up where I’d left off last night at the close of business on The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, this is a very serious piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. It arises in response to some pretty 
horrendous tragedies that have taken place across this province. 
We need look no further than this afternoon when the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote rose to salute the work of the 
students against drunk driving, and pointing out the grim 
statistics that are here in this province around road fatalities and 
injuries and the problems that exist in terms of drinking and 
driving in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, it was well placed that the member from P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Northcote was the one giving the statement, 
having served as Chair of the Traffic Safety Committee, last 
night had referenced the good work certainly of all members of 
that committee, but certainly the work that I was very familiar 
with put forward by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale and 
the member from Cumberland. 
 
And I guess the thing that is most salient, Mr. Speaker, is that as 
good as the legislation is here, it could be better. And what I 
hear from my colleagues in the work that was conducted by that 
committee is that this is good legislation, but it doesn’t respond 

in whole to what has been demonstrated as best practices in 
other jurisdictions, what has been demonstrated to save lives 
and to cut these fatality rates significantly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I guess as good as the legislation here is tonight, it 
doesn’t go far enough. And that is highly unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s highly unfortunate, given that in past we’ve been 
able to come together around moving for legislation to improve 
the situation for workers on the highway, both under the then 
minister of Highways, the member from Cypress Hills, and 
certainly the current Minister of Highways, the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone. We’ve been able to come together in 
this House in agreement on something that makes absolute 
sense in terms of working for that better safety that all workers 
should be able to expect when they go to the job site in the 
morning, that they should be able to come home tonight to their 
loved ones and to their lives and to move on as such. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, those have been good, co-operative efforts 
in this House. And I guess that was the spirit into which we’d 
entered the work of the Traffic Safety Committee. And I know 
that it’s not just, you know, disappointment on our side that the 
full package of reforms aren’t there in this legislation. It’s not 
just disappointment, Mr. Speaker, but I think in terms of 
examining the evidence from across the country, in terms of 
hearing from other experts in the field, in terms of hearing from 
people that have more experience than anyone on that 
committee or anyone in these benches, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
again unfortunate that there wasn’t the appropriate complete 
response made to recommendations around the suspensions and 
around safety carriers in the cars, the booster seats, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[19:45] 
 
But again there’s some fine measures in the legislation in terms 
of refining the work around inexperienced drivers, repeat 
offenders, drivers with high blood alcohol levels; changes on 
zero drug and alcohol tolerance for drivers under 19 years of 
age; changes for all drivers in the graduated driver’s licensing 
program and the motorcycle graduated driver’s licensing 
program; the changes around strengthening penalties for 
drinking and driving based on the driver’s experience and the 
number of offences they have — longer suspensions, vehicle 
impoundments, mandatory ignition interlock requirements. 
These are good changes, Mr. Speaker. But again drawn into 
relief alongside the presentations and the evidence that was 
made available to the committee, we’re left to wonder why the 
full package of reforms was not seized upon. 
 
One thing that we’ll be watching closely, Mr. Speaker, is the 
utilization of photo radar. And it’s a reasonable approach I think 
that has been brought forward in terms of using a pilot project, 
and then of course the evidence will be there to be evaluated 
and to whether or not the program should be expanded or 
wrapped up. But certainly we’ll be watching the work of the 
photo radar pilot project in terms of the safety it holds out to 
provide for school zones and specific high-risk locations. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes that relate to 
the New West Partnership Agreement and helping 
Saskatchewan to align its vehicle registration regulatory 
framework more closely with Alberta. It enables SGI 



4548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to be more responsive 
to new and emerging registration issues for vehicles of unusual 
size, weight, and operating characteristics. We’ll be interested 
to see how that plays out, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Certainly the family that had the vehicle — and again, it’s not 
entirely related to this and it’s more of a customs and excise 
matter — but the family that had their vehicle impounded at 
North Portal and the kind of heartache and frustration that they 
had to endure getting that vehicle into Canada, you know, 
problems like that should be minimized. And we’ll be interested 
to see how this alignment with the Alberta system either aids or 
cuts into those kind of circumstances from arising. 
 
And then very finally, Mr. Speaker, the changes that affect 
commercial carriers such as increasing weight thresholds for 
monitoring, moving the authority for commercial carrier safety 
from the Highway Traffic Board to SGI and publicly releasing 
carrier safety information aligning Saskatchewan with other 
Canadian jurisdictions, again we’ll be interested to know how 
that works out in practice and what the actual sort of roll out for 
that is, and whether or not that helps or hampers highway traffic 
safety, how that hampers or helps the commercial carriers. 
We’ll be interested to see how that unfolds. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, and again recognizing that I was 
speaking the clock out at the close of business last night, I know 
that other of my colleagues have remarks and contributions to 
this debate that they would like to make. But for myself at this 
time I am ready to move adjournment on Bill No. 125, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 19:50.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4541 
 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4542 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4542 
 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4545 
 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4546 
 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4546 
 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4547 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


