
























































Hansard: November 26, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 19A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6077 
 November 26, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly, 
a group of students from the Fresh Start and the Quiet High 
classes, and it takes place at Campus Regina Public. They’re in 
the west gallery today. Their teachers with them today are 
Karen McIver and Dana Sveinbjornson. I’d ask all members to 
help me welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
join with the member opposite and welcome these teachers and 
students that are here today, the students from Victoria campus. 
I actually had the honour to teach at Victoria campus for a few 
years at one point when I was teaching. It was a wonderful spot, 
and certainly I wish these students from Fresh Start and Quiet 
High nothing but the best in their studies, their time here today, 
and in their futures. 
 
It’s also a pleasure to welcome the teachers that are here today, 
Dana as well as Karen McIver. Karen is a friend. She’s also 
married to Marc Spooner, Dr. Marc Spooner, an educational 
leader in the province. And Karen used to lead a very 
impressive Trek School as well. She’s an avid outdoorsperson, 
an awesome canoer, and just a really good person. So it’s a 
pleasure to welcome these fine teachers and these students to 
their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce in your gallery Evan Beaulieu from the W.P. 
Sandin High School in Shellbrook. Evan’s a grade 12 student 
there, and he’s part of the six-man football team that had an 
incredible year after about 25 years of not having a team. Four 
or five years ago we restarted it. They made it to the semifinal 
provincials this year, Mr. Speaker.  
 
As well, Evan is the president of the Student Leadership 
Council at the high school there where they’ll be hosting the 
provincial Student Leadership Conference next fall, Mr. 
Speaker. So he’s busy with his group organizing that. And as 
well, Evan took part in the Forum For Young Canadians, where 
he spent five days in Ottawa, toured the parliament buildings, 
and spent some time with the Saskatchewan MPs [Member of 
Parliament] out there. And he most definitely would be one of 
Saskatchewan’s finest young men and our province’s next 
generation of leaders. So I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Evan to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are some 
special guests seated in your gallery that I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
your gallery is my wife, Ruth Eliason, who is here with our 
daughters Ingrid and Clara. Gudrun is in the legislature as well, 
but she’s napping in the office, Mr. Speaker, and didn’t want to 
be disturbed. They’re in town to take in some of Agribition and 
to visit dad. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 
Ruth, Clara, and Ingrid to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 
pleased to welcome and introduce in your gallery Ray Joubert, 
who’s the registrar of the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists. 
He’s here today to hear introduction of The Health Information 
Protection Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ray played an integral part in the legislation and 
in the amendment. And I want to thank him, as well as all the 
members of the health records protection working group for 
working to, working hard to further protect people’s personal 
health information. And so I’d ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming Ray to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I recognize somebody: the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join 
with the Minister of Health in welcoming Mr. Joubert here 
today. He’s been here a couple of times, a few bills before us 
with respect to pharmacists. And so I look forward to 
connecting with Mr. Joubert at some point in time, too. But I’d 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming him to his 
Assembly as well today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, with 
apologies to my colleague. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming an individual 
seated in the east gallery. I’m speaking of Mr. Benji Hazen. 
Benji is a director with the Regina Multicultural Council. Of 
course they’ve just had the 40th anniversary celebration of the 
multicultural Act. 
 
He’s one heck of a Romanian ambassador, Mr. Speaker. He 
does a lot for the Romanian community and, by extension, 
throughout the community here in Regina, but also takes a very 
keen interest in the world around him and is a good friend and 
neighbour of mine in north central Regina. So it’s really good to 
see Benji Hazen here today in his Legislative Assembly. Please 
welcome him. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 



6078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 
we know that in September of this year, this government 
walked away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable 
housing project in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control and then rent the units at full market price. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a local political commentator wrote 
this about the government allowing a private developer to 
default on fixed-price contracts, and I quote: 
 

It’s the latest indication that the Premier seems unwilling 
to do anything to displease business, even when he knows 
business is dead wrong and even if it means his 
government failing on its promise to deliver low-income 
housing. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer. Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions as it relates to the unsafe conditions on 
Dewdney Avenue created by that government. The petitioners 
are . . . And you know, the members can shout from their feet if 
they want, but what I would do is take this issue seriously. 
What’s needed certainly is a timely west bypass, but there’s 
urgent interim actions that are required to ensure safety for all 
on Dewdney Avenue. And the risks that that government has 
created in their failure to respond has been entirely 
unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed from concerned constituents of mine 
throughout the riding. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of Creighton, Denare Beach, and area. Many residents 

in these communities are struggling with disabilities and 
currently do not have the support and services they need and 
deserve. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan to establish and build a residential and day 
program in the Creighton/Denare Beach region to support 
the immediate and ongoing needs of the community, and 
so that persons with intellectual disabilities thrive in their 
respective community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
Creighton, Denare Beach, and La Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place today to present a petition to build a 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 
senior government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
all from Moose Jaw. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today in support of safe staffing levels in long-term care. The 
petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term care are 
deteriorating under this government; that the Government of 
Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for safe staffing 
levels to provide hands-on care to residents; that the 
government is failing to fix the basics in long-term care, 
including rejecting the further urgent requests from long-term 
care facilities for increased and needed staffing levels. 
 
They point out that the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in 
neglect. They also point out that chronic understaffing in 
long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 
including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 
rise in physical violence amongst residents. And they also point 
out that fixing the basics and achieving real improvement in 
long-term care services requires a firm commitment to actually 
listen to front-line health care workers, residents, and their 
families, as opposed to failing to properly listen to their 
concerns. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to commit to the 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6079 

creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team and to reintroduce actual numbers of 
staff to match the level of care needs and the number of 
residents under their care in long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. The petitioners in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 
to act on readily available information about safety 
concerns with its smart meter program, including through 
the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 
concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 
safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present 
a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan people who are concerned 
about the privatization of jobs in the correctional service. We 
have a public correctional system. The government’s wanting to 
privatize the food service jobs. We know that this is a first step 
in looking at how they can privatize other aspects of the 
correctional system, and we know that there are a substantial 
number of benefits of running a private system. So, Mr. 
Speaker:  
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly cause the government to 
cancel its privatization in the corrections and young 
offenders facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition in support of better health care in 
Saskatchewan. And the people who have signed this petition 
want to bring to the attention of the Assembly the following: 
that emergency room wait times in Saskatchewan have doubled 
since 2010. The government’s own statistics show that patient 
safety is getting worse, whereas chronic short-staffing is a 
problem throughout our health care system. Here is the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 

recognize health care is getting worse under its watch and 
begin fixing the basics by listening to health care workers, 
patients, and their families; properly maintaining hospitals 
and care facilities; and focusing its resources on front-line 
care instead of spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from my 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Angels Corner Recognizes 
Victims of Violence Against Women 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday 
afternoon, yesterday, the Scott Collegiate school community 
gathered together to unveil a memorial called Angels Corner to 
recognize the victims of violence against women. Made up of 
four benches that were built and designed by the students in 
consultation with elders, it is a place for people to gather and to 
remember. At the school assembly marking the event, students 
and community guests talked about the cycle of violence that 
affects far too many women in our communities and took a 
pledge to never commit, excuse, or remain silent about violence 
against women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize a number of the students who 
helped make Angels Corner a reality, including Jackson Ahpay, 
Alexandria Allary, Cree Crowe, Jeret Dustyhorn, Corrina Elliot, 
Thomas Giles, Marcus Hill, Justine Lonechild, Elyas Nippi, 
Keegan Oliver-Gress, Keshina Paquachan, Blake Sabit, Vincent 
Tapaquon, Maynard Whitehawk, and Adam Windigo. 
 
I ask all members to join me in commending the students, staff, 
teachers like Ian Temple, Elder Noel Starblanket, Principal 
Shannon Fayant, and community members who have worked 
hard to ensure that those we have lost are not forgotten and for 
giving us all this opportunity to renew our commitment to 
ending the cycle of violence in our community, in our city, and 
in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Solar Technology Projects 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to announce a groundbreaking green initiative between 
the Saskatchewan government and the First Nations Power 
Authority. Yesterday FNPA [First Nations Power Authority], 
along with its strategic partners, Lockheed Martin Canada and 
FHQ Developments, held a ribbon-cutting ceremony in Swift 
Current. This ceremony celebrated FNPA’s first solar powered 
generation endeavour, a strategic off-grid and renewable 
demonstration project. We were at the Home Inn & Suites in 
Swift Current where the solar project will offset power 
consumption for the hotel. In the lobby of the hotel there is a 
monitor to watch exactly what the solar panels are doing. 
 



6080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

This is a new solar technology and it is specifically designed to 
endure Canada's climate. The Government of Saskatchewan 
was pleased to provide almost $45,000 for the project. This 
funding came from the Métis Engagement Projects Fund. The 
information collected in southern Saskatchewan will benefit 
projects planned in the North as well. This is both innovative 
and green. This project is just the first. The FNPA has just 
announced that they will be doing two school projects. They 
will be found in Fond-du-Lac and Hatchet Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the Assembly in 
congratulating the FNPA, Lockheed Martin Canada, and FHQ 
Developments on their innovative work done in Swift Current. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Farmers Awarded 
Transformation Business Prize 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Monsieur le Président, je tiens aujourd’hui à 
féliciter deux fransaskois impressionants, Dean and Sylvia 
Kreutzer. Agriculteurs à Over the Hill Orchards ici en 
Saskatchewan, ils sont les lauréats du prix Entreprise de 
transformation à la sixième édition des Lauriers des petites et 
moyennes entreprises. Les Lauriers sont présentés par le Réseau 
de développement économique et d’employabilité du Canada, 
une organisation pour la promotion des entreprises 
francophones situées à l’extérieur du Québec. 
 
Nous savons que les entreprises francophones sont une partie 
intégrale de nos communautés francophones. Je suis très fière 
de tous de ces entreprises et leurs accomplissements. Je suis une 
déscendante des pionniers fransaskois. Je sais que les 
entreprises, les familles, et les écoles sont très importantes pour 
la préservation de la culture fransaskoise dans notre province. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate today 
two impressive Fransaskois, Dean and Sylvia Kreutzer. Farmers 
at Over the Hill Orchards here in Saskatchewan, they are the 
winners of the Transformation Business Prize at the sixth 
annual Small and Medium Business Awards. The awards are 
presented by the Réseau de développement économique et 
d’employabilité du Canada, an organization that promotes 
francophone businesses outside of Quebec. 
 
We know that francophone businesses are an integral part of 
our francophone communities. I am very proud of all these 
businesses and their accomplishments. I am a descendant of 
Fransaskois pioneers. I know that businesses, families, and 
schools are all very important for the preservation of 
Fransaskois culture in our province.] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for my hon. colleagues who might be 
wondering what I’m talking about, I am recognizing Dean and 
Sylvia Kreutzer of Over the Hill Orchards near Lumsden. They 
were recently awarded the Transformation Business Prize at the 
sixth annual Small and Medium Business Awards presented by 
the network of economic development and employability 
Canada, a group that promotes francophone businesses outside 
of Quebec, and they were the only Saskatchewan group that 
won an award. 

So I ask that all députés [Translation: members] will join me in 
sending our félicitations [Translation: congratulations] to Dean 
and Sylvia and wish them many more years of success and 
awards at Over the Hill Orchards. Merci, monsieur le Président 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Comets Win Provincial Football Title 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after a 
disappointing loss in the 2013 provincial semifinal, the Melfort 
Comets were committed to achieving their goal of a 2014 
provincial championship. The returning players lifted weights 
and trained throughout the off-season, and two of the Comets 
played in the Football Canada Cup in July with Team 
Saskatchewan (White), while others attended the Huskie and 
Ram developmental camps. 
 
Prior to the start of the season, the grade 12 students gathered 
with the coaches and decided Finish What We’ve Started is the 
theme for the season. Throughout the year, the players were 
committed to improve day in and day out on offence and on 
defence. During the season, the defence just allowed one 
touchdown per game on average, and the starting offence scored 
on average 40 points a game. 
 
Following a victory over Carpenter High School Spartans at 
home in provincial quarter-finals, the Comets defeated the 
Rebels 48-14 in Delisle and the Wolverines 46 to 20 in Warman 
to claim the 3A nine-man provincial football championship. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in congratulating 
head coach, Dave Rogers, and the entire 2014 Melfort Comets 
on a very successful year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Foam Lake Resident Receives 
Community Recognition Award 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Ukrainian people have been 
integral in the development of Saskatchewan and adding to the 
multiculturalism of our communities. Foam Lake in my 
constituency is known for holding the largest Ukrainian festival 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently the Saskatchewan provincial council of Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress held their Nation Builders and Community 
Recognition Awards Banquet. Established in 1995, these 
awards recognize individuals who have made significant 
contributions to the Ukrainian community, to the province, and 
to Canada as a whole. I’m very proud to say that this year the 
recipient of the Community Recognition Award for 
volunteerism was a constituent of mine, Sylvia Myall of Foam 
Lake, for her work on the Veselka committee. 
 
Sylvia was key in finding and booking entertaining as well as 
volunteering at the annual Ukrainian festival. She worked at the 
Ukrainian Museum of Canada when she attended the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] where she obtained her B.A. 
[Bachelor of Arts] and her B.Ed. [Bachelor of Education]. 
Sylvia also taught Ukrainian in high school as well as summer 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6081 

classes at the Mohyla Institute. She has translated documents of 
the archival departments of the Redemptorist Fathers in 
Yorkton and for the UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress] 
Saskatchewan into English for newly arrived immigrants. 
Sylvia has brought new displays of Ukrainian arts and crafts, 
costumes, embroidery, and tools to the Veselka festival. She has 
also ran workshops on pysanka writing and the baking of 
traditional breads. 
 
I would ask this Assembly to join me today in congratulating 
Sylvia on her award and thank her for her many, many hours of 
volunteer work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Spruce Home Seniors Club Celebrates Anniversary 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
acknowledge the 25th anniversary of the Spruce Home Seniors 
Club who reside in the Sask Rivers constituency. On March 
23rd, 1989, a group of volunteers in Spruce Home decided to 
form a seniors club that met frequently to socialize, exercise, 
and participate in numerous activities. That same year the club 
became incorporated as a non-profit organization under the 
umbrella of the Saskatchewan Seniors Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that club is still running today with many active 
members. Some of the members of the Spruce Home Seniors 
Club are Louise Elliott, Delia Demetric, the Czychowski 
family, Geneva Chloarec, George and Alice Cheal, Ethel 
Cartier, Mary Bolton, Ron Fremont, Grace Fremont, and Dark 
and Diane Dempster. In recent years, these members have 
played cards, taken bus tours, attended dinner theatres, 
Rawlinson Centre shows, invitationals, and drama nights. As 
well they do regular exercising, bowling, and golfing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members are very active, both in their 
community and in the activities in which they participate. This 
group engages its members to help with their physical and 
mental health. I am so pleased to have such healthy and 
enthusiastic seniors in my constituency. I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating the Spruce Home Seniors Club on 
their celebration of the 25th anniversary. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Study Shows Reduced Wait Times 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to announce that 
our government’s efforts to better surgical care is translating 
into shorter wait times for patients. According to a Fraser 
Institute study on wait times released today, Saskatchewan has 
the second-shortest wait times in Canada. Mr. Speaker, compare 
that to the NDP [New Democratic Party], who in 2007 had the 
longest wait times in the country. 
 
Waits of 26 weeks or more are less frequent in Saskatchewan at 
3 per cent of patients, compared to the most frequent in 2007 at 
26 per cent. We have the shortest specialist-to-treatment waits 
in the country at seven weeks. In 2007 that wait was 16 weeks. 
We reduced the waits from referral by a GP [general 

practitioner] to appointment with a specialist from 11 weeks to 
seven in only one year. We have half the wait from 
appointments with specialists to treatment, from 14 weeks to 
seven in only a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surgical wait times in Saskatchewan are steadily 
dropping. Members on that side of the House have presented no 
plan for health care improvement but revert back to the tired 
NDP tactics of fearmongering and incomplete information. Mr. 
Speaker, there is more work to be done but our government’s 
action to increase surgeries and drive down wait times is 
showing results for patients. We thank the health regions and 
health care workers for their work in putting patients first. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Fatality in Care Facility 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Jessie Sellwood was 88 years old. 
She was living in Sunset Extendicare here in Regina and she 
died in excruciating pain last Christmas. Her death was initially 
deemed a natural death, but her family fought for the truth to 
come out and the coroner, the coroner eventually ruled that 
Jessie’s death was indeed premature. It was related to a fall and 
an initially undiagnosed broken bone and pain that wasn’t 
properly managed. Mr. Speaker, Jessie’s family is here today 
because they want accountability for her and they want the 
system to be fixed. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this 
government will finally, finally listen. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Why do we keep hearing about 
families who have to fight for the truth about how their loved 
ones died in care facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member opposite for the question. And our thoughts are 
with the family, especially if they indeed had to go through a 
process to determine the actual cause of death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these questions the Leader of the Opposition asks 
are important ones. They’re ones that the government would 
ask. Mr. Speaker. I would note as well, I’m sure, the Minister of 
Health has already indicated to me he would be happy to meet 
with the family to discuss this further. The questions that the 
Leader of the Opposition has asked are questions that we often 
ask as well. For example, Mr. Speaker, we ask the question 
about individual cases like this in the context of the additional 
resources that the government has provided. And these are 
points of fact now, Mr. Speaker, that our government has 
invested in more care aids, that we’ve hired more nurses into 
the system, many more, over 2,000 more nurses. 
 
The fact of the matter is we have increased capital spending in 
long-term care. And so to the extent there are any situations like 
this, it’s always unacceptable, but I think there’s even more 
questions prevalent when we know that additional resources 
have been provided. I don’t know in particular about Sunset 
Extendicare for example, Mr. Speaker, about their funding or its 



6082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

resource historical situation, but I do know in the case of Santa 
Maria we were able to point out yesterday that the government, 
our government has increased funding to Santa Maria by 81 per 
cent. There’s roughly the same complement of staff there for 
the same patients. 
 
And so these questions are very important, and we need to 
continue to invest more in the resources. We need to talk also 
about model of care in all of the institutions and how we can 
ensure this isn’t happening. We’ll talk a little bit about what 
we’re doing in government with respect to falls in long-term 
care in answer perhaps to the next question I anticipate from the 
member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not a question of if they 
needed to fight, they had to fight. They had to fight to get to the 
truth and to have the record corrected. On Christmas Eve last 
year Jessie fell while not being properly transferred. She had 
two separate trips to the hospital by ambulance. They missed a 
broken bone in her leg the first time despite complaints of pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her family wrote to the government and this is 
what they said: “Staff were unable to manage her pain yet it 
took 18 hours for new medication to be ordered and 
administered. Jessie’s pain remained extreme until she passed 
away 12 hours later.” Mr. Speaker, I met with this family earlier 
today. And they say they can’t understand how this isn’t a big 
deal, how this isn’t a concern. And I fully agree with this 
family. 
 
My question’s for the Premier. When someone falls, when 
broken bones are missed, when someone dies prematurely in 
extreme pain, shouldn’t that be a big deal? Why did her family 
have to fight to put this on government’s agenda? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, no one’s debating about 
whether this is a big deal. It doesn’t take the fight to determine 
the cause the death to get it on the government’s agenda. It 
sounds like the process very much let the family down, the 
family that lost Jessie in the end, Mr. Speaker, and we’d want to 
find out the details around that. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Opposition references that there was a 
transfer involved, so I’m not sure if there was an ambulance 
service that was on hand at the time of the fall. I will say this: 
falls for our seniors has been a priority for the government in 
the system when, in 2011, the government together with the 
health regions implemented a province-wide protocol to reduce 
falls. We’re seeing some progress now. We’re seeing 25 per 
cent less falls across the province. Obviously still too many, but 
we are seeing progress. 
 
With respect to the situation that’s been presented today, the 
case of this family, obviously it is a big deal. I think the 
Minister of Health would be happy to meet with the family 
immediately after question period. We would like to assist them 
in getting answers to their questions. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Health 
minister have repeatedly argued that every resident in care 
facilities has individualized care plans. But we think back to 
earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, when the care aids from Santa 
Maria came, and they said that those care plans are not even 
kept up-to-date. 
 
And that’s exactly what happened in Jessie’s case, her care plan 
wasn’t updated even though her needs changed significantly. 
There were changes in Jessie’s mobility, but her transfer 
protocol was not adjusted. And on Christmas Eve, Jessie fell 
while being transferred inappropriately. This is what her family 
also wrote, Mr. Speaker: “The circumstances around her death 
were preventable, yet she died in excruciating pain, and there’s 
just something morally wrong with that.” 
 
My question is for the Premier. Is he hearing the same pattern 
of events in our health care system as I’m hearing? When will 
this government finally start taking this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is something that we do as a government take very 
seriously, certainly with our partners in the Ministry of Health, 
the Regional Health Authorities, and individual facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s why for example, as the Premier has mentioned, in 2011 
we put forward a falls collaborative to every health region, in 
partnership with the health region that is seeing significant 
reduction in falls in our facilities. But we know that we still 
have work to do on that, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve 
invested in the dollars to help equip our long-term care facilities 
more properly when it comes to having the equipment required 
that is necessary to lift and reposition people, Mr. Speaker. But 
certainly we take this very seriously. 
 
We are also going to be sending out a reminder to all facilities, 
in all regions, of what is the expectation when it comes to things 
like transferring so that they can properly ensure that their staff 
know what is required of them when doing things like transfers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the needs are great 
on the front lines. But Jessie’s family came to the legislature 
today because of their concern, Mr. Speaker, with what they 
had to go through to get to the bottom of what happened to their 
mother. Initially, they said Jessie died of natural causes, Mr. 
Speaker. But her family fought for the truth and the coroner 
eventually ruled that Jessie died prematurely. Her death was 
related to the fall, the initially undiagnosed broken bone, and 
the excruciating pain that wasn’t properly managed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even while Jessie’s family tried to get information 
about the cause of her injuries, the facility claimed that Jessie 
must have tried to have gotten up on her own. This is what the 
family wrote: “The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region failed 
her and so did her province.” 
 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6083 

My question is for the Premier. Why should grieving families 
have to fight to actually get the facts about how their loved ones 
were injured and how they died in care facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
this is a case where I would be pleased to learn more from the 
family. I don’t have prior information to the specific 
circumstances around this case, Mr. Speaker. I’m not able to 
therefore speak to what happened in terms of misdiagnosing 
after the fall, Mr. Speaker, or even in fact what happened, that 
the fall did take place in the first place. But I can tell the 
members of the House and the public that this is something that 
we do take very seriously.  
 
As I said, we not only have put forward a falls collaborative as 
one of the things that we know that we need to improve in 
long-term care — since 2011, a 25 per cent reduction — but we 
know that there are still too many falls within long-term care. 
That’s why this is something that in our long-term care facilities 
we manage and we monitor and we measure on a daily and on a 
weekly basis so that our staff, our administrators and our region 
and the system can keep track of how we’re doing in this regard 
and try to get those numbers down to what people should expect 
in our facilities, Mr. Speaker. And ultimately our goal is zero. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Jessie Sellwood’s daughter-in-law was a care 
aid in many facilities, including Santa Maria and Pioneer 
Village. That’s why she knew how to fight to get the truth in 
her mother-in-law’s death. Many families, Mr. Speaker, don’t 
have that experience and don’t have that knowledge to rely on 
to get to the bottom of the truth. 
 
But it shouldn’t be a fight. Jessie’s daughter-in-law confirms 
everything that the Santa Maria care aids raised on Monday 
about short-staffing, about bloated administration, about the 
government’s misplaced priorities, and about a quality of care 
that is getting worse.  
 
My question is for the Premier. How many people need to come 
forward from different facilities before he will admit that there 
are major problems in our seniors’ care system that are spread 
out throughout the entire province and that are systemic? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would 
be happy to work with the family and work with the regional 
health authority. I’m not sure who the fight was with in terms of 
changing how the death was . . . the certificate of death in terms 
of the cause of death, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know who that fight 
was with, but certainly I’d be happy to have more details from 
the family. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this government’s approach to 
long-term care, that’s why I think this government took the 
unprecedented step last year, in mid-year, Mr. Speaker, to 
allocate $10 million to improve staffing levels within the 
system, improve equipment. That’s why in fact that work didn’t 
just begin last fall, Mr. Speaker. It began when this government 

took office, to the point now where there are more than 750 
full-time equivalents working directly in the front lines of 
long-term care in this province, Mr. Speaker. This is something 
that is a priority of this government. This is something that we 
need and want to make changes, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
we have invested the dollars that we have, Mr. Speaker, but 
admit that there is more work to be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Cost and Value of Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Education minister and it has to do with his costly P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-school scheme. Is the 
minister aware of the recent BC [British Columbia] auditor’s 
report that raises major concerns about costly debt and interest 
rates on P3 projects like schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
pursuing P3 projects with respect to the schools in 
Saskatchewan. There’s been some unprecedented growth in 
Saskatchewan that’s given rise to a critical need for schools, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as far as value for money is 
concerned, we do a value-for-money calculation, Mr. Speaker, 
to ensure that we’re returning value to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not only now, but in the future, 
Mr. Speaker. And as long as these projects continue to show 
positive value for money, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue with 
these projects. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I mean the same 
suggestions were made in BC, the same sort of claims before 
they entered into these deals. And then when the BC 
independent auditor looked into the actual interest rates for P3s, 
the average rate was actually seven and a half per cent on 
average and they were as high as 15 per cent. The average rate 
for government itself owned and operated projects in BC was 
just 4 per cent, probably even a little bit lower here in 
Saskatchewan. So the average rate for P3s was a full three and a 
half per cent higher. 
 
To the minister: what does he have to say to Saskatchewan 
people who are wondering why this government is just plowing 
ahead with its P3 rent-a-school scheme when it’s certain that 
it’s going to cost taxpayers more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
procurement process aligns with the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations on best practices when it comes to 
transparency. And to ensure that the public has access to the 
value-for-money calculation, Mr. Speaker, that will be released 
to the public once the procurement process . . . once we get to 
financial close, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

But dealing specifically with the interest rate, Mr. Speaker, 
those numbers are calculated in the value-for-money 
calculation, Mr. Speaker. And that number will be made 
available to the public so that the public and the opposition can 
see exactly where the value for money is as we proceed with 
these projects. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The BC auditor’s report is clear; P3 
capital projects cost a lot more. On average, the interest rates 
are three and a half per cent higher, and sometimes interest rates 
are 11 per cent higher. Even if this government’s P3 schools are 
financed at the average P3 interest rate found in this report, this 
government scheme would cost at least $300 million more than 
if the government built and operated these schools — $300 
million. That’s huge money. That’s money that should go to 
where it matters in education, not wasted on high interest. It’s 
no wonder that Alberta has recently scraped their P3 
rent-a-school scheme. 
 
To the minister: why won’t this government release the full 
details, all the costs of this costly rent-a-school scheme so 
Saskatchewan people can see exactly how much more it will 
cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure how 
much clearer I can be. A report, transparency reports in terms of 
value for money, Mr. Speaker, in terms of fairness reports will 
all be released. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our view, and I think it’s the popular view 
with respect to P3 projects across the country, that P3 projects 
are more transparent to the taxpayers than traditional 
procurement, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
they can argue about it, Mr. Speaker, if they want, but we 
follow the auditor’s recommendations with respect to best 
practice, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is being held out as an 
example across this country when it comes to best practices on 
P3 procurement, whether it’s with respect to value for money 
and throughout the whole process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But everything will be made available as we move forward with 
the fairness opinions, which are provided, and the full 
value-for-money calculation, Mr. Speaker. And that will be 
clear for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s almost laughable, the 
premise of how this minister’s approaching this file. We put 
forward legislation for transparency and accountability and full 
disclosure of costs, and that government voted it down, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s how much they care about transparency. And 
the kind of reports he speaks of now are the kind that I suspect 
are going to be shared with the public after the ink is dried and 
taxpayers are committed for the long time. 
 
We also know, I mean we know these cost more, and we know 
they have the impact of shutting out community. We know that 

they have an impact of shutting out the local construction 
industry. 
 
My question to the minister: why can’t he look to a report like 
this, save the $300 million, put them to work where they matter, 
and stop this wasteful process before any more dollars are 
wasted? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to 
transparency in this process, Mr. Speaker. We’re committed to 
providing value for money to the taxpayers of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We do that by providing the value-for-money 
report calculation, Mr. Speaker, and we do that by providing 
two independent fairness reports as we move through this 
project, through these procurements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I reject the premise of the member’s question 
because certainly we are going to save money for the taxpayers 
of this province. When we can show value for money with 
respect to the calculation for the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll proceed. But there is value for taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll continue to show value for taxpayers. And 
as long as these projects are showing that value, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll continue with the P3 projects in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader, 
unless other debate wants to carry on. 
 

Expenses Incurred by Lean Initiative Consultant 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A further 
question on the theme of accountability and transparency: 
Saskatchewan people were outraged to learn of the fat stacks of 
cash being handed over to John Black, this government’s 
American lean consultant. My question to the minister: has this 
government decided whether it will table the John Black 
receipts so Saskatchewan people can see what we’ve been 
paying for? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This government, as members will know and the public will 
know, are embarking upon a four-year process. About three and 
a half years, in fact, it will take to further embed lean within the 
health care system. This is something that the members 
opposite will know and that started as a pilot project under their 
government in Five Hills Health Region, Mr. Speaker. We also 
then moved forward with some small projects, Mr. Speaker, 
before deciding that this was something that we wanted to 
further implement in the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the question that the member asked, 
certainly that’s information, in terms of the totals, that we have 
provided. And it’s been provided, Mr. Speaker, through the 
answers to written questions. Mr. Speaker, we’ve provided that 
number in the past. Thank you. 
 
[14:15] 
 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6085 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the very contract this government 
signed with John Black says, freedom of information legislation 
and pay disclosure policies apply to this $40 million American 
lean consultant. So there’s nothing that prevents the release of 
all John Black’s receipts, except for the fact of this government 
ragging the puck. Again to the minister: why won’t this 
government table all the receipts today? What doesn’t it want 
Saskatchewan people to see? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well again, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is certainly the totals that we’ve provided, and it’s 
been information that’s been provided to the House and to the 
members of the public. This is certainly, Mr. Speaker, in 
keeping with past practices when the Government of 
Saskatchewan is engaged to work with consultants, whether it 
be under this government or under the former government, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the path that we’re going to take. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Inquest Into Death and Shelter for Homeless People 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we asked this government last week for an inquest into 
the death of Jerry Peequaquat. Jerry was 42 years old. His 
family says he was cut off social assistance despite being 
desperate and homeless. And Jerry died in a makeshift shelter 
on the 500 block of Avenue K South in Saskatoon. 
 
The Social Services minister said last week it was too early to 
commit to an inquest. So my question is to the minister: is this 
government ready now to call that inquest and will it be taking 
any action as a result of Jerry’s tragic death? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the normal 
process is the coroner would call an inquest. The coroner has 
not yet determined a cause of death. There is still some test 
results that he is waiting for, so we will be waiting for those 
results and the determination from the coroner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, last week we also asked the 
minister for an estimate of how many others are desperate and 
homeless but not even receiving social assistance. She didn’t 
have an answer then. Does she have an answer today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said before, 
there is a cold weather strategy that is in place, so our 
communities work together. They are in constant 
communication so that if anyone identifies a homeless person 
through our cold weather months, that they should be reporting 
it to the CBOs [community-based organization] that has 
emergency shelters. 
 

We’ve doubled the number of emergency shelters here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and we encourage all of those in the 
community — family members, or anyone, even if it’s a 
stranger — if you see someone on the street that is in the cold in 
our weather months, please call the emergency numbers and 
there will be shelter provided. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Poverty Reduction Strategy and Children Living in Poverty 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We were hoping for 
better answers to our questions last week and today, but we’ll 
keep coming back to this because Jerry deserved better and we 
have to make sure these kind of tragedies stop happening. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, new information this week shows that 
Saskatchewan’s child poverty rate is getting worse. One in four 
Saskatchewan children live in poverty — one in four. That’s 
shocking and heartbreaking. My question is to the Social 
Services minister: what does she have to say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
referring to a Campaign 2000 report. And they admitted that 
they were struggling with getting data this year because of the 
different data collections that’s been discontinued by the federal 
government. So they are using a different method in which to 
gather data, and it is questionable whether we’re comparing 
apples to apples. However, if we use Stats Canada data, we 
have the lowest rate of poverty within Canada here in 
Saskatchewan.  
 
We are moving in the right direction. We know that there’s 
more work that needs to be done. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 
have completed a housing strategy, why we’re working on a 
disability strategy. We have a violence against women strategy. 
We’ll be releasing soon a mental health and addiction strategy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have just launched a poverty strategy, 
and we’re going to be working with the stakeholders within the 
communities to formulate that strategy. There’s names that the 
member opposite should know, such as Cory Neudorf, Alison 
Robertson, and oh, his friend, Dr. Ryan Meili. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s disappointing to hear 
the minister dismiss the reports that have come out this week 
because we all should be stepping up when we know that 
children are living in poverty here in Saskatchewan. We all 
have to step up. And she has, and we think this is good news 
about the poverty reduction strategy. But we’ve been waiting 
now for weeks for an actual announcement about how this 
poverty strategy will be implemented. It’s been well over a 
month since she’s announced that. What will she do to get that 
happening right away so no children will be living in poverty 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 



6086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

I’m glad that our province is moving in the right direction and 
our poverty levels are going down. However we know there’s 
more work that needs to be done, and we’ll be working with the 
stakeholders to get that committee put together and get started. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I find it passing strange this 
minister will stand up and declare that poverty rates are going 
down here in Saskatchewan when my questions last week, my 
written questions last week that are normally answered every 
six months, has been ordered by this minister. Yet she has the 
gall to stand up and say they’re going down, yet she has no 
proof. She has no proof they’re going down. So our question to 
her: will she get that strategy happening right away, get on it 
this week, and announce how it’s going to be implemented right 
away? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — You know, Mr. Speaker, Stats Canada 
has the answers. And according to Stats Canada, there is 36 per 
cent less children in our province on poverty than when that 
member sat in cabinet when the NDP were in government. 
Thirty-six per cent fewer children living in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yet again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member asked the question. Now 
listen to the answer. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Yet again, just so that everyone can 
understand. According to Stats Canada, 36 per cent fewer 
children in Saskatchewan living in poverty than when that 
member sat around the cabinet table when he was in 
government. What was he doing then? There was no poverty 
strategy then. There was no announcement. We waited for 16 
years for an announcement from that member and we heard 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have done a lot, and we know that there’s more that needs 
to be done, but we are going in the right direction. We’re going 
to work with the people on the ground. We will get a strategy, 
and we will have initiatives in due course. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 
reading of Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 357 through 485. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 357 through 485. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 486 through 521. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 486 through 521. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Support for Energy East Pipeline 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
we’ve had some discussion between House leadership on either 
side of the House about a motion involving some recent 
developments around the Energy East pipeline proposal by 
TransCanada. Mr. Speaker, the recent developments I mention 
is the joint press conference held by the Premier of Ontario and 
the Premier of Quebec regarding this proposed pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among the requirements now being requested by 
Ontario and Quebec in terms of the process, in terms of what 
might be their official and more informal standing in the 
process, has included Ontario requesting a separate 
environmental review for that particular province for the 
pipeline, also Quebec wanting the licensing assessment to 
include upstream GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions. And so our 
understanding is that this is part of their joint position as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two issues are a bit of a concern. A number 
of other requests they’ve made around the process, around 
consultation that’s required with First Nations, with 
communities along the pipeline, environmental assessment, 
safety assessment, these are completely reasonable requests on 
the part of the people of Ontario and Quebec. The pipeline will 
certainly go through those provinces, and we think that these 
answers to these very reasonable questions will come in the 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6087 

National Energy Board process that actually deals with this very 
specific issue. 
 
I welcomed in the past the Leader of the Opposition’s 
comments that what was good enough for our provincial NDP 
here was this sort of triple net process that NEB [National 
Energy Board] provides for assessment of these kinds of 
projects. We would say to our counterparts, our friends in 
Ontario and Quebec: let that National Energy Board process 
occur because they will have answers to all of those reasonable 
questions. 
 
The request for separate environmental reviews in any 
particular jurisdiction is a concern, however. And the request 
for some sort of upstream GHG evaluation of the pipeline is of 
deep and abiding concern. It should be to all members of this 
House. It should be to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It should be a concern to Albertans. It should be 
a concern to all Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ostensibly what is being requested here I think 
from our friends in Ontario and Quebec is that this pipeline, its 
approval should at least contemplate some sort of an evaluation 
of the greenhouse gases related to the pipeline. What’s unclear 
in terms of this ask is whether or not they’re referencing just 
what will be conveyed in the pipeline or the pipeline itself. 
Because there’s going to be a CO2 footprint that went into the 
manufacture of the steel for the pipeline, and all the 
construction process will certainly have its own footprint. And 
so if it’s truly a life cycle of the oil and also of the pipeline and 
all of the work, you’re going to have a very significantly higher 
number on the GHGs than you would if you just narrowed it to 
any one of those things. 
 
The problem is, is that nobody really knows. The problem is the 
precedent that this would set, for other projects across the 
country would also carry this feature of no one really being 
familiar with what is being required of governments. How will 
any project get done like this in the future? How will we ensure 
the transportation of other goods and services if this somehow 
becomes a precedent in other provincial capitals? Because what 
we see here is a bit of pattern, Mr. Speaker, where provincial 
capitals are bringing to bear what seems to be some, not 
contrivances but some previously heretofore unimplemented 
ideas around assessment of these particular projects, things that 
just, measures that have never been requested of these particular 
. . . of these projects. And I think that should concern us all. 
 
We should begin this debate, Mr. Speaker, in the House with a 
summary of what the Energy East pipeline is and what it is not. 
It has been described by some as the ultimate recycling 
program. Why would it be described in this way, Mr. Speaker? 
Well two-thirds of the pipeline exists already; it will not have to 
be constructed anew. It exists already and it is carrying, for the 
most part, it’s carrying natural gas. It’s a gas pipeline. 
 
About a third of the total pipeline will be constructed. When it 
is complete, it’ll carry 1.1 million barrels of a variety of 
petroleum products. And I talked to TransCanada yesterday. At 
the beginning of the projects, we’re talking about conventional 
oil. In the case of Saskatchewan’s contribution to the pipeline, 
it’ll be light, sweet crude from the Bakken. In fact it doesn’t get 
much lighter or much sweeter than the crude we have in 

southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So let’s make that very clear because those who are opposing 
this in other parts of the country, by the way, NGOs 
[non-governmental organization] especially, they’re trying to 
paint this as somehow directly related to the oil sands. It’s true 
that a diluted bitumen may form a part of the oil in the pipeline, 
but at the beginning, at the outset and for the most part, we’re 
talking about conventional oil, conventional oil that will head to 
Eastern Canada. 
 
So that’s the first point, Mr. Speaker, for the NGOs that are 
opposing it: we’re not talking about the oil sands. We happen to 
think responsible development of the oil sands, by the way, is 
fine. We don’t have a problem with that on this side of the 
House. We have about 10 000 square kilometres of potential oil 
sands in Saskatchewan and the previous NDP even set up a 
regime, a royalty regime for that. We hope one day that it’s 
possible to develop that resource in a sustainable way and in 
concert with the area First Nations that are in that part of 
northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
But some in Canada certainly have real concerns about oil 
sands. So let’s be clear: we’re not talking about oil sands oil in 
the pipeline. We’re talking about conventional oil. This is 
perhaps the most important point in the debate: the oil in the 
pipeline from Saskatchewan and from Alberta will replace oil 
that’s currently imported into Eastern Canada from Iraq, from 
Algeria, from Venezuela, where, by the way, the GHG footprint 
around that oil is very significant. Venezuelan oil comes at 
some GHG cost that you wouldn’t find in the Bakken, for 
example; never mind the transportation CO2 that comes with 
shipping that oil to Atlantic Canada. 
 
It would also replace oil currently imported to Canada from 
Saudi Arabia and the United States of America. And I think 
most people in the country, whether they live in Montreal or 
Swift Current, Saskatchewan, might be surprised to find out that 
a big part of our country imports oil from places like Saudi 
Arabia, Algeria, Iraq, Venezuela, the United States of America. 
That just doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense because I think 
they also understand that this country is a world leader in the 
production of oil. We have the third-largest known proven 
reserves of oil on the face of the Earth, and are an exporter of 
oil. Why would that country, why would large parts of that 
country, communities of some size, industries of some size rely 
on oil from Iraq and Saudi Arabia and Algeria and Venezuela 
and the United States to consume or to refine? It just doesn’t 
make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s what’s happening today, and it’s been like that for a 
very long time in Canada. The Energy East pipeline seeks to 
stop that. The Energy East pipeline would bring Western 
Canadian oil to Eastern Canada so that we no longer need to 
import oil. I don’t know how you can be opposed to that. I don’t 
know how you could want to put up more barriers to that, as we 
seem to see coming from the capitals of Quebec City and at 
Queen’s Park. This is a very positive development. By the way, 
it’s why New Brunswick, New Brunswick’s Premier, the new 
Premier there, is very much in favour of the pipeline. It’s why, 
to his credit, Thomas Mulcair, the Leader of the New 



6088 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

Democratic Party and the Leader of the Opposition, is in favour 
also of the Energy East pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the replacement of foreign oil, I 
think there’s one other point I’d like to make. I’ve seen some 
comments on social media that need to be challenged, and we 
need to clear these up on the record. Some have somehow 
introduced parts of the Gateway pipeline debate into this 
particular debate, and specifically the part they try to introduce 
is around tankers, oil tankers. They’re trying to raise the spectre 
of now oil tankers off the East Coast because of the Energy East 
pipeline bringing oil to that part of our country. And it’s true 
that a lot of it will be refined for consumption in Atlantic 
Canada, creating value-added jobs here in the country, by the 
way, for our oil. Some of it might find its way to export. 
 
And so I’ve seen some trying to paint this picture that, well now 
we’re going to have tankers off the coast that we otherwise 
wouldn’t have. Really, Mr. Speaker? And where do these folks 
think the oil from, how that the oil from Iraq and Venezuela and 
Algeria, how it got here in the first place? It wasn’t an oil fairy; 
it was tankers, Mr. Speaker, tankers that are in the sea today. 
Arguably you could make the case that if we are displacing the 
oil that they both refine and consume in Atlantic Canada, we 
should see a reduction in the tanker traffic. You could also 
make the case that if we are replacing oil in Atlantic Canada, if 
we are displacing oil from Venezuela, the GHG footprint is 
likely less than it should be. Mr. Speaker, I actually hesitate to 
get into that whole argument because GHG assessment should 
have nothing to do with approval for this pipeline. 
 
And we encourage the federal government to go ahead with a 
very rigorous process that’s in place, a process, Mr. Speaker, 
that has already resulted in TransCanada, in the earliest stages 
of their effort to get approval, having already contacted 5,500 
landowners, having already had consultations with 155 First 
Nations and Métis communities. And I think they’ve signed 55 
agreements already with First Nations. 
 
The process is under way. The National Energy Board process 
is under way. And it will ask questions around safety and it will 
ask questions around environmental concerns and it will engage 
the communities. It already is engaging communities who need 
to be consulted on this particular proposal. In fact as a result of 
the assessment process, $2.5 million will be provided for those 
who wish to make submissions but can’t afford the cost of 
making a submission. So all who want to make a case to the 
NEB about the pipeline — good, bad, or indifferent — I believe 
are going to have the chance and they’ll be supported 
financially in doing this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also heard people raise some sort of spectre 
of danger around pipeline transportation of oil, not just the 
environmental piece, but danger. Mr. Speaker, here again, let’s 
get some facts on the record. We don’t have this pipeline 
currently in effect, obviously. That’s why we’re having this 
debate. And yet oil from Saskatchewan and Alberta is moving 
to Ontario and Quebec and points east, not to the degree we 
need to, not to the degree we could displace the need for foreign 
oil, but it is. How is it moving, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s moving 
in part by rail. Mr. Speaker, we know that with respect to the 
rail transport of oil, there are significant risks. In fact, we have 
seen those risks manifest themselves in an unspeakable tragedy 

in the province of Quebec. 
 
The risks, by the way, Mr. Speaker, as you will know — you’re 
from southeast Saskatchewan — increase with respect to the 
nature of the oil that those railcars are carrying. The lighter the 
oil, the sweeter the oil, the more incendiary the oil, and the risks 
increase. What we’re proposing here in Saskatchewan and in 
Alberta and in New Brunswick and across the country to our 
friends in Ontario and to our friends in Quebec, is let’s displace 
foreign oil. Let’s do that. Let’s add value to the oil at home. 
Let’s perhaps reduce the extra cost of oil to Atlantic Canadians 
who are paying the Brent price, not the West Texas price, and 
let’s make sure that as much oil is moving in not the perfectest 
method but the safest method we know to move oil, which is in 
a pipeline rather than perhaps in a truck or on a rail. We know 
that’s just simply not as safe. 
 
These are the basics of an argument that . . . I have to admit, 
Mr. Speaker, I know that Gateway has been in trouble for some 
time as a potential pipeline. Keystone has been in trouble for 
some time, as we know, that it’s an intractable problem, it 
seems, and an interminable debate that’s going on. 
 
I honestly, Mr. Speaker, did not believe that Energy East would 
be in jeopardy for the reasons we’ve talked about, for the 
multi-partisan support that exists for it — Liberals, New 
Democrats, federally Conservatives; provincially here, 
Saskatchewan Party provincially; and Alberta, Progressive 
Conservatives, Wildrose . . . I mean I didn’t anticipate this 
concern. But I am worried now. 
 
And that’s why we have asked for this motion to be debated. 
That’s why we’ve asked this legislature to send a signal to our 
friends in Ontario and Quebec. Learn the facts of this pipeline. 
Understand the environmental, frankly the reduction of 
environmental risks that come with the pipeline if you’re not 
moving it by railcar. Understand that we want for this country 
to be energy independent, that we want for this country to not 
need oil from Algeria or Iraq, Mr. Speaker, or Venezuela or 
Saudi Arabia. This just makes a lot of common sense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful to have a unanimous support 
not just for the motion that’s before us, which I’ll read right 
now, Mr. Speaker, but also for a change we might even want to 
do to the motion to make sure we characterize the GHG part of 
their assessment for what it is, which is unnecessary, and 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, unworkable. Because the precedent that it 
sets, maybe for Quebec steel coming this way, doesn’t make a 
lot of sense, won’t be good for the country in terms of internal 
trade, and it needs not to be a part of what Ontario and Quebec 
are discussing, Mr. Speaker. And so I’m going to move at this 
time: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Energy East pipeline and 
the massive economic activity and benefits it will bring to 
all regions of Canada, which includes significant economic 
growth, tax revenue growth, and job creation in Ontario 
and Quebec. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6089 

That this Assembly supports the Energy East pipeline and 
the massive economic activity and benefits it will bring to 
all regions of Canada, which includes significant economic 
growth, tax revenue growth, and job creation in Ontario 
and Quebec. 

 
I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to rise and take 
part in this very important debate on the Energy East pipeline. 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has said, the Energy East pipeline 
shall be the ultimate recycling program. Two-thirds of this 
pipeline, as he stated, is already in the ground. This is a project 
that will benefit not only the people of Saskatchewan but 
Canadians in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been two comprehensive reviews of 
Energy East done by Deloitte and the Conference Board of 
Canada. Deloitte estimates $35 billion in additional GDP [gross 
domestic product] over the 40-year life of the Energy East 
project. Deloitte also notes there will be about $10 billion in 
additional tax revenues to all levels of government over the 
project’s lifetime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2,341 additional direct full-time equivalent jobs 
during the 2013, 2015 development phase will be created from 
this project; 7,728 annual direct full-time equivalent jobs during 
the 2016, 2018 phase; with an additional 1,087 annual direct 
jobs to be sustained during the operating period of the 40-year 
lifetime of the Energy East project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is why this is an important debate. We cannot 
lose sight of what this project could mean to not only the people 
of our province but Canadians as a whole. So I hope the 
members of this Assembly will forgive me if I sound repetitive, 
but I truly believe this is an important measure that will have a 
benefit for people across our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s oil and gas producing industry 
contributes a significant share of Saskatchewan’s real gross 
domestic product, accounting for an estimate 14.6 per cent of 
the total. The oil and gas producing industry continues to be the 
largest contributor among primary industries to our provincial 
GDP. Industry investment in new exploration and development 
in 2013 was approximately $5.6 billion, and in 2013 the 
upstream oil and gas industry accounted for approximately 
36,000 direct and indirect person-years of employment. 
 
Saskatchewan is the number two leading oil producer and 
number three gas producer in all of Canada. On average during 
2013, Saskatchewan produced 487,400 barrels of oil per day 
and 539 million cubic feet of gas per day. The combined value 
and gas production for 2013 was $14.1 billion. Mr. Speaker, oil, 
gas, and related revenues including Crown land sales for the 
2013-2014 fiscal year was $1.6 billion, and approximately $1.9 
billion is forecast for 2014-2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are approximately 300 oil and gas 
companies that operate wells in Saskatchewan today. To tie this 
back to home, the Lloydminster area in October 2014 produced 
over 165,000 barrels per day of heavy oil from just over 5,600 
wells, and 29 million cubic feet of natural gas from 431 wells. 
Drilling activity from January 1st of 2014 to October 31st of 

2014 consisted of 356 vertical wells and 300 horizontal oil 
wells. There is currently 22 enhanced oil recovery projects 
approved in the Lloydminster area, of which 13 are currently 
operating. Of the operating EOR [enhanced oil recovery] 
projects, 10 are thermal projects using steam. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Energy East project is required to ensure that 
the heavy oil production from the Lloydminster, Saskatchewan 
area is able to reach markets. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, the Lloydminster area produces 32 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s oil production. This has greatly 
contributed to the economic growth of our province and has 
allowed the government to return investment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Taxes are lower. 
 
We have invested in highways, education, and health care: 94.2 
million alone has been invested in highways in the 
Lloydminster area; 20.5 million invested in schools, including 
the building of two new schools, Ecole St. Thomas and College 
Park; and a 58 per cent increase in funding to the Prairie North 
Health Region. This has amounted to over $70 million in the 
Lloydminster area alone. 
 
Lloydminster is currently experiencing a development boom. 
For three years construction values have reached or surpassed 
$180 million, and includes the largest construction values ever 
recorded in the city of Lloydminster and totalling well over half 
a billion dollars of investment. The Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business has ranked Lloydminster the number one 
mid-sized Canadian city to start and grow a business. 
 
From this economic growth, Canada and especially 
Saskatchewan has become an attractive destination for 
immigrants across the globe. Newcomers to my constituency 
are bringing business, ideas, and a diverse culture. As 
Canadians, we need foreign talent to sustain the country’s 
demographic and economic growth, and we have just the labour 
market to attract it. Canadians need immigration just as much as 
immigrants need a destination such as Canada. Immigration, as 
it turns out, is the key to Canada’s future prosperity. 
 
These immigrant families do not solely provide skilled labour 
and the creation of new businesses. Economic growth means 
that these families have the opportunity to settle down and 
establish their roots in a country, a community, and a province 
blessed with so many advantages. Mr. Speaker, our provincial 
motto is “from many peoples, strength,” and I am proud to say 
this has never been more evident than it is today in the 
Lloydminster constituency. 
 
In Lloydminster the average age of the population is 27 years of 
age. Mr. Speaker, this is a city with a population of just over 
31,000 people. This is a community that is growing, and we 
need to ensure that they stay in our province and continue to 
contribute.  
 
The job opportunities for our young people coming out of high 
school have never been more diverse or greater because of the 
growth created by the oil and gas industry. Even the realm of 
fields of study they can enter are vast, exciting, and push their 



6090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

entrepreneurial skills. 
 
We also have an aging population, and we need to ensure that 
we take care of those who put in the work before us. That is 
why, with a strong economy, these seniors can benefit from the 
dividends of the growth in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, Onion Lake is a very 
progressive First Nations community. The respective leaders in 
Onion Lake have been able to create job opportunities for their 
community members due to investments from the oil and gas 
industry as well as a strong and diverse provincial economy. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, Husky Energy has been 
a positive presence in the community. Recently, Mr. Speaker, 
Husky Energy, one of Canada’s largest and most established 
integrated energy companies, located in Lloydminster, made a 
significant investment of $1.125 million in 2013 to polytechnic 
to upgrade their power engineering technology lab, enhance 
their power engineering program, and provide scholarships to 
students. Husky employs power engineering program grads in 
its thermal facilities and in its upgrader and asphalt refinery in 
Lloydminster. This probably would not have been possible if 
the industry was not experiencing growth and prosperity in a 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an opportunity such as the Energy East pipeline is 
one we cannot afford to miss. It is imperative that we keep our 
economy strong so we can maintain the Saskatchewan 
advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the extent of my comments, and I wish to 
move that the motion be amended as follows: 
 

Add the following words after “Quebec”: 
 
And that this Assembly calls on Ontario and Quebec to 
recognize the National Energy Board as the appropriate 
body to review that pipeline proposal; and further 
 
That these provinces should not be creating unnecessary 
barriers by imposing additional processes and conditions, 
such as effect on greenhouse gas emissions. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster to: 
 

Add the following words after “Quebec”: 
 
And that this Assembly calls on Ontario and Quebec to 
recognize the National Energy Board as the appropriate 
body to review that pipeline proposal; and further 
 
That these provinces should not be creating unnecessary 
barriers by imposing additional processes and conditions, 
such as effect on the greenhouse gas emissions. 

 
I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Energy 
East project certainly is an important one for Canada and 

certainly important to our province. We’ve long been a 
supporter and an advocate for the Energy East pipeline from 
Western Canada to Eastern Canada. Certainly our oil and gas 
industry’s an important part of our province, a driver within our 
economy, and this is an important project for, we believe, not 
just Western Canada, not just for Saskatchewan but for Canada 
as a whole. 
 
And what we’re looking at, as has been mentioned by the 
Premier and the member from Lloydminster, is that we’re 
actually utilizing an existing pipeline, transforming the 
utilization of that pipeline and then extending another distance 
and, in the process, adding some really good refinery jobs, 
adding value to our resources. Something that’s certainly 
important to our province and something that has been 
mentioned as well that’s certainly important to us is, as a nation, 
reducing our reliance on foreign oil and working towards 
energy independence — something that should be a greater 
priority for governments, provincial and federal. So when we’re 
looking at projects that add value to our resources, add 
opportunities for Canadians, these are important projects. 
 
Now I would say that, you know, we’re a tad disappointed with 
the Premier’s approach on this project to date. And I think that 
it’s important to note that the Premier has lacked some of the 
maturity, I would argue then, as to how he’s engaged in this 
process than say the Premier of Alberta. 
 
You know, when we’re dealing as a federation, there are 
concerns that other jurisdictions, other provinces may have, and 
those concerns should be dealt with in a very thoughtful, direct, 
smart sort of a fashion. And you know, I’ve noticed that the 
Premier of Alberta has recognized those concerns as concerns 
that are important to be addressed and has offered of himself 
and his province direct time to work through some of those 
issues.  
 
Now we believe as well, you know, that this Premier, our 
Premier, has gone at this in a bit of a different approach. And 
what we have to be cautious about this approach is that this is 
an important project, and if one’s not cautious in how they 
engage in this process and how we’re watching a bit of the 
approach of our Premier, there’s a risk of inflaming division as 
opposed to getting the job done for Saskatchewan people and 
all Canadians in a responsible and direct fashion with our other 
provinces. 
 
So we would urge a level of caution. You know, a Twitter 
attack is probably not the best way to deal with such an 
important project. What probably will be important is rational 
discussions, facts and information, and some good direct 
listening with provincial counterparts. And I think that’s how 
you can sort of build the kind of consensus, hopefully, the kind 
of co-operation that allows projects like this to be advanced as 
opposed to pitting regions against regions because it really 
shouldn’t be about that within a federation, and it’s not going to 
serve the best interests of getting this project in place. 
 
We’re also disappointed on the front of the environmental 
record of Saskatchewan, and we note that in the Environmental 
Code they have excluded even a chapter on climate change. 
Now these are important facts because we as a 
resource-producing, trade-dependent province have a 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6091 

responsibility to be taking the environment seriously and 
making sure we have measures forward. And we believe that in 
doing that, and doing that responsible resource development, 
having those policies in place, it allows and strengthens the 
argument for our province to go down east and certainly to 
make the case for important projects like this. So these are a 
couple of the areas we caution. 
 
While we support the motion, while we support the project, we 
urge the Premier to not inflame divisions but to work towards 
building understanding on a nation-building project like this 
that’s important to Saskatchewan, so that we ultimately can get 
the job done within our federation. And certainly as well, 
certainly not neglect our own responsibilities here in 
Saskatchewan on the environmental front, which allows us to 
be I think more effective in connecting with our entire country. 
 
Just a few notes on this project again and why we’ve been 
pushing for this. This is a value-add opportunity for our 
resources. This is something that we see that should be a higher 
priority for our provincial government, for our federal 
government, in allowing Canada and Saskatchewan to be as 
strong as we can be. Certainly this brings about good refinery 
jobs. I’ve seen numbers that have been put forward for Ontario, 
for example, that look to be really good, strong numbers of 
good jobs that should and could be created. And we know that 
this Energy East project would bring 1.1 million barrels of 
Western oil per day to refineries in Eastern Canada. 
 
And we recognize right now that that oil is getting to market 
and we would argue that the pipeline itself is a more efficient 
and safer way to move that oil than putting it on to rail and 
other options that exist. So we see this as a responsible project. 
We see it as a good economic project. And we urge some 
caution now with the Premier to make sure he engages in good 
faith with provincial partners to get the job done for 
Saskatchewan people and for Canadians. That’s all I have to say 
at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we all agree that it’s important 
that we get our oil to the market, wherever that market is. And 
this is another aspect of providing access for Saskatchewan 
products to the world. 
 
I think one of the things that this motion is a small piece of is 
the overall trade policy for Saskatchewan. We’re a landlocked 
province like Alberta. We don’t have access to the oceans and 
so we end up having to rely on our neighbours when we 
transport the goods that we produce, the goods that we take out 
of the ground, and the goods that we grow. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this type of a motion relates to that particular question. And so I 
think that we need to be very careful because it also then relates 
to what it means to be a province in the federation of Canada, 
the Confederation, because it’s about those relationships and 
how those things work. 
 
We know that in times where it’s absolutely crucial that grain 
was to get to eastern markets, the federal government stepped in 
and basically took over the legislation for grain transportation. 
We know that when uranium was important for a war effort, the 
federal government stepped up and basically took over control 

and ended up putting in legislation around uranium. We also 
have seen in the last year what it means when the transportation 
of wheat, the transportation of other products, potash, are 
hampered by the capacity of our rail system. And all of these 
things directly affect our local economy. So this pipeline is 
another piece of that and I think it’s a good thing for Canada to 
work on this effort. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Another good aspect obviously is the fact that more of our 
Canadian oil will go to refineries that are located in Canada. 
And I think that’s a positive thing as well. So practically we 
support an east-west pipeline. 
 
But one of the more difficult aspects of this particular issue is 
where and how will the review take place of the pipeline 
project. We see the role of the National Energy Board and we 
want them to do a good job of assessing what’s necessary. And 
that process is ongoing and so we recognize that. 
 
One of the points that our new premier to the west has 
identified, as Premier Jim Prentice has become the Premier of 
Alberta, is that there’s a perception problem and an actual 
problem around how and what has been done by our Western 
provinces as it relates to the environment, as it relates to 
greenhouse gases. And frankly we have a problem in 
Saskatchewan on the environmental record here which does 
affect projects like this. We know that we have to be smart. We 
have to be diligent. We have to make sure that environmental 
protection is right up the top of the government agenda. We 
know that we have to address climate change. Mr. Speaker, we 
were very disappointed when the new legislation was 
introduced in the legislature this fall around the Environmental 
Code. It did not include a chapter on climate change. 
 
Now that’s the place where the Premier could have shown 
leadership of his government, to go right directly to the issue of 
climate change — which has been promised for many years, 
frankly — and deal with that here so that we can then argue 
from a position of strength here in Saskatchewan. And so it 
ends up being a situation where I think that the Premier of 
Alberta has recognized that he has to go back and work in that 
area to make sure that he can go and speak to the world. 
 
Now when I was the minister of Environment, I worked with 
Minister Prentice, at that time, and he was the minister of Indian 
Affairs and Northern Development and then subsequently 
became the minister of Industry. And there were a couple of 
files here in Saskatchewan that were environmental ones where 
he brought a very practical approach, and we actually resolved 
some of the issues along the water in the Qu’Appelle Valley 
with all the different dams. 
 
I think that that’s the kind of leadership we need on a national 
level as we deal with this bigger issue, which is about 
confederation. And unfortunately we don’t have a base on the 
environmental side right now in Saskatchewan, and that’s 
causing us some difficulty. We also maybe don’t have as clear a 
perspective from our Premier as to how to be part of a bigger 
operation or a bigger country as it relates to some of these 
national issues. 
 



6092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that we on this side support an 
east-west pipeline. It’s important to get oil to market, but we 
need to do that from a place of strength. So we want this 
government to take climate change and environmental 
protection seriously, and we want our Premier to show 
leadership in making sure that the Environmental Code includes 
climate change issues like has been promised for many years so 
that we can actually then go forward and say, well this is what 
we’re doing here; this is how we’re going to respond. We’re 
going to be part of a serious discussion in Ontario and Quebec 
because they have raised some concerns about this. 
 
So practically, this is about how Canada works. We want it to 
work well and we want our government to show leadership 
there. So here today we’ll be supporting this motion because it’s 
important for our oil industry. It’s important for sending the 
message to Canada that we need to work with everybody to 
make sure our products go to other Canadians but also to the 
world. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House is the 
amendment moved by the member for Lloydminster: 
 

To add the following words after “Quebec”: 
 
And that this Assembly calls on Ontario and Quebec to 
recognize the National Energy Board as the appropriate 
body to review that pipeline proposal; and further 
 
That these provinces should not be creating unnecessary 
barriers by imposing additional processes and conditions 
such as effect on greenhouse gas emissions. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The question will now be the main 
motion as amended. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question will read, as moved by the 
Premier: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Energy East pipeline and 
the massive economic activity and benefits it will bring to 
all regions of Canada, which includes significant economic 
growth, tax revenue growth, and job creation in Ontario 
and Quebec; and 
 
That this Assembly calls on Ontario and Quebec to 
recognize the National Energy Board as the appropriate 
body to review that pipeline proposal; and further 
 
That these provinces should not be creating unnecessary 
barriers by imposing additional processes and conditions 

such as effect on greenhouse gas emissions. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. With leave, to put forward a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to put forward a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and amendment as well as 
verbatim transcripts of the debate to the Prime Minister of 
Canada, the Premier of Ontario, the Premier of Quebec, 
and the Premier of Alberta. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader, by leave, has 
moved: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and amendment as well as 
verbatim transcripts of the debate to the Prime Minister of 
Canada, the Premier of Ontario, the Premier of Quebec, 
and the Premier of Alberta. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 163, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2014. The Act being brought forward has four 
amendments in it being proposed to The Education Act, 1995, 
which will be in place by September 1, 2015. In addition 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6093 

regulatory amendments will also be required to support these 
legislative changes. 
 
The first change being proposed is to amend The Education Act, 
1995 to rename section 4.1 to the Education Scholarship Fund. 
The newly renamed Education Scholarship Fund will include 
the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall Scholarship and 
also the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Scholarship in alignment 
with the Premier’s announcement on May 23rd, 2012. 
 
As many of you will remember, the Prince of Wales 
Scholarship was renamed the Prince of Wales and Duchess of 
Cornwall Scholarship to honour the Diamond Jubilee visit by 
the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall to Saskatchewan 
in 2012. It is a scholarship of $500 and can be awarded to up to 
20 students. The Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Scholarship is for 
$1,000 and is awarded for up to six students. These scholarships 
will be consolidated into one fund and renamed, which will 
allow for the addition of future scholarships. We are focused on 
meeting the needs of students and we want to ensure that we 
have flexibility in place to support students’ success in a variety 
of ways. 
 
The second change being proposed is to amend two expressions 
used in the French version of The Education Act, 1995. The first 
one is to change “home-based education program” from 
“programme d’études à domicile” to “programme de 
scolarisation à domicile.” And also to change “pupil with 
intensive needs” from, and I quote, “élève bénéficiant d’un 
programme de soutien intensif” to “élève à besoins 
particuliers.” The change is to capture the nuances of the 
language in the Act so the roles and responsibilities laid out are 
clear and properly representative of expectations. 
 
The need to amend these two expressions was identified in 
April 2013 by translation services unit, Ministry of Education, 
legislative drafting, Ministry of Justice in consultation with 
their respective legislative translators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third amendment being proposed is to amend 
The Education Act, 1995 to allow school divisions to start the 
school year prior to Labour Day when it occurs on or after 
September 5th. Current legislation provides that school 
divisions are required to commence instructional time no sooner 
than the day following Labour Day and to end no later than 
June 30th. This amendment will provide the Minister of 
Education with the authority to choose a start date from the 
school calendar prior to Labour Day in years where it falls on or 
after September 5th. 
 
This change is in response to the school divisions, who have 
responsibility for creating the school calendar, and concerns 
they have expressed with fulfilling the 950 hours of 
instructional time within the current framework of starting after 
Labour Day and ending on or before June 30th. The divisions 
have expressed that in years where Labour Day is not at the 
very beginning of the month, such as September 2015, a start 
date after the statutory holiday would result in the loss of four 
instructional days for teachers and students, which would make 
it difficult to fit in enough instructional time. Accordingly the 
start date in 2015 will be September 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final amendment is a proposal to streamline 

the borrowing powers of boards of education and the conseil 
scolaire. Currently school divisions must acquire a lending rate 
and receive ministry consent to borrow funds in order to 
proceed with major capital projects. However, financial 
institutions hold interest rates for a short period of time and the 
turnaround time for providing school divisions with consent is 
not meeting financial institution deadlines. This is resulting in 
school divisions having to re-tender for loan rates and getting 
new resolutions passed by boards of education or the conseil 
scolaire. 
 
This amendment will require board or conseil resolutions to 
include only the amount proposed to be borrowed and the 
purposes of the expenditure, with good faith that they will seek 
out the best repayment terms and interest rates. Consultations 
have occurred with school divisions in respect to borrowing 
powers with the proposed changes and the proposed changes 
are reflective of what we heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move that Bill No. 163, The 
Education Amendment Act, be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am pleased to stand and give the initial response to some 
of the bills being introduced by the government. And once 
again, Mr. Speaker, we notice under Bill 163 that there are a 
number of changes. And while all the changes that are being 
proposed are certainly important, the one particular change that 
we wanted to focus on, Mr. Speaker, is the whole notion around 
section (6), which allows the minister to set the beginning of the 
school year before Labour Day when Labour Day falls on or 
after September 5th. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we pointed out once again, and this is one of 
the points that we raised in our caucus discussions, is the 
response was, well, well, well, it looks like the Saskatchewan 
Party is back to the drawing board in their legislative agenda 
and their bills. Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
fundamental rules that they didn’t put in place, they didn’t put 
in effect was the whole notion of consultation. And what we’ve 
seen often, Mr. Speaker, is this government begins the whole 
process of trying to govern by polling. You do what people 
think is an appropriate, a fun thing to do. Then you make it as 
part of your policy without any consultation. And then what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, is here we are in this pickle, in this mess 
that the minister has started. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And now we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, now we’re seeing that this 
minister, again in his confusion as to how to get the job done, 
he’s now in a situation where he has to come back and do an 
amendment to their amendment to the consequential Act that 
was amended last year, Mr. Speaker, and is now covered under 
a different bill that was also amended. So to the average 
layperson out there, they’re getting confused. What are you 
amending your amendments for? Like haven’t you got this 
thing figured out? 



6094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

And, Mr. Speaker, the point that we’re trying to raise is that 
obviously this government thought it would be a popular thing 
to do. They were quite frankly trying to govern by polling. They 
were trying to govern by polling when people told them, we 
should tinker with the school year. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
happened here is once again the minister decided, and the 
Premier as well decided, this would be a great thing to do. The 
people of Saskatchewan would be happy with this. It sounds 
like a logical thing to do. So they implement it, made it part of 
their provincial campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we are a number of years later, and they are now 
coming back and saying, oops, we made a big mistake here. 
Now the minister’s leaving the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because 
obviously he doesn’t want to hear about the fact that we’ve 
been imploring him to make sure that he consulted with the 
appropriate people, to make sure consultations were undertaken. 
And that minister didn’t do it. He assumed that he knew better 
than the school boards, Mr. Speaker. He assumed he knew 
better than the teachers, Mr. Speaker. But the fact of the matter 
is they told him, and they implored this government not to do 
this, to consult. Let’s figure this out together. But, Mr. Speaker, 
that government, that minister, and that Premier didn’t do it 
because once again they wanted to make sure that they’re able 
to govern by simple polling, Mr. Speaker, and that doesn’t work 
on many, many occasions. 
 
Now what’s happening is that teachers are telling the 
government that, why didn’t you consult with them? Why 
didn’t you consult with the teachers and the school divisions? 
Why didn’t you come along and recognize and respect those 
partners in education by saying, look, we’re thinking of doing 
this. We want your advice. We want your input. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here we are back to the drawing board for the 
Saskatchewan Party legislative agenda, trying to figure out how 
you clean up this mess that they created, Mr. Speaker. So here 
we are today, speaking of an amendment to their amendment to 
The Education Act that they did no consultations on, and now 
they’re back to square one. Now they’re saying, what do we do 
from here on in to fix this problem, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And the opposition warned them. The opposition warned them 
not to tinker with the school year, not to tamper and try and 
influence the school year for petty politics because, Mr. 
Speaker, the important thing was to sit down and negotiate your 
way through these matters with the appropriate partners, and 
that includes the teachers, the school divisions, the students, and 
of course the parents impacted by this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So one of the biggest points that we would raise here on this 
side of the Assembly is we find on that side of the House 
there’s total confusion on how to get the job done. On one 
minute, on one second, on one hand they want to be able to be 
able to do the popular . . . or govern by polling, but on the other 
hand, they have the whole matter to deal with when it comes to 
respecting the teachers and the education system and of course 
all of the people impacted by that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is what this bill is about. Really it is a bill 
that the Saskatchewan Party government want to put forward 
without highlighting, without highlighting the simple fact that 
they made a mess of this process to begin with. And now here 

we are, a number of months and a number of weeks later, that 
they are now having to come back and they’ve got to fix this 
problem because once again the whole notion that it was part of 
their election platform, and they never consulted with the 
appropriate people. It’s one of the points that we want to raise 
this afternoon as a result of this particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve met with many teachers over my time, 
you know, as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
And certainly as somebody that’s been in government and 
somebody that’s been in opposition, we have got the continual 
message from teachers that they’re fed up with this government. 
They are fed up with this government because they have not 
afforded many of the teachers that due respect that our teachers 
should be afforded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one more evidence of that was of course when they tried to 
tinker with the start of the school year. And from what I can 
understand, Mr. Speaker, is that all the school divisions, they 
have a 950 hour of instruction time that they have to follow, and 
they’ve got to try and balance those hours that the government 
dictates into a number of days over a span of a number of 
months, over a number of courses, and of course over a number 
of schools. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very complex thing to do. But the 
minister and the government decided when they’re going to 
change the school year as to when you’re allowed to start 
because in their opinion it is the proper thing to do. Logistically 
it was very difficult to do. But they once again chose the easy 
way out and said, oh if the people like this, we’ll do this. 
 
And they did it, Mr. Speaker. They put in a policy where they 
didn’t start the school year till after the Labour Day celebration, 
Mr. Speaker. And then lo and behold, a number of months later 
they’re coming back and they are getting grief from the people 
involved with education saying, you made a mistake here. We 
asked you not to do it. We asked for you consultation, and you 
refused to consult. 
 
So that’s one of the things that I think’s really important on this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is the government is retreating. The 
government is making an admission today that they made a big 
mistake here, Mr. Speaker. And we continue seeing those same 
mistakes, Mr. Speaker. As long as you’re governing by polling, 
you can never provide the solid leadership that is required, 
especially on bills of this sort. 
 
You’ve got to engage your partners. You’ve got to 
communicate with a number of people being impacted by this, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is just one example of how the 
government has made a big mess of this particular bill, and now 
the minister comes back and simply tries to portray this as an 
administrative process when we in the opposition know it’s an 
admission of their guilt of not being able to sit down and 
consult with the teachers, the school divisions, the students, and 
the parents impacted by the decision to move this start of the 
school year around the Labour Day celebration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is something that we need to talk about on a 
regular and a consistent basis, is that we’re seeing that this 
particular government has made a number of errors. 
Legislatively when you bring bills forward here, they have to 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6095 

follow certain processes. And we always advocate as an 
opposition, we always advocate that they do a lot of 
consultation, especially to the impacted parties and people of 
any particular bill. 
 
We advocate that because, you know, as a government, they 
should be at least receiving a number of viewpoints, a number 
of organizations’ position on certain issues. All that advice is 
helpful to government. But this government chooses on a 
regular basis to not even consult nor seek advice, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is a shame because there are so many people in 
Saskatchewan that can offer so much advice and good, solid 
direction on a wide variety of issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why on this side of the Assembly we say to people 
and we also encourage the government to consult with people. 
And this is one example of why that consultation is so vitally 
important to the operation of government, is because it talks 
about sound process. It speaks of making sure that you 
administer education in a very professional way and it really, 
really moralizes the people that are engaged with this particular 
service to the Saskatchewan people, and that is educating our 
young people. And on all three fronts the Saskatchewan 
government failed. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party government failed on this, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we’re seeing the government come back — 
the minister, the same minister who wouldn’t take advice — 
coming back and saying we made a mistake on this bill. We’re 
going to have to redraft the bill. We’re going to have to rename 
the bill. We’re going to have to change certain policies on the 
bill. We’re going to amend this bill. And the list goes on as to 
the number of amendments they made to other amendments to 
other amendments and, Mr. Speaker, finally the average 
layperson out there gets confused. What amendment are they 
amending now today? 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, we are pointing out that this 
government just doesn’t have it figured out when it comes to 
working with our teachers and trying to build a solid education 
system for the people of Saskatchewan. It has been a failure and 
an abject failure right from day one, especially in light of the 
fact that they’ve had record, record revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
Record revenue and they can’t get it figured out. 
 
And that’s one of the important points that we in the opposition, 
we always make this position, that we tell people this 
government has not been able to figure their way out. They 
have not been able to even get their legislative agenda in order, 
Mr. Speaker, never mind the finances. But they are making 
mistake after mistake after mistake, and the people of 
Saskatchewan can no longer afford these mistakes because it 
creates a lot of division, disruption, and it creates a lot of 
confusion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the examples on this particular bill that we’re 
speaking about today, Bill 163, where they intervened and 
where they decided in their own interests that they would alter 
the school year. And, Mr. Speaker, the teachers fought back. 
The school divisions fought back, and the system fought back 
against the government that was simply trying to govern by 
polling. They’re trying to govern by polling. They thought this 
was a popular thing to do, Mr. Speaker, and obviously it was 

not. And now we’re seeing a number of months later, he is now 
sitting here today saying, oops we made a mistake. We’ve got 
to go back to the old system because the old system was correct. 
And that’s exactly what the teachers and the people impacted by 
this decision, the school boards and the opposition have been 
saying to this government. And they refused to hear that 
particular argument. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note, it’s important to note 
that that’s the reason why we encourage consultation. We’ve 
always maintained that consultation is very, very key to being a 
successful government. And as I said on many occasions, 
consultation does not constitute agreement.  
 
And even though, Mr. Speaker, even though the minister tried 
to confuse the facts at the time by saying that they consulted 
with various people, we know that was not the case. The fact of 
the matter, there may have been discussions with them, but 
there was no agreement. And certainly there was pushback from 
the teachers, whom we should all respect as MLAs and of 
course as people who have children or grandchildren going to 
school. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what this is, what this is, this particular bill is 
a full admission by the Saskatchewan Party government that 
they made a big mistake altering the school year to 
accommodate the celebrations around Labour Day, Mr. 
Speaker. And the reason why they put that in place is they had 
done some polling, they thought people would like it. So they 
come along, made the decision to start the school year after 
Labour Day, Mr. Speaker, just to try and look popular, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we’re back to square one. 
 
They’ve got to go back to a different system because they made 
a full mistake on this one, Mr. Speaker. And we in the 
opposition are smiling. We’re enjoying this because obviously 
we were right to begin with. They should have consulted with 
the people that they’re trying to ignore, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re trying to ignore. And, Mr. Speaker, once again we are 
remind them, you need to have consultation on these matters, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on one hand, the Saskatchewan Party government decides to 
do this polling and find out they want Labour Day free for 
families to enjoy this. And we’re trying to find out, Mr. 
Speaker, who gave them that advice? Who gave them that 
advice to do this, Mr. Speaker? And where are those 
organizations and people today? 
 
So you look at the teachers’ perspective: here you are, you’re 
working with the number of kids in your classroom as a teacher. 
And you have your prescribed time in which you have to work 
with the students — you have to have a certain amount of time 
to instruct students — that’s identified. The Government of 
Saskatchewan have put those standards in place. And you must 
have X amount of hours of instruction per student each year. I 
think the amount of instruction is 950 hours, Mr. Speaker. The 
school divisions have to fit that time frame or the necessary 950 
hours within the school year, Mr. Speaker. And of course the 
school year spans a number of about 10 months, and as a result 
of that, many school divisions, and planners, teachers, 
administrators, they all have to work together to try and find the 
right balance to ensure that they have the proper time frame, 



6096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

they have the proper students doing the proper amount . . . or 
giving them the proper amount of instruction over a defined 
period of time, Mr. Speaker. And this was their challenge. 
 
Then along comes the government saying, oh we’re going to 
change the school year on you, and we’re not going to give you 
any consultation. This is something that we want to do. We 
think it’s a popular thing to do. Well, Mr. Speaker, as was noted 
on many occasions, sometimes doing the right thing isn’t the 
most popular thing in the world. Sometimes doing the right 
thing is difficult, Mr. Speaker. And in this instance, the 
government should’ve realized that, and they would have 
realized that had they consulted with the teachers, the school 
boards, the parents, and especially the students. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the northern part of the province 
where we have a number of schools that are operating, they 
have a great amount of challenges in terms of trying to make 
sure they do their very best with what they have. Now I know in 
the northern school division that there is a number of days that 
they negotiate locally through their collective bargaining 
agreement that talks about prep time, that talks about 
professional development days, that speaks of how we’re able 
to balance those needs of those teachers in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And we all know that the school divisions operate totally 
different from each other. They have this collaboration; I’m not 
arguing that they don’t have that. I’m pointing out that they 
operate their school division in different ways. There’s a myriad 
of processes in one school division that’s totally different from 
another school division. And, Mr. Speaker, they could be 
neighbouring communities, and yet they may operate their 
schools in different ways. 
 
So my point being, is that when you have this complex 
relationship and complex planning process in place when it 
comes to trying to educate or educating our children and trying 
to fill all the requirements that government’s put on you, and of 
course the parents put on you as well, it’s a very difficult task, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a very difficult task. And you have students 
and teachers and school divisions working overtime to try and 
figure this out. And they put a lot of time and effort into 
figuring out the annual plan to educate our kids and to balance 
all that within the budget and within the constraints of the 
region. 
 
So it’s not one size fits all, Mr. Speaker. There are just a 
different style for every school division. And that’s the 
complexity, Mr. Speaker, that we talk about on this of the 
Assembly when we say, when you’re trying to meddle into the 
school year, you’re having a dramatic, drastic, negative effect if 
you don’t consult with the people that are doing this job. And 
that’s a fundamental point that I want to make today. They 
didn’t consult with the teachers, the school divisions, the 
parents. And as a result of this, Mr. Speaker, we’re back here to 
day one. 
 
We’re back here where the minister sheepishly introduces this 
bill, saying he made a mistake. And now we’ve got to go back 
to the drawing board because, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Party government can’t figure out their own legislative agenda, 
Mr. Speaker. They can’t figure it out, so now we’re back here 
again doing another amendment to The Education Act. And 
how many more amendments are we expecting over the next 
number of months? Probably more amendments upon 
amendments upon amendments. 
 
We would argue you need to get it right from day one. You’ve 
got to get this thing figured out. And, Mr. Speaker, once again 
we’re seeing a failure on the Saskatchewan Party side to do the 
proper consultation and to provide sound leadership on issues 
that are important to Saskatchewan such as education. They are 
not providing that leadership, Mr. Speaker, not providing it in 
any way, shape, or form, from my vantage point. And I say 
shame on them because the teachers have been telling them, the 
school divisions have been telling them, and many students are 
suffering as a result of their lack of leadership and really not 
being able to figure out the process that is necessary to govern 
accordingly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a bill . . . Section 6, once again as I 
mentioned, allows for the minister to set the beginning of the 
school year before Labour Day when Labour Day falls on or 
after September 5th. Now, Mr. Speaker, again we go back. The 
minister still has the right to determine what day they start. And 
they’re tinkering with this again. They’re trying to cover up the 
mistake they made. They’re trying to cover up this huge error, 
this huge lack of consultation. And once again they’re 
positioning the minister to figure this out. We again implore the 
minister that if you haven’t got it figured out in the start, you’re 
not going to figure it out now. So go back to consulting with the 
school divisions because they are radically different from how 
they operate from each other. 
 
That’s the fundamental point we’re trying to raise today. The 
minister should not be able to determine when, where the 
school division’s year can start unless he has that consultation 
and agreement from the school divisions that are out there and 
from the teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We in the opposition really sense, and we know there’s a lot of 
anger out there from the teachers on this government. A lot of 
teachers are not very happy because a good example, a good 
example, Mr. Speaker, is they started this standardized testing. 
Well that was scrapped, Mr. Speaker, because we have 
confidence in our teachers in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
have full confidence in our teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you look at how they tried to intervene in the school year. 
And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that they’re able to 
dictate the amount of hours that the teacher has to instruct their 
students, but yet they determine when the school year starts. 
Like how does that connect when it comes to being a good 
government? It doesn’t connect, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t connect 
in any way, shape, or form. And that’s why it’s important that 
as an opposition we point this out. 
 
So whatever teachers out there that are listening to this 
program, they know. They know that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has treated them terribly. They know that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has treated them badly, Mr. 
Speaker. They have treated them badly in the sense that they 
have not respected their position. They have not sat down and 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6097 

negotiated many things in good faith, Mr. Speaker. They have 
not figured this out at all. And so once again we’re back here 
doing an amendment to their amendment from a different Act 
from a few years ago where they made a big mistake on trying 
to alter the school year without consultation. We’re doing it 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen this as full evidence, as full evidence that the 
Saskatchewan Party government doesn’t know what they’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know what they’re doing. And 
that’s kind of where I stand here in saying, telling people we’ve 
got to get these guys straightened out. The Saskatchewan Party 
government can’t even figure out their legislative agenda, much 
less how to respect teachers, much less how to fund education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’re sitting here talking about the school divisions 
overall, and certainly the teachers and the demand that they 
have, the demands they have for respect from the government, 
but the demands that are placed on the teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
And I do a lot of travelling, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve sat with a 
number of teachers from Buffalo Narrows to Beauval, La 
Loche, Mr. Speaker, the Far North. And I can tell you right 
now, in many of these communities — La Loche being a good 
example of that, Beauval being another great example, Buffalo 
Narrows — of how the teaching staff and administrative team 
in each of these schools are doing a tremendous job to not only 
improve students’ outcomes, Mr. Speaker, but to strengthen 
their community. 
 
And I can tell you right now that as I travel through my 
community and I go to some of the schools — like for example 
Twin Lakes School in Buffalo Narrows, it is being administered 
by local people — many, many of the staff there are highly 
dedicated, Mr. Speaker. They know why they’re there and they 
know their purpose. And they’re doing their job above and 
beyond their call, Mr. Speaker. And I look at that and I say to 
myself, why are we not supporting these teachers more? Why 
aren’t we doing our part as well, Mr. Speaker, as a government 
to try and support them? And this is where the Saskatchewan 
Party government has just failed the teachers time and time 
again. And I think the teachers’ anger is not only strong, Mr. 
Speaker, it is building, Mr. Speaker. It is building against the 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
And again, some of the examples that I’ve used in my own 
communities, Mr. Speaker, is that had it not been for certain 
schools . . . La Loche is a good example, Mr. Speaker, of how 
their schools have done a tremendous job in strengthening that 
particular community. As you walk in the school, they have 
very solid staff that are there every day. They have rules. They 
have different support mechanisms for the students. They will 
follow the provincial guideline for the number of hours that is 
necessary to teach these kids. They have high standards in 
teaching our children. 
 
So the Dene high school and Ducharme elementary school in 
La Loche, I want to say to their staff that you are doing a 
tremendous job. Keep that up because these are the shining 
lights in many of our communities. The centres of excellence is 
what I call them when it comes to schools in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And Beauval is another good example, Mr. Speaker, that as you 
go to some of these communities, you’ll see the staff. They 
spend hours and hours on their own time volunteering in that 
school. You know, Valley View School is one of the schools 
that, when we travel there and go visit, the school is well 
maintained. The staff are very professional. They’re very 
friendly. And the students are disciplined and they’re taught, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re taught a lot of good, valuable lessons in 
that school system. 
 
And that’s my fundamental point. Not only are some of these 
students getting quality education from really dedicated 
teachers, Mr. Speaker, they have the added pressures of trying 
to jump through the hoops of a Saskatchewan Party government 
who, by polling, decided to alter the school year without 
consultation. 
 
Now the Premier really wants to be popular all the time, so he 
does a lot of polling. And they said, give us an extra day off or 
an extra couple of days off so we can celebrate Labour Day 
longer. So he said, okay, that sounds good. So they’ve done it. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker? To me, today, as a result of this 
bill coming forward, it shows that there was a lack of leadership 
at the time on that issue, and today it’s proof that the 
opposition, the teachers, and the school divisions were right. 
They’re saying this is not something that the government should 
meddle in. Before you make changes to our education Act, you 
should ask for our advice as well. That was their message, Mr. 
Speaker, at the time, and this government chose to ignore it. 
And that’s why this minister is here today to amend The 
Education Act once again because he made a big mistake. He 
made a big mistake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it is something that I think overall that we take great pride in 
as an opposition. It is a victory for us. It is a victory for us that 
go right to the top, to the Premier’s office. He wanted the 
school year altered, and the Premier got his wish because he 
thought it was the popular thing to do. 
 
But it is not the right thing to do. Leadership is not about doing 
the most popular things at the time. It’s about doing the right 
thing, Mr. Speaker, and the right thing at the time was to not 
tinker with the school year until he had consultation and 
agreement from the school divisions, from the teachers, from 
the parents, and the students, Mr. Speaker, because it does 
create a big, big problem. 
 
Now going back to my schools, Mr. Speaker, the schools in my 
constituency because I can speak about them fairly well because 
I visit the schools often, and I talk to a lot of the teaching staff. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you right now that many of the 
staff in the northern schools, they are the saviour of our 
community. Mr. Speaker, these are the staff that are making a 
tremendous difference in their community. 
 
And I look at the examples. For example, there’s a number of 
teachers in Buffalo Narrows that are teaching the kids 
basketball, and basketball’s really picking up a lot of steam. So 
Buffalo Narrows children are benefiting from the extra effort 
from these teachers that are teaching, that are teaching the kids 
the game of basketball in their spare time, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

La Loche, as I mentioned, is another good example, Mr. 
Speaker, of how they have made the extra effort of working 
with the students, respecting the students, protecting the 
students, and ensuring the students are there learning each and 
every day. And when I say protecting, Mr. Speaker, from the 
acts of bullying, you know, as a good example of how teachers 
have gone above and beyond their job to make sure that 
children aren’t bullied in school. 
 
So these are some of the things I think that are really important 
overall, is that the quality of educators in northern 
Saskatchewan is very, very high. And I’m very proud of them. I 
often tell the teaching staff, not only in my home community 
but Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, La Loche, Pinehouse, Green 
Lake — the list goes on — and all the communities in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talk to a lot of teachers, and a lot of teachers are not happy 
with this government. And if I was a teacher in northern 
Saskatchewan, I would be absolutely angry with this 
government for the simple reason that, as a result of them 
altering the school year, as a result of how the collective 
bargaining agreements have been discussed and negotiated, 
many teachers in northern Saskatchewan are now working 100 
hours more, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of the 
government’s rulings with this particular bill when they altered 
the school year. 
 
The teachers negotiated that deal with their school division. 
And as a result of the government coming along, changing the 
dynamic of when the school starts, it really impacted their 
overall contract discussions. So now we have teachers in the 
North working harder and longer hours, and at the very least the 
government should respect them for that and acknowledge them 
for that. And they should not have interfered in the school year 
issue when they brought the bill forward soon after the 2007 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it is a celebration for us in the opposition. We were very, 
very concerned, Mr. Speaker, when this came forward. We had 
great discussions. And to see the minister come along today and 
to make an amendment to The Education Act is a victory for the 
school divisions. It’s a victory for the teachers, and it’s also a 
victory for the opposition because we knew they’d made a 
mistake then. And, Mr. Speaker, what they won’t do today is 
admit to that error. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other section I want to briefly talk about 
— I’ll come back to the whole notion of section 6 — but 
section 8 gives the school divisions more flexibility when it 
comes to spending money on schools, housing, and other 
facilities. As many people may not know, the northern school 
divisions offer housing to teachers, which is really acceptable 
because northern Saskatchewan needs to continue to attract and 
to retain professional people and for teachers to come north. 
 
It is a tremendous complement when I see local teachers 
working closely as a team with other teachers that came from 
other parts of the country, if not the world. They come together 
and they build an education system for local kids. It is 
absolutely a marvellous thing to see. It’s an amazing thing to 
see, Mr. Speaker. 
 

[15:45] 
 
So in order for us to continue having that mix of good local 
teachers and bringing in new teachers with new concepts, it is 
important that we respect both of those partners in developing 
this particular school. And some of the opportunities that the 
local school division will do is provide the teachers with 
necessary housing because housing of course in northern 
Saskatchewan is always tough to find. And what section 8 does, 
it gives the school divisions more flexibility when it comes to 
looking at how we can support some of the teachers that are in 
need of housing or facilities of some sort. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know in northern Saskatchewan it is 
always a challenge to try and balance the demands of education 
on what the resources that the province affords many of these 
northern school boards. There are some school divisions that do 
well and other school divisions that don’t. There are some 
school divisions that count heavily on a grant from the 
province, where other boards don’t need a grant from the 
program, just based on the royalties and the taxes associated 
with their certain community. 
 
So there are some boards that are what you would consider 
non-grant boards and other boards that are grant boards. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the premise being is that there’s — again, going 
back to my earlier point — different school divisions have 
different ways of operating their schools and different schedules 
and different days in which they would alternate the start of the 
school year, and it goes . . . as well as funding, Mr. Speaker. 
Some school divisions have extra funding for things like 
housing and supports for the teachers on other fronts. 
 
Well section 8, again, provides school divisions with more 
flexibility. And, Mr. Speaker, what we should know, what we 
should know is that many of the school divisions, no matter if 
they’re a zero-grant board or a grant board, is that they manage 
their money well. Many school divisions in northern 
Saskatchewan and throughout the province, they manage their 
money well. And there should be a reward, at the end of the 
day, saying that if you do have excess money left over, the 
government doesn’t come along and take it from you or put 
other demands on that money, that you should have the 
flexibility to determine where you want to spend that money 
and when you want to spend it, Mr. Speaker. And in northern 
Saskatchewan, supporting the teachers through providing 
housing is one aspect I think many school divisions were smart 
to invest in, and we needn’t interfere with that particular 
process or that particular service as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at all the other challenges the 
school divisions have. And if they have the ways and means in 
which they can be innovative and exciting and continue 
building a solid education system at their local level by using 
extra dollars and giving them more flexibility in how they use 
those saved dollars, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that we would 
certainly want to see happen as an opposition because local 
boards have a lot of insight. They have a lot of knowledge. 
 
And if you can imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, that if we 
do, if we do take the local boards out of the equation and the 
government just simply runs the school divisions from, you 
know, the government centre, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t do 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6099 

anything for local needs and local aspirations. Imagine for a 
moment if all the school boards said, okay, we’ve had enough 
of this government disrespecting our teachers, not engaging us. 
So if the government wants to control education, we’ll walk 
from this whole exercise. You take care of the education 
system. Imagine the chaos, Mr. Speaker. Imagine the problems 
that would create, that would be created if you didn’t have local 
school divisions helping this government and guide education at 
the local level. 
 
So that’s why it’s important that we respect our school 
divisions. That’s why it’s important that we respect our 
teachers. That’s why it’s important that we respect the students 
and the parents that benefit from their work, Mr. Speaker, by 
simply consulting them on something as important and vitally 
important as the start of the school year and how they’re able to 
spend the extra dollars that they’re able to save or able to 
negotiate for the betterment of their school division overall. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it also talks a bit about section 9, in which 
they remove the requirement for a board to get a quote on a loan 
before passing a resolution to borrow money. Mr. Speaker, I 
know that all the school divisions throughout the province and 
some of the towns and villages as well, they are, by law, they 
have to get their books audited. They have to present their 
audited books. They have annual general meetings and all the 
scrutiny that is attached to operating school divisions or local 
government. All the rules are there, Mr. Speaker, so it’s not as 
if people are not following the rules. It’s not as if the school 
divisions in the towns and villages are not getting their audits 
done in a timely fashion. They are all following the rules. 
 
So why did . . . The government comes along and says, oh we 
need you to get a quote on a loan before you borrow money. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s probably an age-old policy that 
probably needs to be looked at. And certainly from my 
perspective we would encourage one thing, is that you consult 
with the people impacted to ensure that what you are doing here 
is something that they want and they support and they would 
embrace. And you need their agreement to do so, so we would 
encourage consultation on that as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we find a bit troubling . . . We talk 
about the school divisions and borrowing money, and 
borrowing money. The whole notion around P3, we were 
talking about that quite a bit, you know, as an NDP opposition. 
And the P3s, Mr. Speaker, the question you’ve got to ask . . . 
This is where we get angry in the opposition. We get just as 
angry on the P3 model that the government is forcing down 
people’s throat because, Mr. Speaker, they tried to meddle with 
the school year. They tried to disrespect our teachers. They 
disregarded our school division. Now they’re bringing in the P3 
school model. 
 
And we sit back as an opposition and we say, my goodness. 
You know, if you are requiring the school division to be 
accountable on how they are spending their money, well should 
you not be accountable as well on how you’re spending your 
education dollars that you received on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan? Come to account. Be transparent in that 
particular model. It’s the same principle that applies to the 
school division should apply to the province as well. Exactly 
what are you spending on P3s? We want to know. 

And I think the other thing that really upsets a lot of the school 
divisions I think, Mr. Speaker, I think, is that once these P3 
schools are established, these rent-a-school schemes that we are 
talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem is, who has the 
right for accessibility? Who has the right to make changes? 
Who has the right to determine use in that facility? Is it the 
contractor? Is it the school division? Or is it the government? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the fundamental argument that we 
would have that as you go through the P3 model: we’ve got to 
figure out who owns this asset. Who owns the assets? Who 
controls the assets? And who has accessibility to the assets? 
And that’s the biggest argument that we have on this side of the 
Assembly. We want to know what we’re spending. 
 
And the second point is, is who determines accessibility and 
who determines whether that school is used at 7 o’clock at night 
or not. Is it the private contract, the people that own that school, 
or is it the school division? These things need to be worked out, 
Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think the province has any clue as to 
how this is going to work for the local school division because 
they didn’t consult to begin with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s really confusing a lot 
of people in the province of Saskatchewan — and I certainly 
have my own theory on this one — but we’re saying they have 
had record revenue, Mr. Speaker. This government has had 
record revenue. In 2007 when the NDP left government, they 
had a budget of $8 billion. Today the budget that the 
Saskatchewan Party has is over $14 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
Unprecedented record revenue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what concerns us on this side of the 
Assembly, when you talk about education, we’ve been asking 
them to invest in education. And the best that they could do 
with unprecedented revenue, Mr. Speaker, almost twice the 
amount of money the NDP had to operate in 2007, is . . . Why is 
it now they have to go to a P3 model to build our schools 
despite the fact that they’ve had record revenue? Where’d the 
money go, Mr. Speaker? You got almost twice as much money 
each and every year than we had when we were in government, 
and yet you’re still punting the debt to P3s down the road, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the question that we have is that we want . . . That’s one of 
the reasons why we’re asking for accountability and 
transparency. We want to know, how is it you get record 
revenue? You get record revenue. You got almost twice the 
money in your budget each and every year, and you have to go 
to this P3 model to build schools. What is up with that? We just 
can’t figure that out, Mr. Speaker. It is totally beyond me how 
they can have record revenue and yet they had to go to a P3 
model to build schools and to build bridges for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that also lends credence to our argument that 
this government hasn’t got it figured out. They do not know 
what they’re doing because, once again, as I mentioned at the 
outset, we have an amendment to their amendment from some 
other consequential amendment that they amended last year to 
impact the bills that they’re amending this year again. Like, all 
these amendments has one confused. So I almost thought 
maybe we should go to an FOI [freedom of information] as to 



6100 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

what their objective is, so we can help them achieve their 
objective to get the right bill in place. And had they done 
consultation, Mr. Speaker, we would be prepared to help them. 
We would’ve helped them out. 
 
Because why would we help them out, Mr. Speaker? Why 
would we help them out? Well because we don’t want the 
teachers and the students to suffer. And we don’t want the 
school divisions to suffer as well because they have a 
government that’s inept and doesn’t really, doesn’t know how 
to take care of the business properly on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again, the question that I have for the 
government, and that includes the Minister of Education . . . in 
the future my advice to you is to not meddle with the school 
year until you’ve got full consultation and co-operation and 
agreement from the teachers, the school division, and the 
students impacted by your decision. Because if you’re 
governing by polling numbers, by polling, Mr. Speaker, if 
you’re governing by polling, that does not, that does not, to me, 
describe leadership. That does not describe to me leadership in 
any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. So if you can’t figure it 
out, go to the people that know what they’re doing. Go to the 
school divisions and they’ll give them some advice. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, today we ask the same question and 
that’s why my colleague, the Regina Rosemont member, he’s 
been asking for accountability and transparency on the P3 
model. Do you know why he’s asking for that? They want to 
know how much extra that they’re paying for these schools. 
Now on this side of the Assembly the NDP want these schools, 
but we can’t figure out why they’re going to a rent-a-school 
scheme, Mr. Speaker. Like they’ve got twice the amount of 
money, twice the amount of money to work with and yet 
they’re still putting the Government of Saskatchewan in debt 
through these P3 models. They’re still putting Saskatchewan 
people into debt on these P3 schemes, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 
going to pay more. We’re going to pay more for those P3 
schemes. We’re going to pay a lot more. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker, the number of members 
across the way are laughing and they’re giggling away in the 
back over there, Mr. Speaker. Do you know why they find it so 
funny, Mr. Speaker? Because 10 years from now when it is time 
to pay these bills, I can guarantee you that 80 per cent of those 
guys across the way will not be around. We would argue, we 
would argue that what they’re doing with P3s is they’re putting 
us further into debt. They’re putting us further into debt when 
we needn’t go into debt, Mr. Speaker. They have enough 
resources to work with and they’re putting us further into debt 
and they’re also adding interest on that debt. 
 
So what I think is going on, Mr. Speaker, is they’re punting that 
debt down to our grandchildren and our children, Mr. Speaker, 
because they can’t provide leadership even on the simple 
process of when you start your school year. They couldn’t 
figure that out. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have no confidence from 
our side of the Assembly that they can figure out the finances of 
this province to ensure that Saskatchewan stays strong for 20, 
30, 40 years. They haven’t got that figured out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think there’s going to be a lot more discussion on this 

particular item from a lot of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker. And I 
look at the money . . . and I had a great conversation with a 
former premier, Premier Calvert. And him and I were having 
discussions on what the Saskatchewan Party government enjoys 
today — a 14-and-some-odd billion dollar budget, 14-plus 
billion dollar budget — and words that Premier Calvert used 
was, I could only dream of having a $14 billion budget when I 
was the premier. We knew we were building up and we knew 
that the economy was coming on strong. But from his 
perspective, he can’t figure out why is it we have to go into 
greater debt, to P3s, when we have almost twice the amount of 
money in the annual budget that the Saskatchewan Party enjoys 
today, Mr. Speaker, than the NDP enjoyed in 2007. 
 
So we want to know, as the opposition, we want to know on 
P3s. At the very least, tell us what we’re going to spend, what 
we’re going to owe, how long is that debt for, who has control 
of these assets. And this government won’t tell us. So what the 
problem that we see on this side is they want all the glory of 
announcing these schools, and they’re punting that debt down 
the road. So 10, 15 years from now we’ll be still paying that 
debt thanks to this minister, that Premier, and that government, 
Mr. Speaker, because they refuse to come forward and be 
responsible, to tell the people exactly what we’re going to owe 
on those P3 schools, Mr. Speaker. Who’s paying that bill? 
 
[16:00] 
 
So from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, when we talked about 
P3s, P3s as an example of how they’ve assaulted, they’ve 
assaulted the education organization overall, they’ve insulted 
the teachers. And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about P3s, from 
our perspective, we don’t look at it as a 3P from the perspective 
of them saying we’re going to get these private companies to 
build these schools. Really, to us the P3 is the Premier’s pricey 
projects. That’s what they call them. 
 
And that’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that every 
taxpayer, whether it’s a municipal taxpayer or a provincial 
taxpayer or a federal taxpayer, that you’re going to be paying 
for all the P3s in this province, the Premier’s pricey projects, 
because he wants the glory. But guess who gets the bill? Guess 
who gets the bill, Mr. Speaker? Guess who gets the bill? 
Taxpayers are going to get that bill. The taxpayers are going to 
get the bill and yet the taxpayers are sitting here saying, well 
my goodness, you know, these guys are getting almost twice the 
amount of money than the previous NDP government did. Why 
is it we’re still going in debt? It doesn’t make any sense to 
them. So to the average layperson, the average layperson sitting 
there saying, well let’s see. If I had a job and I got twice the 
amount of income, I’d be happy. So why am I going into debt 
more? That’s exactly my point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The average person can relate to this, Mr. Speaker. If they had 
their income almost doubled, if they had their income almost 
doubled, Mr. Speaker, they’d say, well why would I have to go 
in debt? Well that’s exactly what the Saskatchewan Party is 
doing on P3s, Mr. Speaker. They have almost twice the income 
than the previous NDP government had, and yet we’re still 
going into debt. Figure that one out, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
exactly my point. The backbenchers chirp from their chair, Mr. 
Speaker. What’s going to happen is eventually, you know, all 
this is going to come to roost. All this is going to come to roost. 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6101 

And we in the NDP opposition are going to hold those guys to 
account. We’re going to say, you were sitting there on your 
hands; you were sitting on your hands while the debt was 
ratcheting up and you’re just sitting there clapping away. And 
guess who’s going to pay the bill later on? It’s going to be the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. They’re going to pay more and more 
under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you have a bunch of backbenchers that don’t know what’s 
going on. They’re sitting there clapping because they’re told to 
clap, Mr. Speaker. And on this side of the House, we refuse to 
applaud the demise of Saskatchewan when it comes to debt. 
And we refuse to applaud the demise of the importance of our 
teachers, unlike the backbenchers across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly our argument today. We can’t figure out 
from the education perspective why you would interfere, why 
you’d interfere with the start of the school year. Why would 
you disrespect the school board association? Why would you 
disrespect the teachers? Why would you not sit down and 
consult with them? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, then you’d shove the P3 model down their 
throat, whether it’s a bridge in Prince Albert or whether it’s 
schools, Mr. Speaker. And we can’t figure it out. You have 
twice the amount of income. You almost have twice the amount 
of income. You have over $14 billion in your annual operating 
budgets. Why are you going further into debt? Why can’t the 
backbenchers stand up and tell their front bench, that doesn’t 
make any sense? You have twice the amount of income, almost 
twice the amount of income. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a lot of 
conversations across the way. Members will have ample 
opportunity to enter into the debate, but currently the member 
from Athabasca has the floor. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important 
here is that the average person . . . This is how I’ll do the 
analogy. The average person out there, if I told him today you 
would have twice the income, twice the income in your home as 
the Saskatchewan Party is now enjoying, almost twice the 
budget that we enjoyed when we were last in government, 
would it make any sense to you to go further into debt? And the 
average person, the average person would say, well no, if I’m 
getting twice the income, I shouldn’t have to go into debt. Well 
that logic doesn’t apply to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we can’t figure out on this side of the Assembly, where in 
the heck is the money going? Why is it you have to go into 
debt? And while that thing is happening, Mr. Speaker, by the 
time they’re done government, they’re going to clean out the 
bank account. They’re going to put all these debts down for 
years and years and years so the next government coming in 
won’t see daylight for another 10 years, Mr. Speaker. And that 
has always been the conservative plans for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We see it on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to make sure, they want to make sure the cupboard is 
bare. 
 
And I’ll say the backbenchers over there, they’re really helping 

that. They’re really helping achieve that, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
really helping achieve that, Mr. Speaker. As a result of their 
mismanagement, we’re going to have debt piling up for a 
number of years. Through the P3 school model, we’re going to 
have that debt apply each and every year. They’re hamstringing 
future governments and the future of Saskatchewan by pushing 
P3s down people’s throats, Mr. Speaker, that are more 
expensive. They don’t want to come forward with the 
information. And we lack control over these facilities because 
the private sector is building it. And guess who’s paying the 
bill? Guess who’s paying the bill, Mr. Speaker? It’s the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the school divisions, the people that 
use the education system. They’re paying the bill. 
 
And that’s why the backbenchers over there, the backbenchers 
over there should have a backbone. The backbenchers should 
have a backbone, stand up, and tell their front bench, how is it? 
We need to know to represent our constituents properly. Instead 
of getting up and being told when to get up and what to say, get 
up and say, how is it we have almost twice the income, we have 
almost twice the income and we still have to go into debt for 
years and years? 
 
And the reason being, Mr. Speaker, is they can’t manage the 
money that they’re getting right now properly. They can’t 
maintain the boom. We’re going to see evidence of that fairly 
shortly. And above all else, Mr. Speaker, their job is to make 
sure that Saskatchewan is knocked down and kept down for 
years and years and years, Mr. Speaker. And who’s going to 
come back and clean up another mess, Mr. Speaker? It’s going 
to be the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan this. You 
cannot afford the Saskatchewan Party anymore. You simply 
cannot afford . . . They’ve interfered in many, many things. 
They have confused many organizations. And despite the 
booming economy and unprecedented revenue, why are we still 
going into debt on projects like the expensive P3 school 
projects, Mr. Speaker, the model that they’re pushing down 
people’s throats? 
 
So from my perspective, I maintain and I’ll continue saying 
this: they want the glory of today’s announcements on some of 
these schools that they’re putting through the P3 model. They 
want the glory today. That’s the Saskatchewan Party. But guess 
who is paying the bill tomorrow? It’s the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer. You’re going to pay through your personal income 
tax. You’re going to pay through an entertainment tax. You’re 
going to pay through land taxes. You’re going to pay through 
some of your elevated power bills. And the cost of living is 
going up. You’re paying those bills. The Saskatchewan Party, 
lacking leadership, wants all the glory today. And they’re 
punting that debt down the road so future generations can pay 
year after year after year after year for the PPP [public-private 
partnership] deal we’re getting from that government, and that’s 
the Premier’s pricey projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say shame. Because we’ve seen this act before, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen this act before. And I can tell you right 
now that as a result of the 1980s, when the NDP took over in 
1990s, it took us 12 of the 16 years that that government . . . or 
that government’s backbenchers are yelling out every now and 



6102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

then to clean up the last mess, Mr. Speaker. And today I’m 
warning the people of Saskatchewan: don’t let the 
Saskatchewan Party get away with creating another mess that’s 
going to take another 16 years to clean up, Mr. Speaker. That is 
not fair to the future generations, and people ought to be held to 
account on that front. 
 
So once again, almost twice the amount of revenue on an 
annual basis, almost twice. Almost twice, Mr. Speaker, almost 
twice. And yet they still have to go to a P3 model to fund 
schools. Why, Mr. Speaker? It’s because they want the glory 
today and somebody else can pay the debt later down the road. 
And to me that does not describe leadership, Mr. Speaker. That 
does not describe leadership. It lends credence to my argument, 
to my argument that all they were about is the same issue on 
Bill 163, was they are polling . . . they’re governing by polling, 
Mr. Speaker. And the polling at one time said, maybe the long 
weekend could be tampered with to accommodate families who 
want to take a couple of extra days off school and, Mr. Speaker, 
here we are again today finding out that the government was 
wrong to do that. 
 
And the minister is standing in the Assembly today, presenting 
a bill that says we’re now going back to square one. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because they didn’t consult. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they wanted to govern by polling. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they didn’t get it figured out from day one. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the damage doesn’t just stop there. It stops on 
promoting the expensive P3 model that many people including 
our children and grandchildren that will be paying for their 
expensive P3 models for years and years to come. 
 
And rest assured, Mr. Speaker, some of the backbenchers that 
are chirping over there, they won’t be around here to be held to 
account. They won’t be around here to be held to account. But 
history, history will not be altered. Their names will be attached 
to this, Mr. Speaker. Each and every one of them, their names 
will be attached to this. And then when people come ask them, 
as they will, why did you allow that to happen? Why did you 
have twice the revenues and you still put us deeply into debt? 
What kind of vision did you have at that time? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m giving them notice that those questions 
are coming to them in the future. And from our perspective, 
from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, they had enough resources 
to do this on their own. They didn’t have to go to expensive P3 
models. They could have done this on their own. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they refused. They took the easy way out, and that’s 
one of the things that I think is important when it comes to 
education and how Bill 163, how Bill 163 affects and impacts 
us all, in many, in many, many, many ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important that we look at all aspects of the bill. 
And while the bill talks about renaming section 3, renaming the 
Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund to the Education Scholarship 
Fund, those are housekeeping items, Mr. Speaker. And yes, you 
want to make sure you coordinate that well. And also, the bill 
also makes changes to the French version of the Act. And I 
want to explain the bill a bit longer, Mr. Speaker, and really, the 
only thing when you want to do the changes in French is the 
French version must reflect more respective language use and 
terms. 
 

That rounds out what the bill’s all about. But the key thing here, 
the key thing for us, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party 
government, is coming back to the Assembly on their knees on 
this whole issue, asking for a mulligan if you will, saying that 
they made a big mistake. And they may not dress it up, but we 
know in opposition this is a victory for us. This is a victory for a 
lot of people throughout the province, that if they had consulted 
properly they wouldn’t be here in this Assembly trying to fix 
the problem that they made, Mr. Speaker. Because they should 
be humbled by this. They should be humbled by this and the 
fact that people out there were willing to explain to them why 
they shouldn’t do that, and they chose not to listen to them. 
 
So many teachers now are going to do that come next election, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re going to turn their back on this 
government and they’re going to choose not to listen to them at 
that time, like they have so callously done time and time again. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know other colleagues want to enter the 
debate on this particular bill. We have a lot more to say on this 
bill, but it’s nice to be able to sit here today and explain to 
people the value that our teachers contribute to our children and 
to our school divisions. It’s nice to really herald the importance 
and the role, and dominant role, that the school divisions are 
playing in many of our areas, Mr. Speaker. It is really nice to 
pay tribute to the educators in the school division, and the 
students out there that are really making Saskatchewan a great 
place to educate your children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the things that we think is paramount. It’s 
something that we should recognize as a government. And all 
we’ve seen from the Saskatchewan government is disrespect, 
disrespect, disrespect and no consultation on very important 
issues like the start of the school year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker we have a lot more to say on this particular 
bill. But at this time I would move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 163, an Act to amend, An Act to amend The Education Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 163, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 161 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6103 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m glad to rise and join debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014. I guess to start off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
again, as we gain a better appreciation for the evolving 
legislative agenda of this government as it’s brought forth in 
this fall sitting, there are certainly some bills that are pretty 
much in the housekeeping vein, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 
some bills that are fixing past mistakes as my colleague, the 
member from Athabasca, was just referring to. There are some 
that are about repeal in terms of leaving . . . I think of the farm, 
family farm credit bill, essentially repealing an Act. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But there are some that are actually . . . contain some legislative 
action. And it would certainly seem on the face of it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that Bill No. 161 would fall into that latter 
category. So it’s good to have something to actually sink your 
teeth into, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the legislative 
agenda of this government. It’s getting to be some pretty slim 
pickings through the roster there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
we’re glad to see a piece of legislation come forward like this 
today. And I guess we’ll see what comes out over the remaining 
days in this session, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Certainly the mind casts back to when they brought in the three 
more MLAs bill in the last day of the first session back after the 
2011 election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a bill of course which, you 
know, they didn’t have the decency to talk to the people of 
Saskatchewan about. They weren’t out there on the hustings 
saying, you know what this province really needs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? It’s three more MLAs. They weren’t saying that from 
door to door. They had a lot of other things to say from door to 
door. They had a lot of other things to say through the phone 
banks and through the paid media, but they didn’t say anything 
about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again we’re always sort of interested to see how the agenda 
rolls out. Are they saving the big ones for the end, Mr. Speaker, 
and then just sort of drop it and run? Or are they, you know, in 
the case of today’s education Act amendment, are they trying to 
sort of camouflage what is an admission of fault? And again 
we’re glad to see that, you know, they’re finally coming around 
to that admission. Or is it about genuine action that’s connected 
with the lives and workplaces of Saskatchewan people or 
what’s actually going on in the province? 
 
Again this would seem to be, this particular bill, 161, would 
seem to be more connected with what’s going on in the 
province, so we’re glad to see this particular piece of legislation 
come forward. And we’ll be looking to see . . . Of course we’ll 
give it the full scrutiny it’s due, and we’ll certainly reserve the 
right to consult more broadly on it in terms of undertakings that 
have been made by this government as to who’s been consulted 
and who’s in favour of what. 
 
But certainly on the face of it, it looks promising. The early 
support coming forth from the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, glad to see that in terms of the legislation coming 
forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’ll be again doing that 
work of due diligence. For myself there’s a . . . I don’t know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you know too much about the wildlife 
on 12 block Cameron where I hang my hat in north central 

Regina. But certainly wildlife in the province of Saskatchewan 
is something that is part of our collective heritage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s part of our collective common wealth, I would 
suggest. 
 
And certainly the great outdoors and the steps that we need to 
take as a society to protect and to ensure that wildlife is being 
well conserved and well taken care of and well approached in 
terms of the way that we as society do so is very important. And 
it’s as important, I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
you’re on 12 block Cameron or if you’re on the home quarter 
out by Montmartre or up, you know, on the Churchill River or, 
you know, pick your place in this beautiful province of ours in 
terms of the wildlife, in terms of the animals and the fish and 
this tremendous natural patrimony that we have here in this 
province. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m also informed in this kind of a debate 
by the fact of while I grew up in the city, certainly my father 
comes in off the farm. And instead of a paper route, he had a 
trapline as a kid growing up, Mr. Speaker, and was an avid 
hunter, fisher. You know, be they ducks or be they deer, he was 
very actively engaged in hunting and fishing. 
 
And certainly as kids we got to experience some of that in terms 
of the trapline or duck hunting or what have you. And it’s 
maybe not a daily sort of interaction for myself, but again it’s 
something that we, wherever we are in the province, should all 
be paying attention to. And certainly I think of the kind of 
engagement that my colleague, the member from Rosemont has 
as an avid fisher, hunter. 
 
I also think of the opportunities that I’ve had to, you know, 
being I’m more of an avid paddler than I am a hunter, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, paddler in a canoe, of course. And in terms of 
I certainly enjoy the people that have those skills and bringing 
home the, be it deer sausage or the pickerel cheeks or what have 
you. It’s certainly lots of tasty ways to enjoy the wildlife from 
my perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the legislation that we have here before us 
today, again one of the stated intents for the legislation is the 
desire to crack down on poaching of wildlife. And this is from a 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news story from 
November 18th of 2014, so just earlier this month. It’s entitled, 
“Saskatchewan toughens wildlife law to crack down on 
poachers.” This is from the director of compliance with 
Saskatchewan Environment. It says: 
 

“If it’s a world record set [of antlers] I’ve heard there’s 
been blank cheques for people trying to get a hold of 
those,” Ken Aube, director of compliance and enforcement 
with Saskatchewan Environment, said Tuesday. “So 
there’s some pretty serious collectors out there.” 
 
“If you found an animal that was shot and left, for 
example, when you’re investigating that scene, there are 
only certain points where this animal could have been shot 
from. And when they could be shooting up to a kilometre 
away it just increases the odds that you’ll never be able to 
find where the shot was taken from.” 

 
What Mr. Aube is referring to of course is the fact of, you 



6104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

know, trophy hunting for trophy hunting on its own. And the 
idea . . . There are few more sort of directly wasteful and 
disrespectful practices I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
than the notion that you would shoot, say a white-tailed deer 
and just take it for the antlers and not make use of that deer’s 
meat that should be there to be taken advantage of, but that 
you’d rather leave it in the field to rot and just take the horns 
and go or take the trophy and go. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
something that I think we can all agree on on either side of this 
House, is something that needs to be cracked down on, is 
something that needs to be taken on because there are few more 
wasteful and disrespectful and destructive approaches to mother 
nature than can be . . . I can’t really imagine. 
 
So when somebody like Darrell Crabbe, executive director of 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, comes forward and says: 
 

Trophy sets of antlers are probably still the number-one 
concern out there and probably the easiest poaching 
opportunity that there might be: where you can shoot an 
animal, harvest the head or take the head off and escape. 

 
We take note of what Mr. Crabbe has to say. And certainly if 
this bill does help to crack down on that kind of behaviour, then 
we are very interested to see how this proceeds. 
 
In terms of the other components in the legislation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it talks about the most serious conservation offences 
carrying an automatic two-year suspension. Again on the face 
of that, it would seem to be a good move. People failing to pay 
wildlife-related fines will be prohibited from buying a licence 
until their fines are paid. Again, Mr. Speaker, a common sense 
measure, it would seem. People who are suspended from 
hunting activities in another jurisdiction will not be able to 
purchase a licence in Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
common sense it would seem in that regard. 
 
Those convicted on three separate occasions for wildlife 
offences will have a lifetime ban prohibiting the purchase of 
hunting licences. Again, Mr. Speaker, it points out the fact that 
some of these things, they’re not rights, but they’re in fact 
privileges. And with these privileges come responsibilities. And 
again, if someone is abusing their hunting licence and the 
privilege that is involved in that in such a way, Mr. Speaker, in 
such a chronic manner, then certainly the pursuit of a lifetime 
ban would seem to be a fair punishment for that, especially 
upon three separate occasions of wildlife offences. 
 
And again this is another measure in the legislation building on 
earlier work that the government has engaged in where, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Justice, people who are in 
arrears for maintenance payments will be denied the 
opportunity to purchase a hunting or angling licence. Again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would seem to be fair enough and 
builds on earlier legislative efforts from this government. 
 
And then lastly, Mr. Speaker, there are certain updates made in 
the legislation to accommodate the new single-vendor 
electronic licensing process that this government has engaged 
in. And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s something where we’ve seen 
some questions arise in terms of how that’s working out in the 
community, how that’s working out in the field, and that’s one 
where we’ll have more questions on for sure. But it seems to be 

more about this government seeking out new ways to privatize 
various functions of government instead of doing it right for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the legislation overall, it 
seems to look like a pretty reasonable effort. We’ll of course 
have more questions to ask and more consultation to engage in. 
One thing that we’re particularly interested in is where in the 
second reading speech from the minister he refers to the fact 
that: 
 

These amendments to The Wildlife Act can be implemented 
without affecting existing First Nations and Métis hunting 
rights in our province and these changes will not add to 
resources or training needs for Saskatchewan’s 
conservation officers. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s one we’ll be consulting on 
more generally. We’ll be interested to see what consultation or 
what sort of confidence or clarity that the government has 
sought out in terms of the impact on the balancing of those 
rights under the constitution. And we’ll be, I’m sure, having 
some good consultation on that with the broader public but 
particularly with representative groups out of First Nations and 
Métis circles. 
 
I guess that’s about it for my remarks at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Again to recap, it would seem to be a fairly decent 
piece of legislation. We’ll have more questions as the 
consultation evolves. And then certainly in terms of gaining 
greater clarity come committee time, we’ll certainly avail 
ourselves of that. But in terms of the legislation, we hope that 
it’s as, indeed as good as it looks. But with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would move adjournment on Bill No. 161, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 162 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am as 
always pleased to enter the discussion in this Chamber, this 
time about Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
I’ll talk a little bit about the bill. And I think it’s important to 
point out actually that before us today, before the legislature at 
this point in time we have, actually I think it’s three bills in the 
last couple of years that have been passed and this government 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6105 

has come back to amend, to make changes, which is always . . . 
I think it’s important when you create legislation to always be 
open to realizing that there will be things that you discover 
about it that need to be improved and enhanced and changed. 
 
But I think it’s telling that this government has three bills before 
us. Actually one that was just read for the second time today, 
The Education Amendment Act, I believe. It’s always good to be 
open to amending and improving things, but when you bring a 
bill before this legislature you should really have done your 
homework fully, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in doing that 
homework it involves real and meaningful consultation with all 
parties who are and will be impacted by that particular 
legislation. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So it’s interesting to me that we have these three bills at this 
point in time before us that have just been passed in recent 
years. So this particular bill, The Enforcement of Money 
Judgments Amendment Act, 2014, is amending an Act that came 
into effect in May of 2012, The Enforcement of Money 
Judgments Act. And that particular Act that we’re amending 
today introduced, as the minister points out, a major revision in 
judgment enforcement law in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the minister points out that implementation of the new 
program had been going well, but it’s proposing minor 
amendments to address practical and technical issues he says 
that were identified by the sheriff’s office and the public as 
lessons learned through their experience. So I’m curious, and I 
know we’ll have an opportunity in committee to find out a little 
bit more. It’s very clear, issues identified by the sheriff’s office, 
but I’m interested to hear a little bit more about the feedback 
that he’s received from the public. And when we talk about 
public, to whom are we speaking? Are we talking about the 
credit companies? Are we talking about individuals? I’d like a 
little bit more information about this. 
 
Bill No. 162, what does this amending bill do, Mr. Speaker? 
The minister points out “It will introduce amendments to 
provide that a notice of seizure of employment income will last 
for a 24-month period of the enforcement instruction without 
requiring it to be renewed after 12 months.” He also points out 
that it includes: 
 

. . . a revised process for the sheriff to provide timely, 
clear title to a third party purchaser of land where the 
judgment creditors and the judgment debtor have agreed to 
payment out of the proceeds of the sale in order to address 
the judgment debt of the vendor.  
 
It will ensure that the sheriff is not considered to be an 
account debtor by reason of receiving funds from a debtor. 
It will provide additional direction on the payment of 
premiums to initiating creditors. [The minister says and 
points out that] It will revise certain seizure provisions and 
enforcement instruction provisions to facilitate operations 
of the sheriff’s office . . . will provide appointment of a 
director of sheriffs. 

 
And the minister also in his second reading speech says that: 
 

It will address technical priority issues regarding advances 
and consistency of language with The Securities Transfer 
Act. It will allow the director of sheriffs to waive the 
enforcement of small amounts such as fees that remain due 
after judgment distribution. It will remove the forms from 
the regulations and allow the director of sheriffs to provide 
the required forms. It will update the language in the Act 
to reflect the wording in the new Queen’s Bench rules.  
 

But in simple language, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill makes it 
easier for those who are owed money to collect their debts. 
 
I think that when we think about that, you always have to think 
about the two sides to the coin, Mr. Speaker, and who is on the 
one side, those to whom the money is owed. So we can think 
about banks, credit card companies, sometimes parents if 
there’s a maintenance enforcement order, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
an employer who had an employee steal money — any number 
of people you think about on that creditor side, Mr. Speaker. 
And on the other side of the coin you have the debtor, the 
person who owes the money, and different circumstances in 
life. Obviously if you owe money, Mr. Speaker, there should be 
a responsibility to pay that money back. Of course that should 
be a given; if you owe money, you should be paying that 
money. 
 
But I think sometimes when we think about this legislation and 
that fine line between striking a balance for fairness, Mr. 
Speaker, making sure that there are individuals who perhaps 
want to pay the money back but are maybe in a tight financial 
circumstance, and you need to think about it being, money 
being paid back in a timely fashion but also giving people an 
opportunity to have time to pay that back. 
 
So I think one of the questions that we need to ask about this 
particular bill is how is this going to speed up the process of 
having people pay their debts, Mr. Speaker. Are there any 
unintended consequences of this? And I think we need to think 
about the environment, the economic environment right now, 
Mr. Speaker, where we have inflation. And we’ve had 
remarkably low interest rates for an extended period of time 
now, and there was the feeling that the Bank of Canada, that 
interest rates would not be changing at least for another year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I know in listening to many financial 
folks these days that they’re talking about the reality with 
inflation, that interest rates might go up soon. So the fact of the 
matter remains, there are many people in Saskatchewan, and in 
Canada for that matter, who are carrying a fair amount of debt, 
whether it’s bank loans on their cars, their mortgages, those 
kinds of things, but credit card debt as well. Unfortunately 
there’s a high level of credit card debt that people are carrying. 
 
So what does that change in interest rate look like for those 
people who are carrying some debt, Mr. Speaker? And how will 
this . . . Again that striking of the balance between ensuring 
creditors are being paid and debtors have an opportunity to 
fulfill their responsibility and pay their debt. Does this bill 
strike that right balance in ensuring that people are afforded that 
opportunity to pay their debts? 
 
I know the original bill that we’re amending, The Enforcement 
of Money Judgments Act, was proclaimed just a short while ago, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But a piece of the Act involved updating 



6106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

the procedure for seizing bank accounts, property, and 
employment . . . [inaudible] . . . which strengthens the 
collecting of child and spousal support. And I know the 
Minister of Justice . . . well the former minister of Justice and I 
believe the previous minister of Justice has talked about how 
Saskatchewan’s maintenance enforcement office has one of the 
highest collection rates in Canada. 
 
But one of the challenges . . . And I’ve seen this in my office 
actually, sort of both sides of the coin here again. I’ve spoken to 
mothers who have been owed money. I’m saying mothers 
because these are the individuals who have come to my office, 
but mothers who have had some serious challenges in collecting 
money for their children from their former partners, and despite 
the maintenance enforcement officers’ high percentage of 
ability to collect, there are still some really hard-to-collect-from 
clients. Often being self-employed makes that incredibly 
difficult. 
 
So the fact that this bill, the previous bill that we’re amending, 
makes this a little bit easier to collect money is a good thing. 
But I’ve also heard from the other perspective. I’ve spoken to, 
in this case, one dad in particular who flags some concerns that 
he had some serious financial pressures and was not in a great 
position to be able to support his children as well as the 
maintenance order had dictated, Mr. Speaker, and had some 
added stress and strain. So again this particular bill is about 
making it easier to collect when there is a judgment, Mr. 
Speaker, a court judgment. And so I think we always need to 
think about striking that balance of fairness of allowing people 
the opportunity to get their money back but also making sure 
that those who owe the money have the opportunity to pay and 
not be put at a severe financial disadvantage. 
 
I mean I’m thinking about someone perhaps who has high 
credit card debt, which isn’t necessarily a smart thing, Mr. 
Speaker, but it is a reality for many people today. And perhaps 
they have a small car that they . . . So the credit card company 
perhaps, that can’t get their money back that’s owed on the 
credit card, but with this legislation, from what I understand, 
let’s say the person owns a $3,000 car outright. This makes it 
easier for that credit card company to seize that $3,000 car 
which may be a link to employment for that individual, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s really important when we talk about this kind of 
legislation that you need to strike a balance. I know that there’ll 
be some good opportunity in committee to discuss whether or 
not this is the right balance, and again who, in the time that the 
original bill was proclaimed, who has pointed out these 
difficulties and why these amendments are before us. But I 
know I have colleagues who will also want to speak to Bill No. 
162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 
2014 and we’ll also talk about it when it gets to committee. 
 
But I just want to point out again that I think it’s an interesting 
thing that we have three bills before this legislature that are 
amending, repealing two of them, I believe, or parts of them, 
and rolling them into new bills. But when you bring bills before 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent upon the 
government to do the necessary homework to get that right in 
the first place, to think about unintended consequences, to 
ensure that all stakeholders who will be impacted by the bill 

have been thoroughly and meaningfully consulted, Mr. Speaker, 
in order to get that right in the first place. 
 
But I think it’s important too for a legislature to be open to 
changing, making changes when we realize that something isn’t 
working as well. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move to adjourn. Those are my comments for now and I would 
like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 159 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join on the Bill 
No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Looking at it, it’s 
a housecleaning item here, and looking at the bill itself, it 
doesn’t talk a lot. 
 
But I want to give a little history I guess from the co-operatives, 
and that’s exactly what this bill that was set up in I believe the 
’70s, to lend money as a co-operative of Canada, a trust 
company of Canada, to lend money to I guess farms, individual 
families who wanted to apply, had that ability to do that. So it 
did that. 
 
Today that has changed over time and it’s now a company that, 
you know, does I believe wholesale financing services to credit 
unions throughout the province. So they’re no longer a 
company that actually lends money to individuals whether it 
was a farm, family farms, individuals. It repeals that bill. And 
that’s exactly what it does so really there isn’t a lot of detail to 
this, other than talk . . . I could go on, Mr. Speaker, talking 
about co-operatives and the good work that they’re doing. 
Many of us belong to co-ops. 
 
But having said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, this bill at 
the end of the day, this bill at the end of the day repeals a bill 
that was introduced in about 1970. It’s housecleaning. That’s all 
it is, so that’s interesting to see. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I don’t have a lot of discussion 
about this bill. In committee it will go eventually, once my 
colleagues have had a few comments to say. And that’ll be 
interesting to see what happens, Mr. Speaker, with that. So at 
this time I have no further questions on this bill. And I will 
actually move that this bill . . . I adjourn on this bill at this time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6107 

debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 155 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Hello again, Mr. Speaker. Glad to join the 
debate this afternoon on Bill No. 155, The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this is sort of a variation on the theme that 
is generally emerging as regards to this government’s 
legislative agenda. And actually this is fairly important, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of . . . To quote from or to reference the 
minister’s second reading speech for this Act, it regards 
bringing the legislation of Saskatchewan into translation, of 
course, in respect to the Mercure decision of 1988 with the 
Supreme Court of Canada, where in terms of making sure that 
Saskatchewan’s francophone community — certainly the 
Fransaskois being in the first rank of the francophone 
community, Mr. Speaker — to make sure that the laws of this 
province are respectful of the French fact here in Saskatchewan, 
respectful of the official bilingualism that is enshrined in our 
constitution and in our Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
It’s again good to see on the one hand action being taken for 
bringing yet another piece of legislation into translation to have 
it available in the French language. But again, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of . . . And beyond that, to quote the minister’s second 
reading speech, “There are no changes in substance.” And I 
guess is another way to say it’s not beyond the . . . Again we 
think it’s a good thing that the French language is being 
recognized and utilized and brought into yet another statute here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. But that there are “no changes 
in substance” I think speaks to something else, which is again 
the character and the substantial or not question as regards this 
government’s legislative agenda. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So in terms of what might come up for substance, again, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Act, in terms of things that we do 
around this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, in terms of legislation that is 
brought forward, some of them are fairly pedestrian. Some of 
them are substantial and of consequence. And some of them are 
actually related to life-and-death matters and that certainly 
would be the case for health care directives because of course 
we’re talking about the steps that individuals take to ensure that 
their rights are safeguarded at end of life. And that in and of 
itself is a field of fairly significant evolution these days, Mr. 
Speaker. There are other jurisdictions where these questions are 

being grappled with more fully, both on the provincial level and 
at the federal level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But back to this piece of legislation, it’s again, to quote the 
minister from the second reading speech, “There are no changes 
in substance.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see the French translation 
moving through the statutes of Saskatchewan. We’re glad to see 
that such a fundamental piece of legislation with, again quite 
literally, life-and-death questions being grappled with in statute, 
we’re glad to see that being made available in la langue 
française [Translation: the French language]. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, beyond that there’s not a whole lot more to talk about 
as regards the bill in and of itself. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 155, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Merci, monsieur le Président [Translation: 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker]. Again, good to join debate on a bill 
that is largely seized with the consequential amendments arising 
from Bill No. 155, the translation into French of The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act. These of course are consequential amendments and again, 
good to see them ushering forth into The Adult Guardianship 
and Co-decision-making Act, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act, The Health Information Protection Act, and 
The Public Guardian and Trustee Act. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of a, you know, unilingual Act 
being replaced with a bilingual Act, we’re glad to see that 
happen. There are necessary consequential amendments that 
usher forth into the other affected pieces of legislation. But in 
terms of this being a matter of stop the press, again, great to see 
that expansion of the accessibility in la langue française 
[Translation: the French language], but in terms of being a 
substantial and new and novel piece of legislation, again it’s a 
bit of a comment on the legislative agenda of this government 
and the way that we see these things sort of . . .  
 
You know, if they’re not repealing something, Mr. Speaker, it 
would seem that they’re amending amendments or perhaps 



6108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2014 

having a combined piece of legislation coming forward with yet 
further combinations. It’s not exactly groundbreaking, Mr. 
Speaker, but I guess it beats some of the alternatives. So if it 
weren’t for housekeeping, and if it weren’t for correcting the 
mistakes that they’ve made in law, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’d be 
an even skinnier legislative agenda on the part of this 
government. 
 
But again, consequential amendments flowing forth from Bill 
155 and the translation of The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act into other effective 
pieces of legislation, fair enough. And I guess I’d conclude my 
comments on it at this time, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 157 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 157. And the title’s quite long 
actually. It’s longer than several of the bills that I’ve had a 
chance to rise in this House and debate. But it’s actually, the 
title for the folks at home and in the House here, An Act to 
Facilitate the Donation of Certain Tissues from One Living 
Person to Another for Transplantation and to Facilitate the 
Donation, after Death, of Tissues, Bodies or Body Parts for 
Transplantation, Medical or Scientific Purposes and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act. That’s the title. 
 
Of course, we talked about the short title is The Human Tissue 
Gift Act, 2014. But as I have said just a few minutes ago, that 
title is longer than many of the Acts this government has put 
forward, particularly when I’ve had a chance to talk about their 
agricultural agenda. The title is longer than their farm agenda, 
for sure. 
 
But this is an important piece of legislation, and one that we’ll 
have a lot to say, a lot to say about because clearly one of the 
great breakthroughs, great innovations we’ve seen in the last 
half of the 20th century was the whole transplantation, 
particularly the heart or the kidney, and what that’s done in 
terms of giving people new hope, new hope for their lives. 
 
And we know there are challenges here though, and there are 
challenges in Canada particularly around . . . I know when I’ve 
talked to people about lung transplants and how do you get . . . 
You’re on a waiting list, but the chances of getting a healthy 
lung or heart, kidney, can be challenging. And it’s a tough, 

tough, it’s a tough time for families, as they have so much hope, 
and they’re waiting for someone else’s tragedy when someone 
dies. And the odd thing from . . . And we’ve talked to many 
people about this and it’ll be interesting to hear when we talk to 
organizations about how they feel about this piece of legislation 
because there’s been challenges around, how do we have this on 
a driver’s licence? How do we make sure we up the rates of 
donation? 
 
But in Canada the challenge has been actually how . . . And it’s 
a bit of an irony from what I understand that the fact that when 
you compare how we die in Canada to, say, how people die in 
some other countries, we don’t die in the quick, tragic sense of 
accidents at the same rate, say, they do in other countries. And 
therefore when we die, often it’s because of disease and where 
later on, whether it be cancer or that type of thing, other heart 
diseases, so really it puts our body parts, to be blunt, not in a 
very good place for use in terms of transplants. And so there’s 
some real, real challenges here, but it’s one that we have to 
come to deal with because in reality this is a very effective way 
to help people live longer. 
 
Now this is an interesting piece of legislation before us for a 
whole host of reasons, but I do want to review the minister’s 
comments. And of course one of the comments, and it was 
brought to our attention, and the minister alluded to it in sort of 
an interesting way, but that in fact that there will be this . . . 
This Act now changes the rules around organ donations and 
allows for the purchase of tissues. Now it hasn’t been quite 
been completely spelled out, but this is something that has 
caused a lot of debate in the ethics and particularly health ethics 
of, how do we deal with that? And of course this is a big, big 
issue that we have to talk about. 
 
So he talks about how “Unfortunately the current legislation 
prevents Saskatchewan’s health system from being more 
innovative in finding matches . . .” And so we need . . . And 
that’s fair enough. We need to challenge, rise to that challenge. 
That’s hugely important. So we have to modernize the 
legislation to take a look at this. 
 
And we’re wondering what’s happening across Canada, and we 
know that it’s a bit of a mixed bag out there in terms of what 
other provinces are doing. But this is something that, 
particularly in our new Canada where we see people living right 
across the country, and you may be feeling that your family . . . 
Someone’s living in Toronto, but somebody is living in 
Vancouver. Someone’s living in Calgary. Someone’s living in 
Saskatoon. But they’re all under different rules, and they’re all 
of the same family. It would be nice to have something 
consistent right across Canada. 
 
So it allows now the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 
regulations — talking about standards, practice, procedures — 
that will improve access to transplantation. This is important, 
allows some flexibility. But we have to think through this and 
say, so what are they unintended consequences? And this is the 
irony of this particular government that they don’t often think 
through their legislation. 
 
We saw this just earlier today in The Education Amendment 
Act, where the minister just a few short years ago, this 
government was saying, we need to make sure kids go back 



November 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6109 

after Labour Day. They hadn’t looked at a calendar to figure out 
that, you know, that can be quite late in the first week of 
September. Nobody mentioned this in that learned group over 
there, or maybe they were too busy talking about whether 
insofar is three words or is it two or one. But really now they’re 
backing up. 
 
So really for this government, they need to pay attention to the 
unintended consequences and think further than just a 
short-term plan. But that’s the legacy of this government that 
we probably will see many pieces of legislation come back 
before us because there’s problems. There’s problems, and they 
didn’t see it, but we talked about it. We talked about it, and we 
warned them, but clearly they didn’t heed that advice. 
 
The minister talks about the need for organ and tissue 
transplants in Saskatchewan and how it far exceeds the number 
of donors. “For the approximately 90 people waiting for a 
kidney transplant,” the minister tells us, “. . . [it] can mean 
months and years of intense, tiring, and time-consuming 
dialysis treatment three times a week.” So this is really tough, 
and we appreciate that. We appreciate that. 
 
We’re not sure how this will have an impact, and those are the 
kind of questions we’ll have in terms of, what is the impact here 
for really upping the number of donors? What can we do to 
make that happen? So this is really, really important that we 
talk about how can we make this program of donors even more 
attractive to . . . when people are able to make the choice for 
donations, that they can do that and do it easily and 
understanding the consent that they have given. 
 
But you know, this is always a challenge, particularly now, and 
will be a challenge as we move forward with the driver’s 
licences or other ways identifying that you agree to be a donor. 
But how will that continue on, and how will that be on your 
person when in fact you do pass away? And often, as I said, it’s 
tragic circumstances that we find ourselves in, and we have to 
make those decisions, especially if you’re a relative who can 
make a decision on behalf of someone and they’re in a 
coma or . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6077 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6078 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Angels Corner Recognizes Victims of Violence Against Women 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 
 Solar Technology Projects 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6079 
 Saskatchewan Farmers Awarded Transformation Business Prize 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 
 Melfort Comets Win Provincial Football Title 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 
 Foam Lake Resident Receives Community Recognition Award 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 
 Spruce Home Seniors Club Celebrates Anniversary 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 
 Study Shows Reduced Wait Times 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6081 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Fatality in Care Facility 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6082 
 Cost and Value of Public-Private Partnerships 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6083 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6083 
 Expenses Incurred by Lean Initiative Consultant 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6084 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6084 
 Inquest Into Death and Shelter for Homeless People 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6085 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6085 
 Poverty Reduction Strategy and Children Living in Poverty 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6085 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6085 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6086 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6086 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Support for Energy East Pipeline 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6086 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6089 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6090 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6091 
  Cheveldayoff (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 6092 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6092 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6093 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6102 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6104 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6106 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6107 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6107 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6108 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


