




















































Hansard: April 01, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5023 

 April 1, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly today some special guests who have joined us in 

your gallery. Mr. Speaker, the consul general for the Republic 

of Korea, for South Korea, Mr. Kie-Cheon Lee, accompanied 

by an administrative assistant to the consul general, Ms. Hester 

Kim, are joining us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these representatives of South Korea have been 

meeting with the University of Regina. They’ve been meeting 

with the Government of Saskatchewan. And they either have 

been meeting or will soon meet with Korean business leaders 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the connection between the province of 

Saskatchewan and South Korea is an important one, and it’s 

only going to grow as a result of the free trade agreement in 

principle that has recently been reached between Canada and 

South Korea. And, Mr. Speaker, this agreement, as we have 

debated on the floor of the legislature here, is very important for 

all of Canada, but it’s of particular importance to Saskatchewan 

as we seek to see some increased trade in agricultural products 

as well as potash, Mr. Speaker, going forward. 

 

And so we want to welcome our guests here today, welcome the 

consul general, thank him for his work, and we want to 

acknowledge what’s going to be possible in the future between 

South Korea and Canada and the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

with me in welcoming our guests to the Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the consul general representing 

Korea to the Assembly today. And the Premier is correct in 

pointing out the important relationship that our province has 

with South Korea and the important relationship that Canada 

has with South Korea as a democratic country and a country 

that is a leader around the world but certainly within Asia as 

well. And I wish the delegation all the best with their meetings 

over the coming days. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly Ms. Mary McFadyen, the 

Ombudsman and Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner for 

the province of Saskatchewan. Sitting with Ms. McFadyen is 

her husband, Jean-Luc Petit, and Ms. Janet Mirwaldt, former 

acting ombudsman. Ms. McFadyen was appointed by the 

Legislative Assembly to the role of Ombudsman and Public 

Interest Disclosure Commissioner on December the 4th, 2013, 

and with her official position coming into effect April 1st, 2014, 

today is her first day in the role of Ombudsman and Public 

Interest Disclosure Commissioner. 

 

All members are invited to join me at a come and go welcome 

reception for Ms. McFadyen this afternoon in room 218 from 

2:30 to 4 p.m. I would like to welcome Mary back to 

Saskatchewan along with one of our newest Saskatchewan 

residents, Jean-Luc. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I’d like all members to welcome some 

special guests in the west gallery. We have 24 grade 8 students 

from the Ruth Pawson School, located in the Uplands area of 

my constituency, Regina Northeast, joined today by their 

teacher, Crystal Wilkinson. Can you just give us all a wave? 

 

And I’d like to welcome these students to their Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They’re doing a tour of the Assembly, 

and I’ll be having the opportunity to meet with them after 

question period to hopefully answer some questions and to 

engage in some dialogue with respect to what they’re observing 

here today. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these students to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to welcome students 

and support staff from the University of Regina. I’m delighted 

that from the University of Regina today we have a number of 

students from Brazil, in fact representing more than 90 students 

from Brazil that are studying at the University of Regina. They 

are led today by Livia Castellanos who is the director of the 

University of Regina International, as well as Martha Mathurin. 

She’s the study abroad coordinator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are studying a variety of subjects. 

Most of them today are focusing on areas of engineering. We’re 

delighted to have them here in Saskatchewan. They’ve been 

here between 2012 and 2014, so their term here is going to be 

coming to an end. And to all the students, I just simply say and 

offer this: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Portuguese.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to help me 

welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming these Brazilian students and 

the folks from the University of Regina to the Legislative 

Assembly. I’d like to say:  

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Portuguese.] 

 



5024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

It’s good to see you here. And being here from 2012 to 2014, 

it’s not always this cold. It’s not always this cold. I know it’s 

hard to believe now, but it’s not always this cold. 

 

But it’s really good to see you here in terms of what you bring 

to Saskatchewan and hopefully what you take home of 

Saskatchewan and Canada and that we may maintain those 

good ties into the future. But joining with the minister: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Portuguese.] 

 

Again, welcome to the legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater support for education. And we 

know that education is one of the most vital services that 

government provides to citizens and that this government has 

failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 

resources to prioritize delivery of educational excellence. And 

we know that this government has failed to develop a real plan 

to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as an 

additional language students, support community schools and 

their communities and students. 

 

And we know that this government has adopted a P3 

[public-private partnership] privatization approach to building 

the new schools this province needs even though the scheme 

will cost more than traditionally built schools and will leave out 

community needs in the designs of the schools. And we know 

that we must build the best education system for today and for 

Saskatchewan’s future. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources 

that provides the best quality of education for 

Saskatchewan, that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic 

and population changes, that is based on proven 

educational best practices, that is developed through 

consultation with the education sector, and that builds 

strong educational infrastructure to serve students and 

communities long into the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to safety on Dewdney Avenue, those that are in support 

of safety on Dewdney Avenue and rerouting the heavy-haul 

truck traffic that’s dangerous and unsafe that’s inundated 

Dewdney Avenue. They cite that it’s unacceptable for that 

government to delay any further addressing this unacceptable 

and unsafe condition created by that government and they’re 

looking for action. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 

the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO, the rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

And it’s signed by many people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I stand today to present a petition on calling for highway 

improvements throughout Saskatchewan. And this particular 

petition, Mr. Speaker, is in support of doing some major work 

on Highway 155, which is the main artery to northwestern 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to commit to repairing and upgrading 

Highway 155. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition are primarily from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. But, Mr. Speaker, as always we present 

petitions from people that have signed petitions from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition for real action on climate change. And given the report 

yesterday of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 



April 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5025 

this is even more timely. 

 

The residents who have signed this wish to bring to your 

attention the following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest 

greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; that 

Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow to 74 million 

megatonnes as reported by Environment Canada in October 

2013, and show no signs of decreasing; that the Saskatchewan 

government has failed to tackle climate change, reduce 

emissions to the province’s own targets, or put in a real plan to 

protect the natural environment; and that slashing programs 

such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses 

energy efficiency program set the province on a backward 

course; and that since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan 

has reduced climate change funding by 83 per cent including 

another 35 per cent cut in the 2014-15 budget: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the 

provincial budget to tackle climate change by reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens from Carrot River, 

Regina, and Saskatoon. I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition opposed to lucrative lean contracts. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners point out that the government is failing 

to properly listen to front-line health care workers, patients, and 

their families. They point out that the government is spending 

many millions of dollars on out-of-country lean consultants 

including a $40 million contract with an American consultant 

and flying in Japanese sensei for $3,500 per day. The prayer 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to cancel its lucrative contracts with 

out-of-country lean consultants and instead focus its 

resources on actually listening to front-line health care 

workers and fixing the basics in health care and seniors’ 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Canora, 

Saskatoon, Regina, La Ronge, and Arcola. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Daffodil Month 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to draw 

attention to a disease which impacts people around the world 

and close to home here in Saskatchewan. I speak of cancer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Daffodil Month, held every April, is an opportunity to 

recognize Canadians living with and those lost to cancer. 

During Daffodil Month, the Canadian Cancer Society and 

volunteers campaign to raise essential funds for the fight against 

cancer. An astonishing one out of every four Canadians will die 

from cancer. This is a far-reaching disease that touches many 

families. This month we encourage people to think of those 

living with cancer and to contribute to the efforts to fight the 

disease. Throughout the month of April, Canadians who 

volunteer from coast to coast are collecting donations, hosting 

events, and selling daffodils to help raise money for cancer 

research. Money raised this month allows the Canadian Cancer 

Society to fund research and to support Canadians living with 

cancer. 

 

It is important to recognize the successes as well as the 

challenges that come with the battle against cancer. The 

incidences of many types of cancer are on the decline. 

Treatment options are not only getting better, but almost twice 

as many people diagnosed with cancer will survive the disease 

than in the 1960s. This progress, Mr. Speaker, is a direct result 

of the passionate involvement of those leading the fight. We 

take comfort in our successes, but we must remember there is a 

long way to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to commend the Canadian 

Cancer Society for their work that has such a positive impact on 

so many. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Watrous Firefighter Retires After 50 Years 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to take the 

time today to speak about a gentleman from Watrous, Mr. Alex 

Schroeder, one of the many people I am privileged to represent 

in the Arm River-Watrous constituency. Mr. Schroeder is no 

ordinary person. He is a community leader and was the 

backbone of the Watrous Volunteer Fire Department. I say was 

because just this year Mr. Schroeder retired from the 

department after 50 years of service. 

 

Alex got involved with the Watrous fire department back in 

1963 as a volunteer. He started as one of the youngest in the 

department. He said in the early years firefighters learned as 

they went, gaining experience after each fire they were called 

to. Alex has experienced many changes over the years. When he 

started, they were using a 1937 open-air truck. He recalls during 

the cold winter months they would have to throw a fire coat 

over the radiator so it wouldn’t freeze up. 

 

Alex is an extraordinary man who has done so much for the 

many folks in and around Watrous over the last 50 years. We 

should all take the time to acknowledge what a great person he 

is. I am proud to represent Mr. Schroeder here in this Chamber 

and would like all members to join me in thanking Alex for his 

half a century of work and to congratulate him on his 

well-deserved retirement. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



5026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Bookstore Wins Recognition 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a community bookstore in my 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana has recently received 

national recognition on the George Stroumboulopoulos show in 

a top 10 listing of beloved Canadian bookstores. 

 

Now open for over 10 years, Turning the Tide is Saskatoon’s 

best-known and best-established independent bookstore, 

offering a selection of fiction and poetry and a plethora of 

non-fiction books on current events, sustainable living, and 

generally making the world a better place. 

 

Owner Peter Garden grew up in Saskatoon, obtaining two B.A. 

[Bachelor of Arts] degrees from the University of 

Saskatchewan in psychology and women and gender studies. 

He hosts a show on Saskatoon’s local radio station CFCR 90.5 

FM called Making the Links, and has been nominated for the 

Planet S readers’ poll Citizen Activist of the Year, winning in 

2005. 

 

Peter is greatly involved in community activism around issues 

of poverty, building relationships between Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal communities, peace, globalization, and working 

to prevent violence against women. 

 

The bookstore frequently hosts book launches and talks by local 

and out-of-town authors and thinkers, as well as presenting film 

screenings and other community-minded events. Located in the 

heart of the Broadway business area, Turning the Tide is 

cherished by students and academics, people from the arts 

community, tourists, environmentalists, and a host of others in 

the culturally vibrant Nutana area. 

 

Will the members please join me in congratulating Peter Garden 

and Turning the Tide bookstore for making the top 10 on 

George’s list. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Canadian Astronaut Visits Regina 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Friday, the local chapter of Canadian Humanitarian, which is a 

registered charity whose mission is to provide the basic 

necessities of life such as food, shelter to orphaned and 

vulnerable children in Ethiopia, Uganda, and Malawi, along 

with event sponsors K+S Potash, brought Canadian astronaut, 

Commander Chris Hadfield, to Regina to speak to 650 grade 6 

students. 

 

Commander Chris Hadfield was the first Canadian to walk in 

space. He has flown in two space shuttle missions and served as 

the commander of the International Space Station. Mr. Speaker, 

Commander Hadfield inspired and awed students by speaking 

about his experience in space which included photographs and 

videos of the inside of the international space station. Along 

with the presentation, students participated in a rocket 

launching competition that was organized by Canadian 

Humanitarian with the help of the Regina public and separate 

school boards. Mr. Speaker, Friday evening Commander 

Hadfield was the guest speaker at the Canadian Humanitarian 

fundraising dinner. Commander Hadfield’s presentation was 

warmly received by everyone at the event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

sponsors of this event and Commander Chris Hadfield for 

stopping in Regina and sharing his experiences with Regina 

residents. And thank you to Andrea Klippenstine for ongoing 

leadership in organizing such a successful event. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Students Compete in Debate Championships 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

weekend I had the opportunity to judge at the 2014 E.C. Leslie 

Saskatchewan Debate Championships hosted by the Regina 

Huda School and the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate 

Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, provincially there are over 300 students 

participating in public speaking and debate. This past weekend 

over 100 students from Saskatoon, Regina, P.A. [Prince Albert], 

North Battleford, Ituna, and several other Saskatchewan 

communities descended upon Campbell Collegiate to 

participate in the competition. The debaters represented 

elementary school students from grade 5 in the novice category 

through senior high school students in the open category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, competing in debates enables participants to 

strengthen their confidence and competence in expressing their 

views dynamically and persuasively. We commend the students 

for taking part in debating, which further develops research and 

public speaking skills and teaches students to see issues from 

opposing perspectives. These skills will help students 

throughout their academic lives and later on in their careers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge Carla Natrasany, principal 

at Regina Huda School, for her work in making this event 

possible. We would like to thank the Saskatchewan Elocution 

and Debate Association and its members for their work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an event of this nature could not take place 

without the support and leadership of the teachers, parents, and 

coaches, and the behind-the-scenes work of timekeepers and 

judges and a host of volunteers. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we 

congratulate each of the competitors for qualifying and 

competing in this championship. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Licensing Agreement to Include First Nations Schools 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I had the privilege 

of attending, along with the Minister of Education and 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Vice-chief Bobby 

Cameron, our government’s announcement to invest $120,000 

to include all First Nations K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

schools in the provincial Microsoft licensing agreement. 

 



April 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5027 

It will provide students in First Nations schools more access to 

technology and resources, which will help improve education 

and employment outcomes. Mr. Speaker, this is the first time 

ever that the First Nations K-12 schools will be included in this 

agreement. This investment means that 91 First Nations schools 

will have access to the most current Microsoft Office software 

to support teaching in their classrooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment once again shows our 

government’s commitment to the success of First Nations and 

Métis students as we continue to respond to the 

recommendations put forward by the joint task force and work 

to achieve the targets outlined in the province’s plan for growth. 

 

And it builds on recommendations that have already been 

addressed: extending child care and pre-kindergarten spaces; 

ensuring driver training is available on-reserve; increasing the 

number of adult basic education spaces; and through last year’s 

investment of 1.5 million, to bring Help Me Tell My Story to an 

additional 100 on- and off-reserve schools; 1.5 million to pilot 

the invitational shared services initiative, which provides 

on-reserve schools with the same supports to students and 

teachers that are available in provincial schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a great start, but we know that there is still 

more work to do. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Indexing the Minimum Wage 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, good news for low-income 

earners in Saskatchewan. Yesterday our government announced 

that the minimum wage would be indexed annually. Each year, 

on or before June 30th, the amount of the increase will be 

announced and the increase will take effect on October 1st. On 

this side of the House, we are working hard to help low-income 

earners through increases to the minimum wage and raising the 

basic personal tax exemption which allows working women and 

men to keep more of the money they earn in their pockets. 

Indexation will provide security for minimum wage earners 

while ensuring predictability for business owners. 

 

When asked what he thought about indexation when we initially 

announced that we were going to do it, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre said, and I quote from a scrum on May 13, 

2013, “I don’t believe it. I have to see it, and I have to wait and 

see what it actually looks like.” Well, Mr. Speaker, seeing is 

believing. 

 

The members opposite suddenly seem eager to have minimum 

wage indexed. They had 16 years to do it. What did they do 

about it in those 16 years, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely nothing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite now have an 

opportunity to take action. Rather than playing partisan politics 

and opposing initiatives simply on principle, they now have an 

opportunity to stand with us and support the indexation of 

minimum wage. Will they do that, Mr. Speaker? I guess we’ll 

have to see it to believe it. 

 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care and Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We keep hearing 

major concerns about how this government is neglecting the 

basics, neglecting the basics in health care and in seniors’ care. 

And while it’s neglecting the basics, Mr. Speaker, it’s choosing 

to pour in untold millions into a US [United States] consultant, 

into Japanese senseis, into kaizen promotion offices, all in 

support of its lean pet project. 

 

We’ve heard many concerns, Mr. Speaker, from patients, from 

families, from front-line health care workers, and now we’re 

also hearing major concerns from government appointees on 

health region boards. Lawrence Chomos, the Chair of the 

Sunrise Health Region, says this government’s budget “puts a 

lot of strain on the system.” 

 

To the Premier: why is he adding a lot of strain to health care 

instead of fixing the basics? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has invested significantly in the 

increases to regional health authorities over the last seven years, 

up nearly 50 per cent in that time, well above the inflation rate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this year’s budget what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is 

providing an overall increase to the regional health authorities 

that will average approximately 3.4, 3.5 per cent — a 3 per cent 

overall health increase similar to what we did last year, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m pleased to be able to say that the health 

regions have been able to provide a high-quality service while 

focusing on patient improvements, reducing wait times, and 

increasing access, whether it be to surgeries, MRIs [magnetic 

resonance imaging], CTs [computerized tomography], and other 

diagnostics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Sunrise Health Region, what 

wasn’t known on budget day was the fact that we do have a 

contract with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] 

that wasn’t in the budget numbers for the regional health 

authorities. And so those regions with a large complement of 

CUPE employees such as Sunrise will see an additional 

increase to their budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you’d think that they could get 

budget information correct actually on budget day when they’re 

dealing with health regions, Mr. Speaker. The Sunrise Health 

Region, Mr. Speaker, received a measly 0.7 per cent funding 

increase from this government. And that left the 

government-appointed board member saying this: “We were set 

back on our heels. It’s going to be really difficult to put together 

a budget by the end of the year. The challenge is 

unprecedented.” 

 



5028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the Sunrise Health Region board Chair 

says that it’s unprecedented, that’s a big deal because they’ve 

had difficult years under this government. It was in 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, that Sunrise closed 45 long-term care beds and had to 

cut 40 staff. And now, Mr. Speaker, they’re facing more cuts 

yet again. My question to the Premier: why is he creating 

unprecedented challenges in our health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the time that it takes . . . What the Leader of the 

Opposition doesn’t realize is, in the time that it takes to actually 

finalize the budget, what happened after that period when the 

numbers were confirmed was that we have a settlement, a 

tentative agreement with CUPE. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, should I be in this position again next year 

for the budget, I will try my best Kreskin to try to estimate what 

the numbers are going to be before the contracts are actually 

agreed to. That being said, Mr. Speaker, when you factor in the 

CUPE agreement, which wasn’t settled when the numbers for 

the budget were finalized, the increase for Sunrise actually is 

3.4 per cent, not 0.6 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when care facilities in the Sunrise 

Health Region put forward their urgent request for desperately 

needed staff, repairs, and equipment, this government made 

them slash their one-time funding request by 22 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, and made them slash their ongoing funding request by 

54 per cent. This government, Mr. Speaker, pled poverty, said 

that they did not have the resources to fix and address the basics 

in health care, Mr. Speaker. And now the increase, Mr. Speaker, 

we see the reaction from the health region there, from the board 

Chair talking about unprecedented challenges that this 

government is forcing upon them. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has money, untold millions for a 

US consultant, Mr. Speaker, for Japanese senseis paid $3,500 

each, for consultants, Mr. Speaker, for kaizen promotion 

offices. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: when will 

this government get its priorities straight and start addressing 

the things that actually matter in health care and in seniors’ 

care? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the member will know, we did provide $10.04 

million to the regional health authorities through the Urgent 

Issues Action Fund. We’ve also indicated in this budget 3.7 

million, nearly $3.8 million will be available for ongoing costs 

related to the Urgent Issues Action Fund. As well, through the 

equipment budget for the regional health authorities, we’ve 

directed the regional health authorities to spend about 30 per 

cent of those dollars, which is close to an additional $4 million, 

on equipment just for long-term care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have further information in terms of 120 

days out from when the regions received the $10 million, the 

initial $10 million. But I can say even to that point, over 700 

pieces of equipment have been ordered and many of them are 

on-site, have been received and installed within long-term care. 

For example, Five Hills Health Region ordered 11 tubs; 10 of 

those have already been installed. I suspect the 11th will be 

done by the time the 120-day report is due. As well, capital 

improvements in Lloydminster are 35 per cent complete. I think 

what members and what the public and what residents will see 

is that over this next year, that those improvements will have a 

great benefit to the residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we can look at the urgent request 

that the health region put forward for care facilities. This 

government forced them to slash their one-time request by 22 

per cent and their ongoing request by 54 per cent. Simply to 

address the basics is what the health region wanted to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s no wonder that language like unprecedented is being used 

when it comes to this government’s actions in ignoring the 

basics but having all of the focus on their pet projects, Mr. 

Speaker, a project, Mr. Speaker, that’s costing us untold 

millions of dollars — a $40 million contract to one US 

consultant, $3,500 a day for each Japanese sensei, $17 million 

alone just last year for kaizen promotion offices, $30,000 each 

to train physicians, Mr. Speaker, how to take this training. 

 

And moreover, Mr. Speaker, we don’t even know the total cost 

for all the health front-line workers that will be taking this, that 

go to seminars and learn how to fold paper airplanes. And we 

don’t know the total cost, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government is being incredibly secretive, last week refusing to 

answer written questions about the details. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: why won’t this 

government invest in the basics? Stop wasting dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, on consultants, senseis, and paper airplanes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

the Leader of the Opposition will know, to date what has been 

spent on lean initiatives within the Ministry of Health has in 

fact exceeded . . . We have exceeded in terms of the savings and 

efficiencies that we found even what we’ve spent through those 

contracts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of this budget, the member opposite will 

know that there is — through the Urgent Issues Action Fund, 

through what we’re spending through that fund and the ongoing 

dollars — unprecedented dollars for long-term care. Just in 

long-term care alone this government has taken a different 

action. We decided to put additional dollars into long-term care, 

other than the members opposite whose only solution to 

long-term care was raise the fees that long-term care residents 

would pay to the point where some would have to go on welfare 

to be able to afford their fees. 

 

We’ve also increased, included spending to annualize the 

funding for the Home First/Quick Response in three 



April 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5029 

communities — in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert — a 

seniors’ house call pilot program, as well as the renewal of 

facilities in Regina Qu’Appelle, Mr. Speaker, as well as La 

Ronge, which the members opposite had many years to do and 

never got to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 

discussion that we had in question period, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier quoted from a letter from SUN [Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses]. SUN has said that the Premier has quoted that letter 

out of context. My question to the Premier: does he agree with 

SUN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it certainly wouldn’t 

have been my intent to do that. We have the quote here from the 

president of SUN. Mr. Speaker, in addition to the letter, she was 

also on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio, I 

think just about two weeks ago, and said similar things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously some concerns with some 

aspects of lean, but there’s also from SUN an endorsement of 

what’s happening in lean. That was the nature of the comment 

from the letter, Mr. Speaker. Here’s also what she said to Sheila 

Coles in an interview on March 19, 2014: 

 

It’s not that we don’t support lean. We need to make that 

clear right off the start. There is a lot of valuable tools in 

lean. We need to create efficiencies. We need to reduce 

waste, absolutely. 

 

Does he agree with SUN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, SUN just comes out now saying 

that the Premier is taking excerpts, cherry-picking quotes out of 

context, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s what the letter that the Premier said, Mr. Speaker, the 

letter that was . . . [inaudible] . . . by SUN that the Premier was 

quoting from. It went on, Mr. Speaker, where the president of 

SUN talked about instances where hemodialysis patients have 

been put at risk or harm, talked about where there’s been a 

shortage of supplies because materials had been leaned out, 

talks about, Mr. Speaker, instances in health regions where 

infection rates have actually increased because of cuts that 

we’ve seen in cleaning under this government’s lean initiative. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with the president of 

SUN that he was reading the quotes of the letter out of context? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, because 

she also said in the letter, notwithstanding concerns they have, 

that we are interested in determining, that we want to hear from 

front-line workers. She also said, and I quote, “I feel hopeful 

and encouraged that positive aspects (and there are many) [the 

letter adds parenthetically] can be translated into practical 

benefits for patients.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have said we are interested in what front-line 

workers have to say about the lean process, not just the nurses 

but doctors as well through the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] who have supported it. We’ve read into the record 

many quotes from members of SUN who support lean. The 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition has read letters to editor from 

some members of SUN, some of which I’ve contacted directly, 

who don’t support it. That’s reasonable. There’s 40,000-plus 

health care workers in the system. Some are going to welcome 

what this change represents. Some will have concerns. 

 

We want to continue to get it right. What we won’t do is 

completely throw out a process, Mr. Speaker, that’s already 

saved more money than it costs, that is delivering results in 

terms of patient care. That’s the Leader of the Opposition’s 

position, Mr. Speaker. It’s not ours. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

also listen carefully to the president of SUN when she says that 

notwithstanding concerns they do believe there’s practical 

patient benefits to lean, and it’s something that should continue 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t need a $50 million 

dollar contract with a US consultant to improve, to improve our 

health care system, Mr. Speaker. You don’t need, Mr. Speaker, 

to fly in Japanese senseis at $3,500 a day to improve our health 

system. 

 

It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that front-line health care workers 

are afraid to share their stories with this government when we 

see the way in which the Premier cherry-picks lines and uses 

statements out of context, Mr. Speaker. We have SUN saying 

today, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier yesterday quoted the letter 

out of context. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he agree that his tendency to 

cherry-pick lines out of letters such as the one from SUN is the 

reason, one of the reasons why health care workers are afraid to 

actually come forward and voice their concerns with this 

misguided project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Tracy Zambory went on to 

say in the Sheila Coles interview March 19th, 2014, “As I said 

before, it’s not that we don’t support lean, there’s lots of 

valuable tools.” This is all pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. The 

president of SUN has certain concerns with the process, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s also support from the president for SUN on 

the public record, on CBC radio, and in a letter they sent, Mr. 

Speaker  . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the deputy leader 

says, you ought not to spin the . . . These are, these are the 

words from the letter from the president of SUN and the words 

from the interview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this particular project of lean that the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] wish to cancel, we’ve already achieved 

more savings than the total contract will cost over four years, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen improvements in terms of 

patient-centred care. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the United 



5030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

Kingdom, no wonder that the appropriate officials from the 

United Kingdom have been visiting the Virginia Mason 

Hospital in Seattle to find out how it can be replicated, the 

efficiencies and the improvements in Seattle can be replicated 

in the United Kingdom. And, Mr. Speaker, the consultant that 

the Seattle hospital hired, the Virginia Mason Hospital hired is 

John Black and Associates. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, SUN and front-line health care 

workers are raising very serious concerns, concerns, Mr. 

Speaker, in a letter that SUN is saying that this Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, is quoting out of context. These are some of the 

concerns that they identified: patients being put at risk, Mr. 

Speaker, patients being harmed, discharges being rushed, 

hospitals running out of vital supplies, and an increase in the 

number of infections because of cutbacks to cleaning. 

 

My question to the Premier: why did he not read those portions 

of the letter yesterday? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to the comment of the president of SUN, 

certainly we take that seriously. That’s why there’s been a 

number of meetings with ministry officials and SUN in the last 

week. They are looking at scheduling time this month to 

continue some discussions. We want to hear their concerns. In 

fact some of the concerns that they’ve raised in terms of 

specific lines within wards, and some of the staffing changes, 

we’ve offered to do a deeper dive into those specific issues. We 

want to understand what their concerns are. 

 

But to be clear, in a letter, in the newsletter that goes out to all 

SUN members, here’s one of the quotes from the president: 

 

We have made it clear, and we’ll go on the record again, 

that there is absolutely no doubt lean has helped identify 

ways and make improvements, and we will support our 

members continued engagement in this work. 

 

Clearly they have some concerns, and we will want to address 

them. But clearly they understand that there is a benefit to lean, 

and they encourage their members to be a part in the 

engagement . . . [inaudible]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s something from the letter 

that the Premier was cherry-picking from yesterday. It says: 

 

We are hearing about instances where hemodialysis 

patients have been put at risk and harm or patients have 

run out of linens or wound dressings because the margin 

for error or uncertainty has been leaned out of the supply 

chains. 

 

We’ve also heard about rushed discharges to increase 

patient flow, leading to poor outcomes and costly 

readmissions for members who work in both emergency 

and home care. 

Efficiencies found by scaling back high-touch surface 

cleaning and operating emergency rooms have resulted in 

rising hospital-acquired infection rates in some regions. 

 

And it goes on. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. It 

is not for the Health minister: does the Premier agree with the 

concerns that the Saskatchewan nurses are raising, Mr. Speaker, 

around patients being harmed, about quality of care going 

down, about infections going up? Does he agree with these 

concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have 

indicated that in meetings with SUN, they have raised some 

concerns. Hemodialysis would be one of them. We’ve offered 

to do a deeper dive into that specific situation, Mr. Speaker. So 

what we’re saying is that we accept that there are some 

concerns, but we acknowledge that SUN has acknowledged that 

there is positives to lean. 

 

Would the Leader of the Opposition acknowledge, in the letter 

he just read from, that there are positives to lean identified by 

the president of SUN in that very letter? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have done what he has offered, is that there are 

concerns, but there are positives identified by SUN. Will he 

acknowledge that there are positives within that letter to the 

benefits of lean within the health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, even the deputy minister of lean 

says benefits that have come through lean, have come through 

listening to the front-line health care workers. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Premier: why, why the $40 million contract? Why, Mr. 

Speaker, $3,500-a-day senseis? The Saskatoon Health Region, 

Mr. Speaker, has a website. The Saskatoon Health Region has a 

website full of complaints from nurses and from front-line 

workers. And here’s a quote from an RN [registered nurse] 

named Tami from March 24th: 

 

We’ve been indoctrinated with the Kanban cards to 

replace hospital supplies. Can we have Kanban cards for 

the staffing positions that aren’t being replaced? . . . I see 

patient care declining because the number of staff at the 

patient level is down, and the acuity of the patients in the 

hospital is up. The ward staffs are scrambling to give basic 

care. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to Tami’s concerns 

about the lean project or will he stubbornly dismiss those 

concerns from Tami like he dismisses the concerns from the 

other Saskatchewan nurses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for 

finally understanding that lean is about the front line.  

 



April 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5031 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . Mr. Speaker, we can keep 

doing things the way that we’ve always done them in health 

care. And even at a point under the NDP, when the health 

budget increased twice the amount that it did in this last year’s 

budget to six and a half per cent and that resulted in facility 

closures, in nearly 100 people being laid off in the health care 

system including front-line nurses, we can continue down that 

track, or we can be more efficient with our dollars. 

 

We can focus more on the patients, on the outcomes of the 

patients, on reducing harm to the patients, which is a cost to the 

system, let alone to the patients. And to the point where we 

have inventory in the system that we never use because it 

becomes expired or we throw away blood products because it 

becomes expired, we can continue on the same track that the 

NDP are offering to the people of Saskatchewan, or we can try 

something different: something that has been proven, something 

that’s been proven here in Saskatchewan, and will be proven 

throughout this province. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’re trying something 

different. It’s $40 million with a US consultant, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re trying something different. It’s flying Japanese senseis 

from Japan to Saskatchewan to meet with health care workers, 

Mr. Speaker, forcing front-line workers to take training where 

they learn how to fold paper airplanes. 

 

Here’s another quote, Mr. Speaker, from a front-line health care 

worker. This one’s from Lisa. This is also from the Saskatoon 

Health Region website from March 27th: “To many of us, it has 

caused great stress and unhappiness at work and at home with 

our families. The morale within the hospital is the poorest I 

have ever seen.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so with patient concerns being raised, infection 

rates going up in some places because cuts have occurred to 

cleaning, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier’s just dismissing the 

concerns that Saskatchewan nurses are raising, when we have 

nurses, Mr. Speaker, afraid to come forward and share their 

views because they see how their comments are treated by this 

Premier and by this government, Mr. Speaker, it’s step after 

step of missteps that we see from this government when it 

comes to their lean project. This government has lost its way, 

signed a fat contract on lean. 

 

Will the Premier stand today, admit that they’ve lost their way, 

cancel the fat cash cow contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, so 

first of all, Mr. Speaker, through the work that we’ve done prior 

to the John Black and Associates contract in some lean work, 

now through the contract, Mr. Speaker, we have to this point in 

efficiencies alone — without getting into what we’ve done on 

patient safety, what we’ve done on quality improvements, on 

daily visual management — we have to this point already saved 

within the system more than we’ve invested, Mr. Speaker. The 

Leader of the Opposition can look at some literature. The 

Cleveland Clinic, for example, on a four-year contract that cost 

approximately $40 million saved more than $100 million in the 

first five years alone. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, in some of the successes that we’ve 

seen early on in lean, with some of the other moves that other 

provinces and jurisdictions are making, including NDP 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, we think that this is one of the tools 

that will be needed to improve care for patients. But it does 

include ensuring that we do have the right number of providers, 

the right providers in the right place for the right patient. And 

that is a part of the equation as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the squeeze on students in 

classrooms across Saskatchewan is getting worse under that 

government. Last week the Saskatoon Public School Board 

requested 11 portables to keep up with the growth pressures 

they’re facing, and all they were given was two. The very same 

thing’s happening in our capital city, right here in Regina, with 

Regina Catholic and Regina Public only getting about half of 

what they requested by way of portables. They needed, Mr. 

Speaker, they needed 24, and all they got was 14 portables, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the Education minister is, why is he refusing to 

listen to the front lines and educational leaders across this 

province who understand their capital needs best? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, I’m somewhat 

surprised by the question. I think there was a significant 

announcement regarding joint-use schools. I think as well, Mr. 

Speaker, there was two schools announced for Regina: Sacred 

Heart and Connaught. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member opposite that Regina 

Public Schools since 2007-2008, the enrolment has increased by 

5.7 per cent during that period of time. The operating has 

increased by 30.8 per cent. Regina Catholic enrolment has 

increased by 7.5 per cent, operating has increased by 26.8 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to support our 

school divisions throughout the province both by way of capital 

and operating funds. And, Mr. Speaker, we support and value 

all of our schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see the same thing here 

from this minister that we saw from the Premier, more spin 

instead of addressing the reality before them. That’s the 

government that’s cut educational assistants, the government 

that’s growing the class size, Mr. Speaker, the government that 

is putting millions for standardized testing but no dollars for 

portables or getting the basics right in classrooms. 

 

And you’d think, you know . . . That minister gets up and pats 

himself on the back. This is the minister who rejected the 10 

portables that are needed here in Regina. And the Catholic 



5032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

school division here in Regina says, “We’re going to be pressed 

to get our kids into the classrooms.” 

 

Overcrowding is going to get worse because of that 

government’s neglect for making sure that school divisions 

have the space they need. My question to the minister: why is 

this government refusing to fix the basics, to listen to teachers 

and the front line and school boards, and ensure they get things 

right like having enough portables for students to learn all 

across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one way to address 

crowding in the classroom is simply by closing schools, as the 

members opposite did with 176 schools. Mr. Speaker, in Regina 

in this area we have provided, since we formed government, 

$131.025 million. Twelve major capital projects: École 

Monseigneur de Laval, Balcarres, Lumsden Elementary, 

Emerald Ridge, Campbell, Scott Collegiate, Arcola, Douglas 

Park, Seven Stones, École St. Andrew, Connaught, Sacred 

Heart. 

 

We have included this year 11 relocatable classrooms, 121 

renovation projects, 7 early year projects. And in addition to 

that, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll make no apology for it whatsoever, 

three joint-use P3 schools: Harbour Landing, Northwest, and 

Greens on Gardiner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an enviable record, unlike the members 

opposite that said, we’re just going to close them up, move the 

people away. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing something about it — 

$131 million worth plus the P3 schools coming. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re not taking lessons from those people. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Funding for Student Internships 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday I had the honour of announcing in this 

building that our government is providing an investment of 

$365,000 in funding to support student internships through the 

Mitacs program. This funding incudes $225,000 for 30 research 

and development internships for graduate and post-doctoral 

students in Saskatchewan industries through the Mitacs 

Accelerate program and an additional $140,000 for 20 new 

international education research and work experience 

opportunities through Mitacs Globalink program. 

 

This investment will provide increased opportunities for these 

students to develop and apply their education and research skills 

while at the same time they will also be gaining valuable work 

experience that benefits our industries in our province. 

Essentially this is meant to help with that transition between 

learning and earning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Mitacs Accelerate program allows graduate 

and post-doctoral fellows to assist companies to develop and 

test new technologies, improve processes and services, and 

increase productivity and innovation. The Government of 

Saskatchewan has supported 145 graduate and post-doctoral 

internships in agriculture, forestry, mining, oil and gas over the 

course of several years. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when Suzanne Paschall, the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Indie Ink Publishing, was asked yesterday 

about the Mitacs program, this is what she had to offer: 

 

It was incredibly easy to access. You know, in fact, having 

worked in government and in universities for many years 

and worked with government programs a lot in my career, 

I was shocked, frankly, at how easy it was to access. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Mitacs Globalink program will help 

recruit international students as well as encourage 

Saskatchewan students to go abroad. And as they return, Mr. 

Speaker, to Saskatchewan, they will have new knowledge, new 

networks, and be positioned very well not simply to help fill 

Saskatchewan’s labour market with more than 15,000 jobs open 

and available today but in fact also help fuel the economic 

growth that’s under way and that defines the new 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m just 

rising to respond to the ministerial statement. I thank the 

minister for providing an advance copy of his remarks. 

 

I’d note, Mr. Speaker, that this announcement took place 

yesterday. We had some guests here in the Assembly yesterday. 

Certainly my understanding of ministerial statements is that 

these things are to be brought forward in a timely manner. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, this is a good news 

announcement. We’re glad to see these $365,000 brought 

forward for research and development for our graduates in the 

province and again that connection to the broader global 

community, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking to see good things 

from the individuals taking up these scholarships and 

internships, and we’ll look to see further good news on this 

front from the folks who have availed themselves of these 

opportunities with Mitacs global. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d say again, thanks for the advance 

copy and good to see this announcement for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 101, The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 



April 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5033 

Committee of the Whole? When shall it be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013, and that the bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 101 — and I’m having 

trouble being heard by myself — that Bill No. 101, The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 118, The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and 

that the bill be now read a third time. 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act and 

that the bill be now read for the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move that this bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 119, The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this 

bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 and that the bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



5034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2014 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée  

The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 311. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to question 311. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 

I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:31.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5023 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5023 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5023 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5023 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5023 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5023 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5024 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5024 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5024 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5024 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5024 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5025 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Daffodil Month 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5025 

 Watrous Firefighter Retires After 50 Years 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5025 

 Saskatoon Bookstore Wins Recognition 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5026 

 Canadian Astronaut Visits Regina 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5026 

 Students Compete in Debate Championships 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5026 

 Licensing Agreement to Include First Nations Schools 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5026 

 Indexing the Minimum Wage 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5027 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care and Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5027 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5027 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5029 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5031 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5031 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Funding for Student Internships 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5032 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5032 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5032 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5033 

 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5033 

 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5034 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5034 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


