




















































Hansard: May 13, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 63A  TUESDAY, MAY 13, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5393 
 May 13, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, a number of guests are seated in your gallery and 
it is my pleasure to introduce a very special guest, His 
Excellency Vadym Prystaiko, ambassador of Ukraine to 
Canada. Mr. Prystaiko was born in the southern Ukraine oblast 
of Odessa but spent most of his life in Kiev, where he received 
a master’s degree from the Ukrainian Academy of Foreign 
Trade. Before he became a diplomat, he was co-founder of one 
of the first Ukrainian Internet providers and electronic media 
outlets called Electronni Visti. 
 
In 1994 he accepted a position with the Ukrainian government, 
following in his family’s long tradition of public service. Since 
then Mr. Prystaiko has served in diplomatic positions in both 
the United States and Australia and as deputy director general 
of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] in the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. He was first appointed the ambassador of 
Ukraine to Canada in November of 2012. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this is his first actual visit to Saskatchewan, even though I can 
tell the members in this Assembly that he has participated by 
way of conference call with my advisory committee once 
before. 
 
And now we’re very, very pleased to have him in the Assembly. 
Also seated beside him is Mr. Gerald Luciuk who is the Chair 
of the Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations advisory committee. I’d 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming His Excellency 
to Saskatchewan as well as Mr. Luciuk. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Deputy Premier in extending a welcome to His Excellency 
as well as Mr. Luciuk, and to thank His Excellency for the work 
that he has been doing on behalf of the people of Ukraine but 
also of the important work that he has been doing in sharing 
information and communicating with the people of Canada. 
And as we’ve all watched very closely our TV screens, as we’re 
concerned about what is happening in Ukraine, I know His 
Excellency has done a fine job in speaking through the media in 
clearly expressing the views of his country, the views of his 
government and doing it with such great conviction. 
 
And I do want to compliment His Excellency on that and let 
him know that everyone in the province is concerned about the 
future of Ukraine. We all stand united with our allies in 
Western Europe for a peaceful and democratic future for the 
country of Ukraine, and thank His Excellency for the work in 
fostering that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you I would like to recognize this year’s 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship recipients seated 
in your gallery. For the past four years, the Ministry of 
Agriculture has offered the Saskatchewan Agriculture Student 
Scholarship to grade 12 students and recent graduates who are 
pursuing agriculture-related post-secondary education. Each 
year a variety of talented youth with bright futures in the 
agriculture industry apply, and this year was no different. 
 
We received 33 applications and the Ministry of Agriculture 
staff had the difficult task of choosing one winner and three 
runners-up. I would ask the scholarship winners to please wave 
as I announce their names. 
 
Josée Monvoisin of Gravelbourg has been awarded the grand 
prize scholarship. Josée submitted a video about her family 
farm, along with other farmers and ranchers are growing safe, 
healthy food in an environmentally friendly way. In the fall, 
Josée will begin a Bachelor of Science program in agribusiness 
at the University of Saskatchewan. As winner of this 
scholarship, Josée will be awarded $4,000 to help with her 
studies. 
 
Three runner-up scholarships valued at $2,000 each were also 
awarded to Sara Grassick, Miranda Heidecker, and Hannah 
Friesen. Sara Grassick of Prince Albert lives on a mixed farm 
with both cattle and grain. For her scholarship application, Sara 
submitted a video about how the agriculture industry is a 
foundation of opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
 
Miranda Heidecker is from Middle Lake. For her submission, 
Miranda wrote about sustainable agriculture that makes us a 
global leader in feeding the world. 
 
And last, we have Hannah Friesen from Laird. Like Sara, 
Hannah chose to submit an essay about agriculture as the 
foundation of opportunity in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these students have shown pride in the 
agriculture industry with their willingness to speak up about 
what makes it one of the best industries in the province. I’m 
sure that each of these students have bright futures ahead of 
them. Thank you to all of the scholarship winners for your hard 
work, dedication, and passion for agriculture. I look forward to 
hearing of your contributions to this exciting industry in the 
coming years. I would ask all members to join me as I 
congratulate this year’s Saskatchewan Agriculture Student 
Scholarship winners, wish them all the best in their future 
endeavours, and welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



5394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

you and through you to the rest of the Legislative Assembly and 

on behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to extend 

my congratulations to these four young women who have 

successfully received these scholarships, and particularly to 

Josée Monvoisin — félicitations — from Gravelbourg is very 

near to my hometown of Lafleche. So I know that country very 

well, and some great farming goes on down there. The folks 

from French Canada certainly know how to farm. So I’m sure 

that the scholarship will be well used on her part. 

 

And for Sara, Miranda, and Hannah as well, it’s nice to see four 

young women representing the youth and the young farmers of 

Saskatchewan and I am very certain that you will do an 

excellent job as you go forward into your chosen career in 

agriculture. So on behalf of the official opposition, I too would 

like to welcome all of you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce, in the west gallery, 54 grade 5 students from St. Luke 

School. For those of you that are not familiar with that area, St. 

Luke School is actually about five doors down from where 

Sandy and I live, and these students, a lot of them, walk past my 

house. So I met with them earlier today. They were 

exceptionally polite, courteous, shook hands, and we were able 

to give them a bit of a brief tour around the building. Mr. 

Speaker, these are not only good-looking students, but they’re 

exceptionally bright and hard-working. 

 

They are joined today by their teachers, Curtis Wagner and Cari 

Karakochuk, and a number of parent chaperones: Leslie 

Schriener, Colette Berg, Colette Janes, Jason Deline, Lorne 

Knihniski, Karen Johnson, Patti Glowa-Meyer, Albie Malan, 

Janice Fox, Sandra Weinheimer, Sheri Lerat, Rob Hurd, and 

Carol Mailloux. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I told these folks earlier that this is their 

legislature, that they are citizens of Saskatoon, owners of this. 

And I would like to ask all members to welcome them to their 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had a lot 

of special guests in this Assembly over the years, but I don’t 

think any more special than I have here today. Mr. Speaker, I 

have three fantastic moms that have joined us and a brand new 

young son, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to welcome to this 

Assembly, seated in your gallery, Stephanie, my wife, who 

many of you know, who of course is so important in everything 

within our family and our life; as well my mother, Faye 

Wotherspoon who’s been introduced before; and my 

mother-in-law, Barb Willows. But I am particularly proud today 

to introduce William Gregory Craik Wotherspoon to the 

Assembly at only seven days old here today. I ask all members 

to welcome my son to his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 

you, I’d like to introduce some special guests in the legislature 

today. First I’d like to introduce Carla Fenton Katchmar. Carla 

has been very prominent in the media recently, getting 

signatures on a petition to create better treatment for youth who 

are addicted to drugs. Her daughter Chantaey had died at an 

overdose at the age of 16. 

 

Attending with her today are good friends Christine Devine, 

Shreya Shah, Yvonne Estey and her son Justin and his 

girlfriend, Wray Griffiths. And they are here to watch their 

petition be presented today. I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Carla and her friends here to their legislature. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’d like to introduce two 

individuals who are important particularly to one of the Pages 

here in the Assembly. That would be Wes and Candace Topal 

from Fort Qu’Appelle that are here today. And they’re 

observing some of the final days of their son’s service as a 

Page. 

 

They can be very proud of their son. I know that Dylan Topal 

has certainly proven himself a diligent young man, a thoughtful 

young man with a great sense of humour, and certainly a bright 

future ahead of him. So I ask all members to welcome Wes and 

Candace Topal to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater services for young 

people dealing with addictions. And this has been a major issue 

for folks right across the province as they come to terms with 

how they can serve young people better. I’d like to read the 

petition: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: the definition of child in provincial legislation 

limits the ability of law enforcement and social service 

agencies to intervene to help children between the ages of 

16 and 18 years of age. The result is that parents are often 

unable to assist teenagers with serious addiction problems 

because their children decline voluntary help. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan take the 

necessary steps and actions to improve access to addiction 

programs for children between the ages of 16 and 18 

years, including extending the power toward involuntary 

committals at treatment facilities and extending the time 

for involuntary treatment. 

 

I do so present. Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are 

right across this province, largely in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

Regina, right across the province. I do so present. Thank you 

very much. 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5395 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue. They’re calling on this 

government to fix a problem that that government created. 

They’re calling on that government to act immediately, as any 

further delays, they note, are entirely unacceptable, placing 

people and lives at risk. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action, as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina, actually in this case all located directly on Dewdney 

Avenue. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present the 

petition about Highway 123. This highway provides the only 

access to the communities of Cumberland House and 

Cumberland House Cree Nation. This highway was voted by 

Saskatchewan residents as Canadian Automobile Association’s 

worst road in the province last year, and this highway is still 

waiting for major upgrades and repairs. Mr. Speaker, the people 

are very concerned for their safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the upgrades, repairs, 

and maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

once again standing today to present a petition to build a second 

bridge from Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 

presented petition after petition, day after day, and the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 

serves central and northern Saskatchewan, as well as the 

city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 

senior governments. 

 

And as in duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing about this petition 

I’m presenting page after page here today, is that the number of 

support that they’re getting from a number of communities. 

And people that have signed the petition include Carrot River, 

Saskatoon, Rosetown, Humboldt, La Ronge, Wadena, Herschel, 

and the list goes on and on. Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to 

present this petition calling for a second bridge for Prince 

Albert. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

to present a petition today for a residents-in-care bill of rights. 

The signatures recognize or acknowledge that residents in care 

have the right to dignity, respect, and safety; that residents in 

care deserve basic guarantees of the quality of care they ought 

to receive; that residents in care have the right to individualized 

care that meets or exceeds minimum quality of care standards; 

that it is the responsibility of the provincial government to 

ensure consistent standards of care in facilities throughout 

Saskatchewan; and that requiring each care home to post a 

residents-in-care bill of rights will guarantee that senior 

residents have individualized care plans and minimum quality 

of care standards. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

adopt Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 

which would provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right 

to quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care 

homes. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. And this petition is signed by 

individuals from across the province, but Carrot River, 

Hepburn, Kindersley, Herschel, Indian Head, Nipawin, 

Saskatoon, and Tisdale are just a few of the places, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition calling for improved safety on Highway No. 1 east of 

Regina. The undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 

the Highway No. 1 corridor between Regina and Balgonie has 

become unacceptably dangerous, as attested to by the number 

of traffic collisions, many involving personal injury and death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 

 

Respectfully request that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, until the overpasses are built along this 

corridor: (1) immediately install traffic lights at 

appropriate locations along Highway No. 1 between 

Regina and Balgonie, (2) immediately reduce speed limits 

to appropriate levels within this corridor, and (3) take 



5396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

steps to ensure that the speed limits are enforced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is the latest instalment of a great 

number of petitions that have been signed. This one in 

particular has been signed by citizens from Regina, Emerald 

Park, White City, Pilot Butte, Glenavon, Moose Jaw, Balgonie, 

Edenwold, Carlyle, Lumsden, Qu’Appelle, Leslie, Odessa, 

Montmartre, Fernwood, Melville, Chaplin, Grayson, and 

Zehner. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present 

a petition opposed to the correctional service job privatization. 

There are a number of jobs within the correctional service right 

now in the food services but also in some other areas where 

there is concern that these jobs will be privatized. And so in this 

petition: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the 

government to cancel its privatization in the corrections 

and young offender facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

rising to present a petition which is opposed to government cuts 

to the harness racing industry. And the undersigned residents 

wish to bring to your attention the following: in 2012 the 

government stubbornly cut the grants for Yorkton’s harness 

racing industry, and the government has failed to properly listen 

or consult with the residents of Yorkton. The government’s cuts 

towards harness racing will continue to negatively impact 

breeders, trainers, and other employees as well as destructively 

impact the economic spinoffs of the horse racing industry. 

These cuts will continue to have a great negative economic 

impact on the city of Yorkton and the surrounding 

communities. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan may be pleased to call on the government to 

immediately reinstate the grant funding for harness racing 

in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s over 1,000 signatures on this petition 

that I’m submitting today, and this is from people mainly from 

the Yorkton area but definitely from the communities 

surrounding Yorkton. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon School Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the history of an important school in my 

constituency, Buena Vista School. It turns 100 this year and to 

celebrate, the community has planned a three-day celebration. 

 

The school has a long history starting in 1910 when the 

Saskatoon School Board purchased a city block in the new 

Buena Vista neighbourhood. In March of 1912, a petition came 

from the community for a school to be built on that location, 

and by October of the same year the school board had agreed. 

Architect David Webster and contractors Shannon Brothers and 

Cassidy were hired to build the historic 12-room school. 

 

The cornerstone was laid on June 1913 by W.P. Bate, secretary 

of the board, and in April 1914, only two years after the 

petition, Buena Vista School opened with six rooms in 

operation. The space was expanded in September with two 

more classrooms for students, and another four rooms that were 

rented to the Normal School. William H. Holliston was the very 

first principal at Buena Vista and remained at the post for more 

than 25 years. 

 

I’m looking forward to celebrating Buena Vista School’s 

centennial celebrations, including school performances, a 100th 

anniversary program with band and choir, and I have the honour 

of being among the special guests. An old-fashioned carnival, 

antique auto show, children’s activities, and horse and buggy 

rides are also in the lineup for the three-day event. 

 

I’m pleased to be part of the Buena Vista centennial and ask all 

members to join me in congratulating the students, teachers, and 

administrators for recognizing 100 years of colourful history at 

Buena Vista elementary school. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hopes for a Peaceful Resolution in Ukraine 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to welcome the ambassador of 

Ukraine to Canada to our legislature today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ukraine has recently been in crisis, fighting for its 

identity and survival against Russian invasion and infiltration. 

On May 25th the country will hold an important presidential 

election in hope of moving towards a peaceful resolution. 

 

Mr. Prystaiko’s visit to Saskatchewan during this critical time 

in Ukraine demonstrates the importance of our province’s 

relationship with his country. While here, Mr. Prystaiko will 

speak to the Saskatchewan Ukrainian community and meet with 

several government organizations. His visit will allow 

Saskatchewan residents to learn the latest about the situation in 

Ukraine. It will also give us a chance to reaffirm our support for 

that country. 

 

Saskatchewan has extremely close ties and an important shared 

history with Ukraine. In the early 20th century, many Ukrainian 

people braved the ocean to start new lives in our province. 

Today around 13 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population is of 

Ukrainian ancestry. 

 

Since 1990 our province has signed 14 various agreements with 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5397 

Ukraine and also established the Saskatchewan-Ukraine 

relations advisory committee. Mr. Speaker, in March we also 

provided $60,000 for humanitarian assistance. We look forward 

to continuing to work with His Excellency and the Ukrainian 

community to support the people of Ukraine towards a peaceful 

resolution. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Regina Runner Coordinates Royal Road Race 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise and 

recognize and thank Ted Jaleta for his leadership in 

coordinating this past weekend’s fourth annual Royal Road 

Race. 

 

The Royal Road Race is a family event that promotes wellness 

and the sport of running, and the proceeds go to local charities. 

Hundreds of people participate in the family fun run, the 

5-kilometre fun run, and the 10-kilometre road race on 

Mother’s Day weekend each year. Ted’s competitive running 

club, the Jaleta Pacers, partner with the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] to hold this event. This year’s race was 

another great success and raised $24,000-plus to go towards 

Chili for Children and the Regina United Way, two very worthy 

causes. 

 

This is one more example of the incredible leadership of Ted 

Jaleta and the Jaleta Pacers throughout the community here in 

Regina and beyond. Jaleta’s active participation and role in 

coordinating community events betters the quality of life for 

Saskatchewan citizens. Not only that — gathering in our 

communities for events like the Royal Road Race increases the 

opportunity for engagement of children, youth, and families in 

their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say thank you to the event sponsors, 

volunteers, and the RCMP for contributing to its success. In 

particular I’d like to recognize the Royal Road Race planning 

community and the Jaleta Pacers for their commitment to 

fostering inclusive opportunities. And finally I want to say a 

very special word of thanks to Ted Jaleta. I thank him for not 

just being an athletic legend here in Saskatchewan, I thank him 

for his leadership and its expression through events such as the 

Royal Road Race and the Pacers. And I thank him for being a 

living, breathing, inspiring embodiment of the spirit of 

Saskatchewan’s motto, “from many peoples, strength.” Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Youth Honorary Chair of Gutsy Walk 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

recognize a special young man in my constituency. Andrew 

Ross, an 11-year-old from Yorkton, is the honorary Chair of the 

Crohn’s and Colitis Canada’s Gutsy Walk in Regina coming up 

on June 8th. 

 

Andrew was diagnosed with Crohn’s when he was only 18 

months old. Despite his age, Andrew has been making a large 

impact in tearing down the stigma surrounding Crohn’s and 

colitis. He and his family have raised more than $20,000 in the 

past five years. Andrew says that while it is sometimes hard to 

live with Crohn’s disease, he still feels very lucky that he can be 

active and never has had any surgeries or spent long periods of 

time in the hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look up to citizens like Andrew for taking such 

initiative to raise awareness and funds for research to help better 

the lives of those it affects. According to Crohn’s and Colitis 

Canada, there are more than 233,000 Canadians living with 

Crohn’s and colitis, about half with each. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of the Assembly to join me 

in recognizing the efforts of young Andrew Ross and wish him 

success as the honorary Chair of the upcoming Gutsy Walk in 

Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Tourism Leader Receives 

Lifetime Achievement Award 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — I am honoured to rise in the House today to 

recognize a constituent and friend of mine, Ms. Mona 

Selanders. Mona was named the inaugural recipient of the 

Prince Albert Tourism and Marketing Bureau Lifetime 

Achievement Award last Friday. 

 

Despite only being a resident of Prince Albert for 16 years, 

Mona has had a tremendous impact on the community. In 

addition to her day job as general manager of the Prince Albert 

Travelodge, Mona has long served the city’s tourism centre, 

leading the organization in its many different forms over the 

years. Mona was also instrumental in forming the Destination 

Marketing Fund which has been key to attracting a number of 

significant events in recent years, bringing millions worth of 

economic spinoff into the area. 

 

Mona is a tremendous leader and ambassador for the city of 

Prince Albert. We are so lucky to have her in our community. 

Her passion for tourism, vision for the future, and ability to see 

potential where others may not are just a few of the qualities 

that make her so special. Here is a good example. One year, on 

Remembrance Day weekend, a young hockey team was staying 

at the Travelodge. They were getting on the bus for their game 

when Mona stopped their coach and said, “It’s Remembrance 

Day. They can’t show up without poppies.” She stood at the 

door with a bucket of poppies and pinned one on each player as 

they left the hotel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Mona Selanders on her well-deserved Lifetime Achievement 

Award and thank her for being such an excellent ambassador 

for Prince Albert and Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Saskatchewan Athlete in Training for Paralympics 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to acknowledge the grandchild of two of my 



5398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

constituents, Leroy and Carol DeMong of Cudworth. Their 

grandson, Mitch Bossaer, was born and raised in Saskatoon and 

currently is a student at the University of Toronto Scarborough. 

Mitch’s goal is to make it on Team Canada for the 2016 

Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even at the young age of eight, Mitch knew that he 

wanted to play basketball. He was enrolled in Saskatoon Minor 

Basketball Association until the age of 13 when he was 

diagnosed with cancer. As part of his treatment his leg had to be 

amputated, but this did not diminish his passion for basketball. 

 

He was later introduced to the wheelchair basketball 

community where he quickly became a star player. Mitch has 

played with the Saskatchewan team in the 2011 Canadian 

Winter Games. He played for the Canadian under-23 team in 

the World Junior Championships in Turkey and was also on the 

team that won gold in Mexico City, qualifying for the world 

championships. More recently he played for the Saskatchewan 

team at the 2014 Junior National Championships, where they 

took home the gold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Mitch Bossaer on his many accomplishments, and wish him 

luck as he trains to be selected for the national team for the 

2016 Paralympics. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Remote Presence Technology Pilot Project 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday our government announced a new, pioneering way to 

deliver health services to remote communities. A remote 

presence technology pilot project will be launched in Pelican 

Narrows to help improve access to timely health care for 

patients. This technology is an advanced robotics telemedicine 

platform. It enables a physician or specialist to instantly connect 

with a patient remotely and perform real time assessment, 

diagnosis, and patient management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to provide $250,000 in 

funding to introduce remote presence technology as a two-year 

pilot in Pelican Narrows. This pioneering technology will 

virtually eliminate distance and time barriers. It will bring 

health care to patients within their own community. This is 

especially important in rural and remote areas like Pelican 

Narrows. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Dr. Mendez, unified head of the department of surgery at the 

University of Saskatchewan and Saskatoon Health Region, will 

lead the Pelican Narrows pilot to partnership with northern 

medical services and Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. Dr. Mendez 

brings a wealth of experience in the health care field and is a 

pioneer in using remote presence technology in Canada. 

 

I want to thank all the partners for engaging in a project that 

will truly benefit people in northern Saskatchewan. Initiatives 

like this will help us build a responsive, more accessible 

patient-centred health care system. Our government will 

continue to promote innovative health care solutions and 

improve access to quality care for people in our province, no 

matter where they live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moments before 

question period, the Premier and I both received an email from 

the executive director of the school of public health at the 

University of Saskatchewan. In his email, he raises very 

significant concerns about what is happening at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. And he writes, “Hopefully the 

board and the province’s political leaders will ask probing 

questions and ensure that due process is followed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: has he read the email? 

Does he share Dr. Buckingham’s concerns? And is he finally 

willing to ask some probing questions about what is happening 

at the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that the University of Saskatchewan is one of 

the best-funded, in fact it is the best-funded medical doctoral 

universities in the country. And, Mr. Speaker, what we also 

know, as an independent medical doctoral university, is that key 

issues of organization and renewal are the purview of the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

To ask a very legitimate question about our level of engagement 

regarding TransformUS, that is this process of renewal, we have 

been engaged as appropriate in dialogue, in discussion for 

months. Certainly issues around accreditation, especially 

accreditation regarding health sciences and health services have 

been part of an ongoing dialogue and discussion. We have 

received reassurance from the board Chair and from the 

president that accreditation is not an issue under the 

reorganization. In fact what we’ve been given word is that 

we’re going to see the strengthening of the health sciences and 

health services as a result. Thank you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to be 

listening to all of the respective voices that are coming from 

campus. And here’s what the executive director of the school of 

public health has to say: 

 

In December 2013 the president of the University of 

Saskatchewan called a meeting of the senior leadership 

team (deans and vice-presidents) to discuss the 

TransformUS process. Her remarks were to the point: she 

expected her senior leaders to not “publicly disagree with 

the process or findings of TransformUS;” she added that if 

we did our “tenure would be short.” With that meeting 

there was the “silence of the deans.” Never in my 40 years 

of academic life have I seen academics being told that they 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5399 

could not speak out and debate issues. 

 

This is incredibly concerning to me. Does this concern the 

Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much again, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, in a recent email from the president of the 

University of Saskatchewan, I’ll just quote directly because it 

relates to these very questions. Again they’re legitimate 

questions, fair questions. The president says: 

 

Nothing is decided until it goes through our governance 

bodies. This is an internal matter that the university must 

manage, that we believe the restructuring will make health 

care provision better, not worse, and that it will force 

better accountability and collaboration and that we would 

. . . never jeopardize accreditation. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Dr. Buckingham says in his email, “Never in 

my 40 years of academic life have I seen academics being told 

that they could not speak out and debate issues.” 

 

The executive director of the school of public health of the 

University of Saskatchewan is speaking out because he and 

many of his colleagues throughout the university have major 

concerns with what is happening at the U of S. He says: 

 

Major changes with long-term ramifications have been 

planned behind closed doors, with little or no opportunity 

for faculty or students to respond. The major 

recommendations have been released in May when some 

of our faculty and most of our students are not even on 

campus. 

 

Again, this is incredibly concerning to me, and it ought to be of 

major concern to the Premier. And I agree with Dr. 

Buckingham that it’s important for political leaders to be asking 

probing questions and to ensure that due process is followed. So 

again my question to the Premier: is he concerned, and will he 

start asking probing questions that demand to be asked? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I think, 

importantly to the member’s premise of the question, we’ve 

been engaged in questions and conversation and dialogue for 

many months regarding TransformUS. This email comes from 

the board Chair. It says: 

 

School of Public Health. It is the program that receives 

accreditation and that is not influenced by a reporting 

structure, therefore the School of Public Health can control 

its own accreditation, no matter where it is housed. A 

comparative example is the School of Physical Therapy. 

While they may report administratively to the College of 

Medicine, there is no impact on accreditation. 

 

She goes on to say, “There is no reputational or accreditation 

risk to a change in the reporting structure and, as a result, no 

implications to the health service delivery in our province.” 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the school of public health at the 

U of S is an incredible success story. In five years, its enrolment 

has gone from 17 students to 238. It has the largest international 

student body of a school of public health in Canada, and in 

January of this year it became the first school of public health in 

North America to receive international accreditation for its 

master’s program. 

 

But Dr. Buckingham says, “Much of what has been built over 

the last five years is threatened by the TransformUS plan to 

place the School of Public Health under the College of 

Medicine.” Coming from the executive director who has built 

the school with his colleagues over the last five years and who 

is an expert on its accreditation, this is hugely concerning to me. 

My question to the Premier: is it a concern for him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government invests this year more than $350 

million in the University of Saskatchewan. Since assuming 

government, having the privilege of assuming government, 

we’ve seen an increase of 65 per cent to the University of 

Saskatchewan’s operating increase and operating budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that it’s not simply 

rhetoric, but reality. This government cares deeply about our 

students, about our researchers, and about our faculty. We have 

been engaged in dialogue, discussion, and discourse with the 

university administration and with stakeholders right across that 

campus. Mr. Speaker, again to quote the board Chair: “There is 

no reputational or accreditation risk to a change in the reporting 

structure and, as a result, no implications to the health service 

delivery in our province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to support the University of 

Saskatchewan. We’ll also continue to support the independence 

of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the long-term 

well-being and future of campus. Dr. Buckingham received an 

email at the end of April from university leadership saying: 

 

You are in an especially tough position and are subject to 

the expectation the president has of all leaders, that you 

will support TransformUS and the university’s messaging.  

 

My expectation is that there will be no mention in public 

or to government that changes to our internal structures 

will endanger anyone’s accreditation. 

 



5400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

So Dr. Buckingham, who’s worked with his colleagues, worked 

with staff, worked with students to build a highly reputable 

school of public health, Mr. Speaker, the first in North America 

to receive international accreditation, yet Dr. Buckingham is 

now being told to shut up and to not express concerns to public 

or to government about the likely consequences of the 

TransformUS process. I don’t think that’s acceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, I think that’s outrageous. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think that’s acceptable, or 

does he share my very deep concern about this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, once again the University of Saskatchewan is the 

best-funded medical doctoral university in the country per 

student. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 65 per cent increase in 

funding under this government. In fact this year alone, we will 

invest more than $350 million a year in the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I will reassure people is that we have been in 

dialogue and discourse and conversation, including questions, 

Mr. Speaker. And again to quote the president: “This will never 

jeopardize accreditation. That is the process.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raises a very 

interesting question. What we do know about the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, when 

they were in government, when it came to the University of 

Saskatchewan and the success of students, they didn’t make it 

any easier by having a 175 per cent increase in tuition, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s their track record, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

continue with record investments at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can go on and on if 

he wants but the question was whether or not this government 

thinks it’s acceptable that academics would be told to shut up 

and to not speak to the public or to government. 

 

This government had no problems expressing its concerns when 

things were going on at the University of Regina. So it’s 

baffling why it refuses to express any sort of concern with what 

is happening at the University of Saskatchewan, especially 

when well-respected academics like Dr. Eric Howe, like Dr. Jim 

Miller, and now Dr. Robert Buckingham are raising major 

concerns. 

 

And now we have confirmation, Mr. Speaker, that debate is 

being stifled and academics are being told to shut up and to not 

raise concerns. My question for the Premier: what will it take, 

what will it take for this Premier to express concern about what 

is going on at the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a track 

record of making sure that we’re investing in the University of 

Saskatchewan as well as $5.5 billion of investment right across 

our post-secondary sector. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we’re 

working to do is make sure that we are attuned to and making 

sure that we remain in dialogue with the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote from the board Chair, and that is 

regarding the issue of TransformUS and medical accreditation: 

“These changes simply reduce costs by combining 

administrative function, and that would be consistent with our 

expectations as a board.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I do have concerns about, Mr. Speaker, is 

when the member opposite begins to offer opinions about the 

operations of the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we 

all have a vested interest in the success of this institution. That’s 

why we’re investing record investments, a 65 per cent increase, 

Mr. Speaker. The questions are fair and valid; the premise that 

we are not concerned or engaged, simply incorrect. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Addicted Youth 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Chantaey Katchmar was 16 years 

old when she died from an overdose in July 2012. Her mother, 

Carla, has joined us today along with family and friends. 

Because of her tragic experience, Carla has had many thoughts 

to share with this government about how to prevent youth 

addictions and how to help young people who are struggling 

with addictions. 

 

Carla’s had a difficult time getting a meeting with the mental 

health and addictions commissioner, but I think she deserves to 

be heard. To the Minister of Health: will he meet with Carla 

today to hear her thoughts? And will he also ensure that Carla 

gets a one-on-one meeting with the mental health and 

addictions commissioner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I want to 

express my sympathy to the family in this case. Certainly I 

know personally the devastation that addictions can cause to a 

family and what that means for a family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say today that both myself, I believe the 

Minister of Social Services, will meet with the family if they so 

want to meet with us. As well, we will be putting in a call to the 

commissioner. We’ve often referred, after meetings in the last 

six months, in meeting with families and other providers 

regarding mental health and addictions, we’ve often referred 

them to meet with the commissioner because we do want that 

input. And certainly I would extend that offer as well and be 

contacting the commissioner about this case as well. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5401 

Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, our province’s urban parks 

conserve and protect the natural environment in the hearts of 

our cities, but this government is underfunding them. We’ve 

heard significant concerns about the implications of this 

underfunding on the Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon. 

 

The authority states that funding has declined from $33 to $9 

per capita, making it impossible to keep up with the needs of a 

rapidly growing city. Because of the funding crunch created by 

this government’s underfunding, the MVA [Meewasin Valley 

Authority] has had to make substantive cuts. To the minister: 

why is this government failing to properly fund our urban parks 

like the Meewasin Valley Authority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to the hon. member for the question. We discussed this 

during our estimates earlier this year and had a discussion about 

the funding of the seven urban parks in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As members will know, this government has a statutory 

responsibility for funding Meewasin Valley Authority in the 

city of Saskatoon. We’ve maintained that statutory funding on a 

consistent basis since coming to office, Mr. Speaker. As well, 

since 2010 this government has provided $1.9 million in 

additional capital funding for trails building through the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, which the hon. member never 

seems to refer to when talking about funding for the Meewasin 

Valley Authority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that the Act stipulates that statutory funding be 

reviewed every five years for these urban parks in the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That will take place later this 

year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Paul Hanley wrote in today’s 

StarPhoenix, and he said: 

 

If we want to maintain Meewasin, it is important that 

statutory funding be increased. The city and the university 

have implemented small funding increases this year, but 

the province has not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Hanley says, Meewasin boosts an incredible 

value to Saskatoon’s culture and conservation efforts. And the 

ROI [return on investment] is significant; the return to 

taxpayers has been 5 to 1. But why is this minister walking 

away, yet again, from another great return on investment for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I think, in response to the 

question from the hon. member, this is exactly the line of 

questioning we had during estimates. I would point out, in the 

same article that the hon. member refers to by Mr. Hanley, he 

also says: 

 

With just 18 per cent coming from local tax dollars [that 

being in Saskatoon property taxpayers, Mr. Speaker], the 

return to Saskatoon taxpayers has been five to one. 

 

I would remind the hon. member that since this government has 

taken office and introduced revenue sharing with the urban and 

rural municipalities in this province, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government has increased funding to the city of Saskatoon by 

159 per cent while maintaining our statutory funding 

responsibilities to the urban parks and massively increasing our 

investment in provincial parks in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

We stand by our record with the $1.9 million in additional 

funding to the Meewasin Valley Authority for the trail building 

in that particular area, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yet again, it sounds like 

this government is not ready for growth, it’s ready for more 

excuses. Over 1 million people per year visit the beautiful 

64-kilometre Meewasin trail system in Saskatoon. This is an 

incredibly valuable urban park. The CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the MVA, Lloyd Isaak, has expressed concerns that 

the MVA’s mandate, which is a provincial legislative mandate 

to conserve and protect the natural environment in the heart of 

Saskatoon, is stymied by this government’s refusal to step up to 

the plate.  

 

To the minister: why has this government flatlined funding for 

the Meewasin Valley Authority for the last four years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if anybody knows 

about flatlining funding to our urban parks in this province, it’s 

the NDP [New Democratic Party]. In the last seven years of 

their time in office, Mr. Speaker, they did not increase urban 

park funding by so much as a dime. In the last seven years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have increased funding to our urban parks, 

Meewasin Valley Authority in particular, by over 48 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how she equates that to flatlining. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we have increased revenue 

sharing to the city of Saskatoon, that particular municipality 

that benefits the most from the beauty of the Meewasin Valley 

trails, by some 159 per cent over the last seven years, Mr. 

Speaker. In addition to that, we have provided $1.9 million in 

capital funding for the construction of trails with the Meewasin 

Valley Authority, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s not flatlining. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Activities of Community-Based Organizations 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the cabinet 

committee on CBOs, community-based organizations, recently 

did a review of government processes related to agreements 



5402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

with CBOs and is now requiring CBOs to actually have policies 

and guidelines in place in regard to political activities. Could 

the Minister of Social Services outline if there were any specific 

problems that led to this requirement for CBOs to have political 

activity policies in place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very delighted to be 

able to talk about our community-based organizations and the 

great work that they do right across the province, whether it’s in 

the ministry that I’m responsible for or Health or the other 

human services ministries. Mr. Speaker, we can’t do what the 

community-based organizations do. On the ground, they have a 

chance to deal with people first hands-on and know their unique 

situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when it comes to community-based 

organizations, we’re always making sure that they can provide 

the information not only to us but for the citizens of the 

province when it comes to whatever program that we’ve been 

talking about. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the chance in the last 

number of years to meet with many of them. We have well over 

200 community-based organizations in the province. Just about 

$400 million is spent on those CBOs, and they do a great job 

when it comes to dealing with people with disability, our 

children in care, our seniors. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to tell 

you, as a province, we thank them wholeheartedly for the work 

that they do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister of Social 

Services agree that it would be highly inappropriate to ask a 

community-based organization to use its resources to support a 

political party or an individual candidate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not really sure where 

the member opposite is coming from. I know that CBOs have a 

task to do, that they are, that their work is for individuals on the 

ground. I’m not really sure if there’s a political purpose with 

that. 

 

But I assure you that when it comes to making sure that our 

vulnerable individuals are looked after, regardless of the party 

that is in government in this House, I think that we would 

ensure that their work is to look at everybody across the 

province. We won’t put a political hat on anybody. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. The Saskatoon Food 

Bank & Learning Centre receives provincial government 

funding, and it therefore follows very strict rules about how it 

uses that funding. And the food bank is also a charity, so it also 

has to follow strict rules that are laid out by the Canada 

Revenue Agency to not use its resources for political purposes. 

 

But we recently have learned that the Sask Party was involved 

in asking the Saskatoon Food Bank to use its resources to 

support the election campaign for the member of Saskatoon 

Sutherland by paying him during the campaign period. Wisely, 

the food bank refused to do that, but it is incredibly concerning 

that they were even asked to do that. To the minister: will she 

agree that an independent investigation is needed into this 

matter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, the 

allegation he has just brought up is something that of course we 

would be concerned about. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

we know the good work that they are doing. I’ve had an 

opportunity to meet with the CEO of the food bank here in 

Regina and talk about not only the work that they’re doing for 

people that are using the food bank but the added opportunities 

to talk about skills and training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are individuals on both sides of the House — 

but I can tell you specifically on this side of the House — that 

are really concerned about it and have a passion for ensuring 

that work happens for our vulnerable individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we all have friends on one side of the 

. . . In various organizations, the community-based 

organizations that we rely on, this government, are lots of times 

are not only our friends but they are our family members, and 

we have the opportunity to work with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of questions that I’m sure the 

member opposite would like to ask, from using everything as a 

political football, as he normally does. But my question to him 

is making sure that the services that are provided for people that 

are vulnerable are something that they are providing. That’s my 

goal, and it’s the goal of every member on this side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the question when it 

speaks to transparency and accountability and ethics of this 

House is, does she think that this deserves or warrants an 

investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — We’re going to take notice of that 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Health Care and the Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — In the basic criteria for a contract with John 

Black, the $40 million US-based [United States] consultant, 

requires the development and implementation of a policy for 

anchor draggers. It’s right on his website, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

listed as a requirement for any organization with whom John 

Black has a contract. To the minister: what is an anchor 

dragger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5403 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Many people would assume that that would be an NDP 

government, but that’s not the case in this respect. I know the 

members opposite have brought up a number of things in 

relation to the John Black contract and what John Black asked 

for in terms of what’s the information on his website. We’ve 

been able to, I think, talk publicly and talk with the members 

opposite that a number of the things that they’ve brought up in 

terms of the JBA [John Black and Associates] contract actually 

haven’t taken place here in Saskatchewan. With respect to this, 

I’m not aware that this term is used in our contract or has ever 

been used in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — We know that one of the biggest problems 

with the Premier’s lean pet project is the fact that many health 

care workers are afraid to speak out because of the culture of 

intimidation over lean, and that is because this government is 

treating them like anchor draggers. In his book, John Black says 

dealing with anchor draggers is an essential step for 

implementing lean. It’s number 11 of the 13 steps that John 

Black says are essential to lean implementation. He writes: 

 

Deal with excess people at the onset. Devise a growth 

strategy, and remove the anchor-draggers and managers 

who won’t give new ideas a fair trial. Recognize the early 

leaders who can change others. 

 

To the minister: how can he justify this kind of treatment of our 

hard-working and dedicated health care professionals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I can certainly talk to our growth strategy within the 

Ministry of Health and the entire health care system: for the 

first time ever, Mr. Speaker, 11,000 RNs [registered nurse] 

licensed to work in the province — the first time we’ve ever in 

fact been over 10,000, Mr. Speaker, well over 1,000 under this 

term of this government being in office — 423 more physicians 

practising in Saskatchewan. That’s about the Saskatchewan 

growth plan when it comes to health care, a 24 per cent increase 

in just seven years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked a lot about some of the work, 

the good work that lean has accomplished. This was just put out 

a week ago by Sunrise Health Region with respect to mental 

health services, which I think are important. Some of the work 

of lean, this has been the results: they reduced patient treatment 

appointment wait-lists from over 100 in the months prior to lean 

being implemented down to 18 and now down to zero, a 

wait-list of zero. They reduced quality defects by 58 per cent in 

notes being transcribed. These are just two examples, and there 

are much, much more examples of where lean is being effective 

in the health care system. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. The minister may proceed to 

move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

[14:30] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

134, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 



5404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

134, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 and 

that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration Act, 2014 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has requested 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you it gives me great pleasure to introduce a 

school group from my hometown of Kelvington. We have 17 

grade 4 students from the Robert Melrose Elementary School in 

Kelvington that have driven here today. I know it’s a two and 

three-quarter hour drive and I’m really delighted to see you here 

today. 

 

With them is their teachers, Monique Gollings and Jessica 

Welder, and we have parent chaperones Jelaine Donald, Ken 

Radke, Sara McChesney, David Mennie, Kelly Onyskiw, Dion 

Patenaude, Kelsey Robinson, Denita Taniskishayinew, Tracey 

Ziola, and Troy Lockie. I’m going to be really delighted to meet 

with you in a few minutes and answer any questions you may 

have. And welcome to your legislature. I’m asking all my 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5405 

colleagues to join with me and asking them to welcome you to 

your legislature here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 

for leave to move a motion for an address to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion regarding the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner. No, introductions? Okay, to do introductions. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Me? I didn’t hear what you said. 

Well thank you, Mr. Government House Leader, for giving me 

the opportunity to introduce guests. 

 

We have seated in the Speaker’s gallery Mr. Ron Kruzeniski 

and his wife, Yvonne, and unseen by members is his second 

best friend, Dane. Mr. Kruzeniski is the recommendation of the 

Board of Internal Economy to the appointment of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. I would ask all 

members to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 

for leave to move a motion for an address to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave for a motion of address to the Lieutenant Governor, which 

is what I was expecting earlier. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council appoint Mr. Ronald J. Kruzeniski, 

Q.C., S.V.M., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as Information and Privacy Commissioner 

pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council appoint Mr. Ronald J. Kruzeniski, 

Q.C., S.V.M., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as Information and Privacy Commissioner 

pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 347 through 352. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 347 through 352. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

order the answers to questions 353 through 356. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 353 through 356. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 357 through 401. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 357 through 401. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Election Amendment 

Act, 2014. Mr. Speaker, this bill will implement a series of 

amendments proposed by the Chief Electoral Officer that have 

been agreed to by the members of this Assembly. 

 

These amendments will do the following, Mr. Speaker: they 

will establish a permanent voters registry in Saskatchewan and 

remove the requirement for door-to-door enumeration 

subsequent to the next provincial election. It will provide for 

homebound voting. It will allow qualified voters to vote at 



5406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

advance polls. 

 

It will remove the requirement for a voter who is not on the 

voters list to swear a statutory declaration in addition to 

completing a registration form and showing photo 

identification. It will permit a voter to deposit their own ballot. 

 

It will allow the Chief Electoral Officer to waive the 

requirement to set up a polling place in remote locations with 

25 or fewer voters, and instead use mail-in ballots provided by 

the returning officer in that area. It will ban the use but not 

possession of cameras and phones in polling places. 

 

It will remove the requirement for election officers to 

necessarily be resident in the constituency in which they are to 

serve. It will remove the RO’s [returning officer] duty to 

transport candidate scrutineers. 

 

It will provide that the term of the returning officer will expire 

six months after the return of the writ for a general election, 

subject to reappointment by the Chief Electoral Officer. And it 

will provide that election clerks be appointed by the CEO 

[Chief Electoral Officer] rather than by the returning officers 

and be made subject to term limits like those of a returning 

officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again with the support of the opposition members, 

The Election Amendment Act, 2014 will also provide for 

amendments to improve voter access for voters with disability, 

including defining a friend to include the spouse, child, or other 

relative of the voter in order to broaden the pool of who may 

assist the voter with a disability. 

 

It will allow a polling place to be held in the location with a 

liquor licence. Often such a location provides the best voter 

access in a particular community. 

 

It will broaden the availability of the voter assistance provisions 

to apply to any voter who has a disability that significantly 

restricts the ability of the voter to vote. And it will allow an 

individual to act as a friend to assist two voters and provide that 

a deputy returning officer may use a sign language interpreter to 

translate any oath or declaration and to ask any question that the 

deputy returning officer is required to put to the voter and to 

translate the voter’s answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will also adopt the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada’s recommendation that military voters be 

provided special ordinary resident recognition similar to that 

provided for students so that active members of the military 

retain their residence when they are out of the province or are 

immediately recognized as ordinarily resident when serving in 

Saskatchewan. We in this Assembly recognize the sacrifice that 

our military makes to protect our democracy and we are proud 

to be the first jurisdiction in Canada to make these amendments 

to better facilitate their ability to participate in that democracy 

by voting in Saskatchewan elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Election Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 139, The Election Amendment Act, 2014. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join debate on Bill No. 139, The Election 

Amendment Act. 

 

I guess off the top, I’d like to say thanks in a couple of 

instances, Mr. Speaker. As the minister has outlined quite ably, 

there are a number of points of origin for the different 

components of this legislation. Certainly the work here is very 

much informed by good advice on the part of our Chief 

Electoral Officer. It’s been informed by work ushering forth 

from the Human Rights Commission and certainly from the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada. And we thank those 

institutions for the work that we see reflected here today. 

 

I also want to thank the minister and I want to thank the 

Government House Leader for taking great, going to great 

lengths to ensure that the opposition was well consulted on the 

items considered here today and that that consultation was 

fulsome and ongoing. And I think when you can have that 

co-operation in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, it can be 

productive and lead to a good result for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So in terms of the actual items in the legislation, in terms of the 

provisions made for the permanent voters registry, I’d note that 

this is a mechanism that has been called for with bipartisan 

support in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, since at least 2004. And 

the way that it is proceeding now will enable Elections 

Saskatchewan to take advantage of enumeration work that is 

being conducted in preparation for the federal election and will 

see us go into that next election with that permanent voter 

registry. 

 

I’m really glad to see the provisions in this as regards 

homebound voters, as regards improvements for voters with 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker, and I think those are ones that again 

make a lot of sense. And we look forward to having a greater 

discussion of the particulars of them in committee in the not too 

distant future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in the main, I think this is a good piece of legislation. And 

certainly this is something that has received considerable 

scrutiny from the official opposition and that we’re glad to see 

good ideas ushering forth from the Chief Electoral Officer, 

from bodies like the Uniform Law Conference, and bodies like 

the Human Rights Commission being presented here today. 

 

And I think this will improve the access available at our polls, 

not just for folks with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, but clarifying 

various procedures around the appointment of election officials 

and the establishment of polling places, but also the provision 

that is made, again responding to the Uniform Law Conference, 

for those men and women that serve in uniform so that their 

access to the ballot box, to this most fundamental aspect of our 

democracy that they indeed are putting their lives on the line to 

defend, that that access will be a better . . . [inaudible] . . . for 

them, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to see that step being taken here. 

 

So we look forward to the broader discussion in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the particulars presented here. But again 



May 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5407 

we thank the different sources that have seen this work go 

forward, and again I would thank my colleague, the 

Government House Leader for his work in ensuring that the 

opposition had opportunity to have input for this, and the 

Minister of Justice as well. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

conclude my remarks and enable this piece of legislation to 

move on to committee. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 139, The Election Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 139, The Election Amendment Act, 2014 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — Okay. I call the committee to order. The 

business before the committee are resolutions for final supply. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I’ll move directly to resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, the sum of $57,241,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 1: 

 

Resolved that making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on the account of certain charges and expenses for 

public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2014, 

the sum of $57,241,000 be granted out of the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 

resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2015, the sum of $11,453,418,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2015, the sum of $11,453,418,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I move that the committee rise and that the Chair report 

that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave 

to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



5408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2014 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. In accordance with rule 32(1)(d), 

the minister shall now move first reading of the Appropriation 

bill. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 140 — The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 140, 

The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 1) be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 140, The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 1) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, by leave and under rule 

32(1)(e), I move that the bill be now read a second and third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 140, The Appropriation Act, 2014 be now read a 

second and third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:53.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5394 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5394 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5394 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5394 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5405 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5394 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5395 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5395 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5395 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5395 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5395 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5396 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5396 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon School Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5396 

 Hopes for a Peaceful Resolution in Ukraine 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5396 

 Regina Runner Coordinates Royal Road Race 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5397 

 Yorkton Youth Honorary Chair of Gutsy Walk 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5397 

 Prince Albert Tourism Leader Receives Lifetime Achievement Award 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5397 

 Saskatchewan Athlete in Training for Paralympics 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5397 

 Remote Presence Technology Pilot Project 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5398 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5398 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5398 

 Support for Addicted Youth 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5400 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5400 

 Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

 Activities of Community-Based Organizations 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

 Health Care and the Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5403 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5403 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5403 

 Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

 Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

 



 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5405 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5405 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5405 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5406 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5407 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5407 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5407 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 140 — The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 1) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5408 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


