




















































Hansard: November 12, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 11A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5797 

 November 12, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce three guests that are seated in 

your gallery. Joining us today are Bill and Maureen Preston as 

well as Dr. Mike Moser. They are here to hear first reading of 

The Human Tissue Gift Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill is a lawyer and Maureen works as an RN 

[registered nurse] on the transplant ward where renal patients 

are admitted. And a number of years ago, Maureen donated a 

kidney to her husband. Mr. Speaker, Dr. Moser is one of our 

kidney transplant surgeons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be making changes to legislation 

that we certainly hope will establish standards, practices, and 

procedures that will improve access to transplantations here in 

the province. I’m glad that the three of them could be with us 

here today to hear the introduction and first reading of the bill, 

and I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the minister in welcoming Bill and Maureen Preston 

and Dr. Mike Moser to their Legislative Assembly here today. 

 

We’re eager and interested to see and hear first reading of this 

bill as well. There can always be improvements. Many of us 

know people who’ve had to go through transplants or have been 

on the list waiting for various transplants, Mr. Speaker, so we 

look forward to hearing what this bill is about and how it will 

improve services for people here in Saskatchewan. So with that, 

I’d ask my colleagues to join me and the minister as well in 

welcoming these guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I am pleased to welcome to the Assembly 

representatives and supporters from Kate’s Place and the 

Salvation Army who have graciously agreed to join us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Kate’s Place is a residence operated by the 

Salvation Army that provides safe, stable, and supportive 

housing for women participating in the drug treatment court. In 

your gallery today it’s my pleasure to introduce Major Mike 

Hoeft, area commander of the Salvation Army — you can give 

us a wave; thanks, Mike — Audra Isaac, executive director of 

the Salvation Army; Amanda Carlson, managing director of 

Kate’s Place; Judie Birns, manager of the drug treatment court; 

Isabelle Morris who is a graduate and current tenant of Kate’s 

Place; and Susan who is also a graduate and former tenant of 

Kate’s Place. 

 

I’d also like to recognize Pat Thiele, acting executive director of 

the community justice division of the Ministry of Justice who is 

also seated in your gallery. Pat and his team have worked very 

closely with Kate’s Place and the Salvation Army in seeing this 

move forward, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very, very proud of their 

work. 

 

So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming our guests 

to the legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the minister in welcoming the guests here today. 

It’s a very important announcement, a good news 

announcement. So folks from Kate’s Place, welcome to your 

legislature. We’re glad this is moving forward. To the Salvation 

Army for the leadership in this and all the folks that made it 

possible, thank you very much from the opposition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce Bruce 

Farrer and his wife, Cathy, who are joined today by a number of 

their family members. If Mr. Farrer would give us a wave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bruce Farrer is a teacher. He has a long and 

storied career. You are going to hear a bit more about one of his 

stories coming up shortly, Mr. Speaker, but I wanted to take this 

opportunity to recognize Mr. Farrer for his commitment to 

education in Saskatchewan. He has spent much of his 53-year 

career at Bert Fox Community High School in Fort Qu’Appelle. 

He’s also spent time teaching in on-reserve schools, and he 

continues to teach in classrooms today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is full of passionate and dedicated 

teachers and Mr. Farrer is certainly no exception. I would like 

to ask all members to join me in welcoming him and his family 

to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and also advise that he plays 

bridge with the mother of the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. I don’t know whether he taught the member 

from Indian Head-Milestone. If he did, there’s probably some 

work continuing that needs to be done. I won’t go any further 

down that road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’d also like to join with the Minister of Health in 

recognizing Bill and Maureen Preston. Bill Preston is a lawyer 

from Saskatoon where I practise as well. I had a number of files 

with him, both on the same side and on the opposite side over 

the years, a person who is a great practitioner, a very skilful 

lawyer, a good person. He’s also one of the senior partners in 

the law firm that has employed my wife for the last 28 years. 

And we’ve got 28 years of cheques that have never bounced, so 

keep up the good work. And we’d like to ask members to join 

all of these people today. 

 



5798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the Minister of Education as opposition 

Education critic and welcome Mr. Bruce Farrer and Cathy 

Farrer to their Assembly. It’s an honour to recognize somebody 

who’s given so much to their province. Fifty-three years of 

service and excellence in teaching is something incredibly 

special, and that impact that’ll have been left in the lives of so 

many is something that can never be in fact measured and 

certainly can’t be taken away. So certainly the opposition is 

thankful for your leadership in education in our province. 

Certainly Bert Fox is an incredibly special school doing very 

important work, and it’s our pleasure to welcome you to your 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 

we know that in September this year this government walked 

away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 

project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 

control of and then rent the units at full market price. I’d like to 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions as it relates to the unacceptable safety issues 

on Dewdney Avenue relating to heavy-haul truck traffic and the 

failure of this government to properly plan to ensure safety for 

our residents and users along Dewdney Avenue. And this 

petition calls for immediate action by this government to ensure 

safety for all. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina, including directly from Dewdney Avenue. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

pleased to stand in my place to present a petition on housing. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To cause the provincial government to restore the 

rent-to-own option for responsible renters of the social 

housing program and to reinstate the remote housing 

program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 

to present a petition that’s condemning this government’s 

dangerous smart meter program. And the individuals who 

signed this petition want to bring to the attention of the 

Assembly the following: 

 

Whereas the government knew about major safety 

concerns related to its smart meter project; whereas the 

government ignored those safety concerns and plowed 

ahead with its program; whereas the safety of 

Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk; we, in 

the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request that 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

take responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 

information about safety concerns with its smart meter 

program, including through the immediate resignation of 

the Minister Responsible for SaskPower and a fully 

independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 

that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Company Contributes to Historic 

Space Mission 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 

moment today to recognize the contributions of an innovative 

Saskatchewan company to an important space mission. 

Saskatoon’s SED Systems is a Canadian company that’s 

playing a big role in the European Space Agency’s Rosetta 

mission. The Rosetta mission is the first project in history to 

rendezvous with a comet. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5799 

The roots of SED came in 1965 when the University of 

Saskatchewan’s Institute of Space and Atmospheric Studies 

announced the formation of a new group within its 

organization. It was called the space engineering division. Its 

mandate was to design and build rocket instrumentation for 

upper atmospheric studies. With Dr. Alex Kavadas as director, 

one engineer, and three technicians, the company began its 

journey to the global solution provider that it is today. 

 

SED Systems has been involved in the Rosetta project since 

2001 when they, with only 250 employees at the time, won the 

contract to build the first ground station. There are currently 

three Saskatchewan-built ground stations in Australia, Spain, 

and Argentina. 

 

Earlier today, after a 6.4-billion-kilometre journey that began a 

decade ago, the 220-pound robot probe successfully landed on 

the comet, which is going 135 000 kilometres per hour. This is 

the first historic landing on a comet after descending from a 

mother ship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s incredibly exciting that a Saskatoon-based 

company is playing such an important role in this mission. I ask 

all members to join me in recognizing the remarkable 

accomplishments and the Saskatchewan spirit of the team at 

SED Systems. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Distinguished Police Officer Retires 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to rise today 

and recognize a good friend, Sergeant Ian Skinner, who has 

retired from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police after 37 years 

of service. I first met Ian in 2001 when he was promoted to 

corporal and worked in the Rosetown detachment. I was 

immediately struck by his professionalism and commitment to 

the safety of our community. 

 

Ian was born in Ontario and began his career in 1977 in Ottawa, 

serving on Parliament Hill and then in the executive/diplomatic 

protection station. Ian was assigned to Saskatchewan in 1992 

and served the communities of Rosetown, Langenburg, 

Saskatoon, and Yorkton. It was great to welcome Ian back to 

Rosetown in 2011 when he became the commanding officer of 

the Rosetown detachment. 

 

He is also a dedicated member of our community, and perhaps 

one of his more notable local achievements occurred earlier this 

year when he refereed the longest hockey game ever played in 

Saskatchewan history. The Midget A North Saskatchewan 

Female Hockey League game went into eight overtime periods 

and lasted almost 200 minutes, a daunting task for the young 

players, let alone a middle-aged guy like Ian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recent events in our nation’s capital have 

reminded us all how thankful we are to people like Ian who 

dedicate themselves to protecting Canadian people each and 

every day. I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Sergeant Ian Skinner for an outstanding career with the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and thank him for making 

our province not only a great place to be but a safe place to be. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Availability of Midwifery Services 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 

pleasure to attend the 14th annual conference of the Canadian 

Association of Midwives. Midwifery is an important and 

established profession in our country, and other provinces are 

making great strides to advance and promote midwifery. 

 

Unfortunately for women here in Saskatchewan, this 

government has been dragging its feet, and progress in building 

midwifery services has been slow. Most women in 

Saskatchewan are not able to choose midwifery because there 

just aren’t enough midwives working in our province. The 

government could do something about this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Services are only available in three of our province’s 13 health 

regions. Women in Saskatoon, Regina, and the Cypress Hills 

area have very limited access with a total of 15 midwives in our 

whole province. Where it is available, wait-lists are long and 

many women are turned away. This government got to proclaim 

The Midwifery Act, building on the work that had been 

happening since the previous government committed to funding 

it in the 2005-06 budget, but it has not made midwifery or 

women a priority. 

 

I hope that all members will join me in congratulating the CAM 

[Canadian Association of Midwives] on their successful 

convention and will continue to fight for access for all 

Saskatchewan women who want to choose midwifery care. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Teacher Achieves Decades of Student Engagement 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

recently embarked on the first ever student-first consultation. 

One of the key pieces heard through that consultation is that 

student engagement is essential to student success. Today I 

stand to celebrate someone who has engaged his students for 

decades, Mr. Speaker, and that person is Fort Qu’Appelle’s 

Bruce Farrer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Farrer started teaching in 1961; his annual 

salary, $3,200. And he taught in a one-room rural school. The 

times have certainly changed, Mr. Speaker, but Mr. Farrer’s 

passion for education certainly hasn’t. For a number of years, 

Mr. Farrer has given his students a unique assignment: write a 

letter to your future self. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, it was his 1994 English class’s turn to 

receive the letters that they had written to themselves. One of 

those recipients was Scott Fulton who’s now a teacher himself. 

He said of the experience, and I quote, “I was just feeling 

honoured and grateful. I’m amazed and inspired at the work of 



5800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

Mr. Farrer.” And, Mr. Speaker, he’s not the only one. 

 

I’ve been in many classrooms throughout my career, Mr. 

Speaker, and I know that good teachers find a way to engage 

their students. Mr. Farrer has not only engaged his students, but 

he’s engaged people from across this country. He’s a living 

example of why Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada to 

live. Simply put, it’s the people. I thank Mr. Farrer for his 

contributions to education in our province throughout the years 

and in the years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Working Together to Support At-Risk Mothers 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Six months ago I 

stood in this House to tell you about Sweet Dreams, a supported 

living home for at-risk single moms in Saskatoon. Our 

government is proud to report that Sweet Dreams is already 

helping families stay together and providing moms with 

mentoring they need to continue them on the path towards 

success and well-being. 

 

Sweet Dreams has already had one mom with three children 

move into independent living. The mom is continuing her 

education and is doing motivational speaking for Aboriginal 

women. There are also five other moms living in the home with 

their six children. Mr. Speaker, Sweet Dreams will also have a 

mom expecting a baby soon transition into Sweet Dreams. This 

is all very exciting for our government and the people of our 

province because this means that moms and their children are 

getting the support they need to help them stay together. We are 

able to help moms without taking their children into care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this progress is made possible thanks to the great 

partnership between Conexus Credit Union, Wally and Colleen 

Mah, and Egadz. The commitment made by our government 

was a trial of a social impact bond, the first funding model of its 

kind in Canada. And it’s now a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Don Meikle of Egadz from Saskatoon can attest to 

the positive work that’s being done. He says, and I quote, “The 

innovation and commitment of the community at large has 

attracted a great deal of positive attention on the way we are 

working together to provide moms the opportunity to care for 

their children with lessening degrees of support into the future.” 

 

Our government believes in the social conscience of our 

citizens. This is one of the ways we are working together to 

help keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hilltops Win Fourth Junior Football Title in Five Years 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I am pleased to rise in the House today to announce 

the victory of the Saskatoon Hilltops over the Langley Rams 

this past Saturday. The Hilltops won 39 to 14 to secure the win 

in the second Canadian Bowl championship matchup between 

these two teams in the last three years. The Hilltops have now 

secured their unprecedented 17th Canadian Junior Football 

League title and the fourth in five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the great coverage and big hits led to five first half 

turnovers created by the defence. These great plays really set 

the tempo for what would end up becoming a dominating 

performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not to be outdone by their defence, the Hilltops 

offence made a few highlight-worthy plays in their own right. 

Quarterback Jared Andreychuk scored on a 14-yard keeper, 

followed by running back Logan Fischer breaking two tackles 

to find the end zone from 7 yards out. Receiver Evan 

Turkington added to the Hilltops’ advantage with two 

touchdowns. He finished the game with five catches for 131 

yards. Mr. Speaker, the strong lead by the Hilltops in the first 

half ensured them the victory. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Saskatoon 

Hilltops in their win over the Langley Rams and securing yet 

another Canadian Bowl championship. I’d also like to thank 

head coach Tom Sargeant and his entre coaching staff, the 

Hilltops executive, and fans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Shelter for Vulnerable Citizens 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 

House today to talk about how we can all work together to save 

the lives of our most vulnerable citizens during the coldest 

months of the year. As our temperatures in our province 

plummet, our government, along with our community partners, 

want to make sure that people know what to do if they see 

someone in need of a warm place to sleep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community and government partners in 

Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert have developed 

cold-weather strategies and have coordinated measures to 

support those in need of shelter. Although these supports are in 

place, we still ask Saskatchewan people to look out for those 

without shelter so that they can get the help they need, when 

they need it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals who witness someone in the need of 

help in Regina can contact Mobile Crisis Services. For those in 

Saskatoon, the Salvation Army and Saskatoon Lighthouse can 

be contacted for after-hours emergency services and referrals. 

In other communities across the province, individuals are asked 

to contact their nearest Ministry of Social Services centre. As 

always, if someone witnesses someone who’s in immediate 

danger, please call 911. 

 

The loss of one life is one loss too many. Mr. Speaker, let’s 

keep Saskatchewan strong by working together to make sure 

nobody in our province is without a warm place to sleep. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5801 

Health Quality Council and the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government’s 

$40 million American lean consultant didn’t like the 

communications branch at the Ministry of Health, so this 

government, Mr. Speaker, scurried to turn the Health Quality 

Council into the province-wide provincial kaizen promotion 

office. And it did so, Mr. Speaker, on an incredibly tight 

timeline. On February 1st, 2013, the proposal for such a move 

was circulated amongst senior leaders. But just 12 days later, 

Mr. Speaker — not even two weeks — the Health Quality 

Council announced that it would become the provincial kaizen 

promotion office on April 1st. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Why did the 

government move so quickly to make the Health Quality 

Council the main cheerleader for its lean pet project? What was 

the rush? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the Health Quality Council’s role had evolved over 

a number of years to focus not only on reporting but also 

helping all of the health sector in the system work on quality 

improvement initiatives, this was something that, in the words 

of the board Chair, wasn’t forced on them, that they took on this 

role eagerly on behalf of the health care system. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members of the House that 

this was a decision of the Health Quality Council that was made 

by the board, unanimously by the board of directors of the 

Health Quality Council, to take on this work. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think it’s important to also know that at that time over half of 

the board members of the Health Quality Council were 

appointees under the former government, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, clearly not the cheerleaders of 

this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, internal emails show that there is 

a tremendous amount of confusion and frustration, Mr. Speaker, 

in the Ministry of Health as this government sought to appease 

and sought to please John Black. It’s incredibly unfortunate, 

Mr. Speaker, that this Premier and this Minister of Health did 

not do the proper consultation with stakeholders to ensure this 

was the right decision, Mr. Speaker. And they did not properly 

consult with people. They did not think this decision through. 

 

And it’s appalling, Mr. Speaker, that this government’s $40 

million American lean consultant was put in a place where he 

could call the shots. But it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, given 

the standing of this toxic consultant, the standing that has been 

given to him by this government. An internal org chart, Mr. 

Speaker, shows that this government’s $40 million American 

lean consultant is at the same level as the deputy minister of 

Health.  

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does he really think 

that that is an appropriate placement for such a toxic 

consultant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can say very clearly that 

John Black or John Black and Associates, the firm that we’ve 

contracted with, is not on the same level in terms of decision 

making, in terms of providing advice to me as the minister, in 

terms of providing the functions of the permanent head of the 

Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker. That is clearly not the case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an internal org chart 

produced, Mr. Speaker — not by the opposition but by 

government, by the Health Quality Council, Mr. Speaker — 

that shows John Black is up at the top of the org chart. And they 

should be able to answer, Mr. Speaker. This is the government, 

the Premier that has placed such faith in John Black, such blind 

faith in John Black, Mr. Speaker. They should be able to stand 

and say whether or not he should be there calling the shots. 

 

It’s the $40 million consultant, Mr. Speaker, that tattles on 

leaders who dare question John Black’s authority, the one that 

senior leaders say, Mr. Speaker, lacks respect. So it’s incredibly 

concerning that he’s up at the top of the chart, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s also concerning, Mr. Speaker, that John Black is there, 

lording over the Health Quality Council, the Health Quality 

Council that is supposed to be an agency that is independent 

and an agency that provides independent analysis and evidence 

for Saskatchewan people. And I think that speaks volumes, Mr. 

Speaker, about the John Black version of lean that this 

government has been chugging now for months and months. 

And they laugh. They scoff. But they know, Mr. Speaker, that 

they placed this individual as the chief cheerleader for its lean 

pet project. I have huge problems with the Health Quality 

Council, Mr. Speaker, delivering a program and also 

responsible for evaluating its effectiveness. 

 

My question to the Premier: we know he is hugely concerned 

about optics, Mr. Speaker, so will he at least admit in this 

situation that there is at least the appearance of a huge conflict 

of interest in the role of the Health Quality Council, that it is a 

glaring conflict here? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

quote from the strategic plan of the Health Quality Council. 

And I’ll quote: 

 

Although measurement is important, Health Quality 

Council has gone beyond issuing reports. Over the past 

four years, we have set out a substantial program of 

quality improvement activities to ensure that problems 

identified in our reports would be followed up by concrete 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this strategic plan was adopted and approved May 

2007 under the former government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this shows that there has been a role of the Health Quality 

Council to ensure that there are measurements but also that they 

play an active lead role in quality improvement. That’s what’s 

continuing under this government. That’s what was put out by 



5802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

the former government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is this government that has 

chugged the Kool-Aid coming from John Black. It’s this 

government, Mr. Speaker, that has meddled with the role of the 

Health Quality Council, and it’s this government, Mr. Speaker, 

that should fire John Black. 

 

John Black was upset, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t like the Ministry 

of Health’s communication. So he threw a fit, Mr. Speaker, and 

he ensured that the communications and the promotion were 

moved from the ministry over to the Health Quality Council. He 

wasn’t happy, Mr. Speaker, that there were only five staff in the 

ministry responsible for lean promotion, so he made the Health 

Quality Council devote over 22 of its full-time staff to promote 

lean, a whopping 350 per cent increase in the full-time staff 

who were devoted to lean promotion here in the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t enough for the toxic John Black 

in his approach to health care here in the province. Internal 

emails from June of this year show that John Black was upset 

again. And this time, Mr. Speaker, he was upset because of a 

job title change within the Health Quality Council. That’s how 

meddling and how toxic his role is in this. 

 

To the Premier: on what planet, Mr. Speaker, on what planet 

does it make sense for John Black to have control over job titles 

at the Health Quality Council? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll go on to 

quote from a strategic report that talks about the work of the 

Health Quality Council, working on metrics, working on 

reporting, but also moving into quality improvements. So this is 

May of 2007. Since 2003, so between 2003 and 2007, Health 

Quality Council has provided basic quality improvement 

training to over 1,400 individuals and supported some 135 

quality improvement teams across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made the decision based on some work that 

had been done in Five Hills Health Region, some work done 

under this government after 2008 in quality improvement, and 

some of the work using lean methodology. We felt that it was 

prudent to invest further into the health care system to deploy 

lean methodology across the entire health care system and work 

with the Health Quality Council, as had been approved in May 

of 2007 in terms of their evolving role. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council itself 

admits that its bread-and-butter work, the work that it is 

legislatively mandated to do, is being put on the back burner, is 

taking second place, Mr. Speaker, to the lean pet project and the 

cheerleading role that has been assigned by that Premier and 

that Health minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On June 13th of this year, the Vice-Chair of the Health Quality 

Council wrote a lengthy email in which he talked about, Mr. 

Speaker, John Black not acting like how a consultant should 

act. He talked about the need — get this, Mr. Speaker — for a 

reset on the overall lean strategy. And this is what he said: 

“Somehow we need to take a much more active role in defining 

the strategy as opposed to allowing JBA to dictate it to us.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is so clear this project has gone off the rails. 

This version, Mr. Speaker, of John Black’s lean is not working 

for Saskatchewan, and everyone knows it. And there’s a lot of 

frustration, Mr. Speaker, with the elevated role that this 

government has placed John Black in. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that it was a rushed 

decision to have the Health Quality Council to become the lead 

cheerleader for its lean pet project, and will it finally put an end 

to allowing John Black to dictate things in our health care 

system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to check the 

record just so I get this right. But did the Leader of the 

Opposition quote an internal document, a memo or a letter from 

the Deputy Chair, the Vice-Chair of the Health Quality Council 

that says that the Health Quality Council should have more 

control over determining on how lean is implemented in the 

health care system, something that I think I’m not sure if the 

Leader of the Opposition is for or against that now, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the Health Quality Council being involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made changes to the way the contract’s 

going to be developed, the way that it’s going to end in terms of 

tailoring this to Saskatchewan’s need, but certainly this 

evolution in the role of the Health Quality Council is not new. 

In fact it had not even started under this government. It had 

started with the strategic plan of 2007 under the members 

opposite, and they know that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, everyone in Saskatchewan knows 

that the government’s lean pet project, with its John Black 

version of lean, has gone off the rails, Mr. Speaker. They have 

put far too much trust in John Black. They’ve given him far too 

much power. They have deviated, allowed the HQC [Health 

Quality Council] to deviate from its main role, Mr. Speaker. 

Everyone understands that, Mr. Speaker, except this Premier 

and this Health minister.  

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit his government has 

lost its way with the John Black version of lean? Will he stand 

today and admit that they need to end the contract with John 

Black? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are ending the contract with John Black and 

Associates in June of next year, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said that 

publicly. We have already announced that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we’re not going to do is we’re not going to change our 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5803 

practices and lose the momentum that we’re seeing when we 

can report, Mr. Speaker, to the people of this province that 

RUH’s [Royal University Hospital] emergency department 

times, from arrival in the door to treatment, was formerly 1 hour 

53 minutes on average. Now it is approximately 57 minutes, 

thanks to a lean RPIW [rapid process improvement workshop]. 

 

So we’re not going to change that. We’re not going to change 

the momentum that we’re seeing in the health care system. We 

are going to make adjustments. We are going to tailor it to 

Saskatchewan’s needs. And we’re going to make sure that we 

can contain this, that we can continue with this after the JBA 

[John Black and Associates] contract ends, Mr. Speaker. But 

this is work that we’re going to continue on with. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Replacement of Smart Meters 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — On Friday a smart meter on the side of 

Joan Riemer’s home here in Regina started on fire. Joan said 

she woke up to an exploding sound, looked out her bedroom 

window, and saw flames. The burning meter started her 

barbecue cover on fire, which could have quickly spread to the 

propane tank. 

 

Thankfully Joan was home and was able to deal with the fire 

immediately. But it’s shameful that this government has failed 

to contact all Saskatchewan families that have had these 

fire-prone smart meters strapped to their homes to tell them 

how dangerous these meters are and to ensure measures are 

taken in order to minimize damage and save lives if meters start 

on fire. To the Premier: will he commit to do that today? And 

does he believe it’s safe for families, for babies, for kids, for 

parents, for seniors, to lay their heads down tonight on the wall 

just outside of a smart meter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed 

SaskPower officials informed the public that there was another 

meter failure on Friday of last week. SaskPower is working as 

quickly as possible and as quickly as meters can be delivered 

from the current supplier to reinstall these meters as quickly as 

possible. 

 

Obviously it was a very unfortunate incident, Mr. Speaker. We 

would certainly, the Government of Saskatchewan would want 

. . . And SaskPower is removing those meters as quickly as 

possible, at a rate of approximately 5,000 per week and is 

currently ahead of schedule with respect to these meters. A very 

unfortunate incident that SaskPower officials are dealing with. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question wasn’t answered. It was 

put to the Premier. The question to the Premier was, what steps 

is he taking to make sure he’s mitigating risk? And does he 

believe it’s safe for families — for babies, for parents, for 

children, for seniors — to be laying their heads down tonight on 

the other side of a smart meter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for the Economy. 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, indeed this is obviously an 

unfortunate incident. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

taken actions with respect to this. We’ve ordered the removal of 

these meters as quickly as replacements can be installed, Mr. 

Speaker. The current supplier, Itron, is supplying SaskPower 

with about 5,000 meters per week. So this is moving as quickly 

as the new meters are available to SaskPower to install on the 

homes of people across Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly we would want to do everything we 

can with respect to this. We will check to see whether there was 

any notification on the installation of the meters to begin with, 

Mr. Speaker, but we will be removing them as quickly as they 

possibly can be. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer again from the 

minister. The question was to the Premier. It was about safety. 

That minister was informed about safety concerns and 

proceeded two years ago to strap over 100,000 smart meters to 

the homes of Saskatchewan people, put their property and put 

their lives at risk. It’s entirely unacceptable. 

 

Saskatchewan families that have dangerous smart meters 

strapped to their homes are rightfully very afraid about waking 

up to an explosion and looking out their bedroom and seeing 

flames, just like Joan Riemer saw. They’re thinking of their 

loved ones. They deserve to know when these dangerous smart 

meters will be removed from their homes. 

 

My specific question to the Premier: will he commit today to 

speed up the removal process for these dangerous smart meters 

and release the order in which these fire-prone meters will be 

removed? Will he do that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in the two 

previous questions that have been provided, clearly SaskPower 

and the Government of Saskatchewan want these meters 

removed as quickly as possible. They are only available in 

about 5,000 per week, Mr. Speaker, so SaskPower is working as 

quickly as possible. They are ahead of schedule with respect to 

this action, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all of the meters that are 

available from the one company that makes this particular type 

of meter that they’re being reinstalled with. All other meters, 

Mr. Speaker, would be a smart meter type that we are reluctant 

to put in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just not believable that 

that government can’t find and source safe meters to urgently 

replace the meters and speed up this process. The reality is this 

government isn’t treating this as an urgent safety priority, and 

they haven’t all the way through this process. 

 

Joan Riemer still hasn’t been told if government will cover the 

damage to her property as a result of the fire caused by the 

smart meter that this government strapped to her home. My 

specific question to the Premier: who’s paying for the damage 

caused by this government’s catastrophic smart meter fiasco? 



5804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, all costs related to any 

problems with respect to this would be borne by SaskPower. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Funding for Aboriginal Education 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government used to give $10,000 a year to the science 

ambassador program at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], but this year it gave nothing. And that is very 

frustrating, Mr. Speaker, because the science ambassador 

program enhances science education for Aboriginal kids by 

connecting the U of S students with schools in many of our 

northern communities. 

 

And I know how important this program is to kids in northern 

Saskatchewan, and I think it’s outrageous that this government 

cut its $10,000 of funding to this program. To the minister: why 

did he cut the funding for this incredibly valuable program that 

improves education for Aboriginal kids in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to thank the hon. member for the question. What I would 

indicate is that the funding at the University of Saskatchewan is 

given to them in block grant funding for them to decide on what 

they’re going to do with their programs at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That particular funding is up 60 

per cent since this government came into office in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the fact that we are having more 

and more Aboriginal students enrolled in our universities and 

our post-secondary education institutions over the last five 

years. The University of Regina enrolment’s up over 50 per 

cent. The University of Saskatchewan is up over 10 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, year over year for Aboriginal enrolment. And 

SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] is at 

record enrolment, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of that record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Don’t blame the U of S, Mr. Speaker. They 

used to fund it; they cut the program, Mr. Speaker. The science 

ambassador program makes science fun and relevant for 

Aboriginal kids in remote northern communities. Its aim is to 

increase participation of Aboriginal students in science and 

technology, engineering, and math. Supporting this program is 

an investment in our province’s future, Mr. Speaker, but this 

government slashed $10,000 from this program. It has $3,500 

per day for each Japanese lean sensei, but it can’t find $10,000 a 

year to improve science education for Aboriginal kids in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Once again to the minister: without blaming the U of S, how 

can this government justify nickel-and-diming Aboriginal 

education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would take 

exception to the notion of nickel-and-diming Aboriginal 

education in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has provided $295 million in First Nations and 

Métis education and skills development in the last seven years, 

Mr. Speaker. This government has promised, this government 

has promised, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the adult basic 

education wait-list, which we are on track to do this coming 

year, Mr. Speaker. This government has provided $20 million 

in its previous budget for First Nations and Métis, Aboriginal 

education in the post-secondary sector, Mr. Speaker. I’ll take no 

lessons from that member on providing funding to 

post-secondary education in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a $10,000 program. And 

that’s it, Mr. Speaker; it’s a $10,000 program that was very 

valuable. The government of Manitoba supports the U of S 

science ambassador program. But this government doesn’t 

support it anymore — 10,000 bucks, Mr. Speaker. And that 

didn’t stop the Education minister from showing up at the 

year-end celebration and talking about how important this 

program is. It’s bizarre that the minister would show up for the 

cake and the balloons after cutting funding in this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding speaks volumes about this 

government’s approach to Aboriginal education in our 

province, and it’s downright shameful. Once again to the 

minister: will he commit today to reverse this reckless funding 

cut and provide enhanced funding to expand this crucial science 

education program? Will he do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as we’ve seen over the last number of days in this Legislative 

Assembly, the opposition has a knack for coming in here and 

taking quotes out of context and providing information that isn’t 

quite factual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I will do is endeavour to look into this 

program to see what the University of Saskatchewan has done 

with it and get back to the honourable member. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, total confusion 

from that minister and that government. It’s a $10,000 program 

that they cut. Once again, this past year the science ambassador 

program was in Green Lake. It was in Beauval. It was in 

Pinehouse, Fond- du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Black Lake, and 

Hatchet Lake. It would be incredible to see this program 

expanded to more communities throughout northern 

Saskatchewan and the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker, but this 

government needs to do its part. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5805 

Once again to the minister: the minister showed up for the cake 

and for the balloons and sang the praises for the program, about 

the program, Mr. Speaker. And now why can’t he do the right 

thing and refund this funding cut to the U of S, a valuable 

program to northern Saskatchewan? Will he do that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can undertake to have a 

look at this and see where the funding came from. My 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, and I just received a short note, is 

that this was funding provided by the University of 

Saskatchewan, not directly by the Ministry of Education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite that we provide 

$189 million a year in our government’s budget for First 

Nations and Métis initiatives, $6 million for recommendations 

for the joint task force. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a far better 

record than the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, last March a 

resolution calling for equal funding for on-reserve students was 

defeated. And where was it defeated, Mr. Speaker? At the NDP 

convention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a quote from the Missinipi Broadcasting 

Corporation, dated March 15 of 2013. And I’ll just read the 

quote: 

 

Broten . . . [was] non-committal as to whether the province 

should fund on-reserve education but says the government 

should be lobbying the federal government more 

vigorously to equalize funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re not the ones that are doing anything over 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely unacceptable to see 

this government walking away from First Nations children, 

Métis children in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to 

science education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A $10,000 program, Mr. Speaker, a program more than that, 

with $10,000 of funding from the government, Mr. Speaker, 

and what do we see? We see the minister going for the cake, 

going for the balloons, Mr. Speaker, but axing the funding. It 

makes absolutely no sense. And we see the contrast in 

priorities. They have $3,500 per day, Mr. Speaker, for every 

sensei, but they nickel and dime a program for $10,000. That’s 

a rounding error for John Black’s travel on any given day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that it was a mistake 

to cut the funding for the science ambassador program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition can huff and puff all he wants. We 

indicated we will have a look at where it was coming from. This 

was the University of Saskatchewan program. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll make no apologies and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no 

lessons from the members opposite. 

 

Six hundred thousand dollars is provided by this government 

for summer literacy camps targeted primarily at remote northern 

communities; $500,000 for a Community Literacy Fund which 

goes to organizations such as the North Central Family Centre; 

1.2 million and $1 million in capital for 15 new pre-k 

[pre-kindergarten] spaces; $276 million for supports for 

learning which goes to support our most vulnerable students 

which includes First Nations and Métis. 

 

For the members over there to try and cherry-pick something 

that was cut by the university is something, Mr. Speaker, that is 

typical of the misleading that they’re doing over there, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s something that the members here will not tolerate 

and the citizens of our province will not tolerate it either. We 

want reliable, accurate information. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to caution the minister about the use 

of the word misleading. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Government Support for Safe Housing at Kate’s Place 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to inform members of the Assembly that today 

our government is announcing funding that will keep the doors 

open at Kate’s Place, a residence that provides safe and 

supportive housing for women enrolled in the Regina drug 

treatment court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this announcement is significant for many reasons. 

For one, it matters to those who are interested in ensuring 

supports exist to help vulnerable women in our province. The 

Regina drug treatment court addresses drug addiction as an 

underlying cause of criminal activity and has proven successful 

in reducing recidivism, reducing drug harm, and substantially 

improving participants’ health and overall well-being. It is in 

fact considered to be one of the most effective therapeutic 

courts in Canada, and something we’re very proud of. 

 

Prior to Kate’s Place, a lack of safe and secure housing 

prevented many women from taking part in this successful 

therapeutic court. Vulnerable to exploitation, many would 

instead be serving custodial sentences or potentially, Mr. 

Speaker, be homeless. Now more women are completing the 

program. I’m pleased to report that since the opening of Kate’s 

Place, the number of women participating from the drug 

treatment court is up nearly 40 per cent. 

 

This funding has meaning for those interested in families. 

Addicted to drugs and often separated from their friends and 

family, most of the women at Kate’s Place have or had children 

in the care of child protection services or in the care of relatives. 

With the help of staff at Kate’s Place — who dispense and 

monitor medications, complete curfew checks and room 

inspections, provide counselling, assist clients with personal 



5806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

problems, and provide transportation to court and medical 

appointments — these women have made positive changes in 

their lives. As a result, many were able to resume contact with 

their children after completing the program. 

 

Even more significantly, Mr. Speaker, since 2012 four women 

who were pregnant when they moved into Kate’s Place for 

treatment later gave birth to healthy, drug-free babies. That may 

be this program’s most enduring contribution to the future of 

our province to date. 

 

Most importantly, this funding will make a significant 

difference in the lives of some of the city’s most vulnerable 

citizens Many of the residents of Kate’s Place are young, single 

mothers who have in their own lives battled histories of 

addiction and abuse. Often they’re, before participating in the 

therapeutic court, residents of Kate’s Place were frequent users 

of the health, social service, and criminal justice systems. 

 

Kate’s Place has allowed its residents to make positive changes 

in their lives. Women live in Kate’s Place while taking 

treatment, getting education, finding a job, and learning 

parenting skills. Kate’s Place provides a vital contribution to the 

rehabilitation process, providing a supportive environment that 

enables women to make a significant improvement in their 

lives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can appreciate our interest in ensuring that 

this program, which has showed encouraging signs of success, 

is given a chance to continue. Kate’s Place was started in 2012 

by the Salvation Army with money from a federal pilot project, 

but the federal pilot funding is over, leaving the project on the 

brink of termination with its doors set to close at the 1st of this 

month. 

 

I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, to members of this House, that 

our government will not let that happen. The Ministry of Justice 

is providing $200,000 for operations and programming at 

Kate’s Place. That’s on top of a $49,000 grant from the ministry 

provided earlier this year, and another grant worth $20,000 

from the Ministry of Social Services. This means the lives of 

women at Kate’s Place will continue to improve. They will 

foster healthy, drug-free futures for themselves and their 

children. 

 

So on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I applaud all 

those who are involved in bettering the future of these affected 

women and children. The Government of Saskatchewan 

continues to support the work that they do, and we are 

profoundly proud to be part of their cause and their future. 

Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

congratulate the government on coming up with the funding for 

this particular project. It’s a very important thing that’s been 

happening in Regina that complements the work of the drug 

treatment court, and it’s important that that court have 

structures around it that allows it to do its job. And so it’s very 

much appreciated that this money has been located now. My 

understanding is that it will be ongoing money so that this 

project will continue. 

I’d like to make a special point of thanking Major Mike Hoeft 

of the Salvation Army and all of the staff there who have 

worked to make sure this project works. Also I’d like to thank, 

in Justice, Ms. Jan Turner and Mr. Pat Thiele for all of the work 

that they have done to put this all together. And I think we all 

need to acknowledge the very capable leadership that Provincial 

Court Judge Clifford Toth has provided for the drug treatment 

court because this has been a key in making sure that some of 

these programs continue. 

 

It’s important that the whole community understands the 

importance of providing these services, and I very much 

appreciate the work that the minister has done and the ministry 

has done to make sure Kate’s Place continues. So thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that first reading of Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 158, 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5807 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure today to enter into this very, very important debate on 

victims of domestic violence. So I’m pleased to enter into 

debate on Bill No. 144, An Act to amend The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 

 

It is an important piece of legislation and one that is very, very 

timely. You know, Mr. Speaker, we were all gripped, the news 

of just a few weeks ago, when there was a shooting of a soldier 

in Ottawa and how that really galvanized a country in terms of 

concerns about those who serve us. 

 

But just shortly after that, that very weekend of course, the 

news of what was happening at CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] with their own Jian Ghomeshi and the idea of 

domestic violence, and that also galvanized the country about 

what happens. How can a situation arise where you have one 

person in a position of power over another person, no matter 

what the circumstance? So we’ve all come to have another good 

think about what does domestic violence mean. 

 

And I think this is an important topic that we raise, and we go 

back and we take a look at this. We saw a situation where a star 

in CBC’s radio programming, Jian Ghomeshi, could all of a 

sudden cause such discussion and despair. Because I think 

people whenever we hear of this kind of thing happening think, 

how could this happen in a modern society, a society that prides 

itself on being compassionate and fair and a zero tolerance on 

violence? And yet we know, we know that this happens way, 

way too often. And we should make this a priority of our 

society, our province, our country, our communities that we 

will not tolerate this, that we will not tolerate the existence of 

domestic violence. 

 

And I see that we’re changing the name to interpersonal, and 

I’ll get into that kind of discussion. 

 

But we hear about this more and more, and of course this 

summer when we heard about Raymell Rice, Ray Rice of the 

Baltimore Ravens, what happened there. And we see the 

complications you have where if you don’t have people . . . And 

it is a difficult situation. It’s so easy for us to say, if people just 

would only come forward. But the circumstances are so 

personal and complex that people feel that they do not have the 

power to come forward. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And so we really think this is an opportunity for us to have that 

discussion in the House, and I look forward to the speeches and 

the questions in committee on this. Because as we’ve seen, 

particularly in the case of the CBC circumstance where we 

know of at least nine women who were victims of violence — 

and I understand now that a couple have come forward and 

have made reports to the Toronto Police Service, and that will 

proceed as it should — but how a secret could be kept so quiet 

so long, especially in such a high profile situation. You have it 

in sports. You have it in the media. And somehow we can keep 

that a secret, so it’s no wonder that in a home or in those 

interpersonal relationships, it’s very, very difficult to bring 

forward. 

 

But we are glad to see for example that we know, after the Jian 

Ghomeshi allegation came forward — and I’m just going to 

read several quotes from CBC News — that the Saskatoon 

Sexual Assault Centre said the news triggers memories, triggers 

memories and I hope gives a sense of courage that we will as a 

community stand behind those who do come forward, that they 

know that they’re not alone, that we will support them as they 

tell their stories, and that they will have a safe place to be. And 

this is an important issue. So not only do we have the 

legislation, but we have the resources in our communities to 

make sure that people feel safe to come forward. 

 

And so I just want to quote, too, the article that was posted 

November 4th, 2014, and I quote: 

 

Heather Pocock, assistant director of the Saskatoon assault 

centre, said news reports have triggered memories for 

many people. In some cases, that prompts calls to the 

centre. Most of them simply want to talk. 

 

It goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

“Research says most people don’t talk to anyone,” she 

said. 

 

“Well, I think every time something like this breaks in the 

news people start to think about their own circumstances 

and their own situation and they reach out for somebody to 

talk to.” 

 

Pocock said she is not surprised many don’t report abuse 

to the police. She said they are afraid they will be blamed 

or they are skeptical of the justice system. 

 

She wants victims to know there are people here who will 

listen, and help. 

 

And she says, and I quote: 

 

“If people really feel like they need to say something or to 



5808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

get help, we want them to know there are services that 

exist on their behalf.” 

 

Pocock [goes on to say] . . . she’ll be speaking with police 

to ask whether the increase in calls to the centre’s crisis 

line is matched by a corresponding increase in calls to 

police. 

 

Well it goes on to say, continues to talk about the role of police 

and victim services. 

 

Linda Perrett, and I quote: 

 

Linda Perrett, Coordinator of Saskatoon Police Service’s 

victim services, said it is too soon to tell if her department 

will also see the same sort of increase as workers have at 

the city’s sexual assault centre. 

 

And she says: 

 

“One of the problems with going to court is that you need 

such a high level of evidence,” Perrett said of her work 

with victims of alleged sexual assaults. “Unfortunately, the 

victim’s credibility is often what is questioned. 

 

[And she] . . . explained that once a victim makes the often 

difficult decision to take their claims of a sexual assault to 

court, the file is given to a prosecutor who reviews the 

case to determine whether there is enough evidence to lay 

a charge. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

Perrett said victim services attempts to make this process 

easier for people who decide [when] they want to go 

through the judicial process by referring them to support 

resources in the community that can help. 

 

And then she goes on, and I quote her: 

 

“The other thing I tell victims is that the court is not a 

healing process,” Perrett said. “Your healing should come 

outside of that . . . but don’t count on the court system to 

be a healing process, because it generally isn’t for 

victims.” 

 

So it’s a tough, tough row that the folks who are victims of 

domestic violence find themselves in. And so this is an 

important discussion that we’re having here today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a moment and reflect on 

what did the minister have to say about this. And I find his 

comments, they were a little bit longer than typical. Sometimes 

the minister doesn’t give an awful lot of comments. And what I 

read here was helpful. He reflects back on the fact that 

members, and I quote: 

 

Members will recall that Saskatchewan was the first 

province in Canada to introduce victims of domestic 

violence legislation back in 1994. Since then this Act has 

served as a successful model throughout Canada for 

emergency protection . . . legislation. 

 

So I’m proud to say that that was our side of the House that 

brought that forward and we’re glad to see that that was an 

important thing that we did. But it’s important to bring this 

forward. And now we are 20 years later looking at it and 

saying, is this the best it can be? Can it be better? And clearly 

this government is thinking there’s tools that we need to bring 

forward to make it more effective. Because as I was just 

quoting in the media, the police service says there are gaps. It’s 

not an easy process to go through, the judicial system, because 

there are gaps and it makes it very difficult for victims. 

 

So he talks about how this provides an additional tool to a 

responding police officer to separate individuals who represent 

an imminent risk of injury to each other. It’s critical to the 

functionality of the Act that police and victims are immediately 

able to seek an emergency intervention order by telephone. So 

again it’s using the technology. How can we use technology to 

move this forward? 

 

It talks about the balance between the risk to the individual who 

fears violence and the procedural rights of the respondent. 

That’s fair. That’s what our justice system is based on — due 

process. But we can’t have it that there is imminent danger or 

risk because, as we know, people just will not come forward 

when it’s time to report such abuse. It’s very important that we 

make it so it’s an effective tool, but one that respects that 

balance of judicial due process but is not used as a tool to 

protect an abuser as well. So this is an important thing that we 

can take a look at. 

 

He also talks about how the changes in the bill will provide for 

incremental increase in the scope of the application, the act of 

verification where it provides for a particular situation. We 

think that’s important. It provides for procedural changes to 

address concerns that have been identified by victim services 

branch in their ongoing operations of this Act. Clearly they are 

people who experience and can bring forward what’s been 

happening in the field. 

 

What are the kind of circumstances that we see that happen, that 

we can clarify or make changes so there are not barriers to 

people who are being victims? We want to make sure that it 

works as effectively as possible because we cannot tolerate that 

situation where, because of a legal loophole, that all of a sudden 

people are getting protection where they should not. We support 

due process, and that’s a reasonable request in our society that 

the justice system is there for both sides, but it cannot be used 

as a tool for undue protection. 

 

But I would like to . . . And I’ll ask more about this because we 

always ask this: who was it that brought forward these 

concerns? Was it just the justice branch that brought this 

forward, the victims services branch? Or were there groups like 

the sexual assault centre? Did they bring forward ideas? 

 

You know, one of the concerns that I’ve heard an awful lot are 

people who live with disabilities that have a hard time 

articulating and expressing concerns, particularly, for example, 

those with autism that don’t have the . . . who may not have the 

power of emotion or expression. When we normally think 

somebody might come in and be talking about a sexual assault, 

quite often people — you know, the victims — are showing that 

on their faces or in their voices. But if, because of your 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5809 

disability, you may not have that ability to show emotion or 

your language, then as a matter of fact, no matter what the 

circumstances, it becomes a more difficult situation. 

 

So are people being trained to really help this new spectrum that 

this government, I understand, may be considering? Those 

would be the questions that we’ll be asking in committee 

because what we think of victims has rightfully so been 

expanded from, you know, 20 years ago. There’s a newer 

understanding that people may be victimized who haven’t come 

forward because of the limitations in the legislation. 

 

The one, for example, that they talk about, will extend the scope 

of the application of the Act to caregiving relationships 

regardless of cohabitation. And so that’s an interesting idea 

because maybe they’re not living together. They have a unique 

relationship because one is a caregiver, so there is a relationship 

of power. One has power over the other. And that creates an 

unfair relationship where one would feel like, I can’t report 

because I would lose. I would be a big loser in terms of this 

relationship. This person is a caregiver and I can’t put that at 

risk. I absolutely can’t put that at risk. So that’s very, very 

important. 

 

They will go . . . talk about a variety of circumstances beyond 

their traditional domestic scenario in order to protect a broader 

range of victims and of violence. So we’ve talked about that, 

what that may mean. So it will be interesting to know and, 

when we get into committee, to have a very full discussion of 

this. Were people with disabilities involved? Were people of 

visible minorities involved? You know, we often think about 

this as a male-female, a heterosexual type of relationship. Were 

people of the LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender], 

the queer community, were they involved? Were trans people? 

And we’ll be celebrating next week marking — celebrating’s 

the wrong word for it — but the Transgender Day of 

Remembrance. And there’s another perfect example of 

violence, of violence especially in a power relationship. So have 

those folks been consulted, and how can we make sure that we 

bring them into this discussion as well? 

 

It would also . . . brings in the idea of prohibitions of electronic 

contact between parties, and clearly that’s a huge issue. When 

you think of, just if we could just go back 20 years, what we 

have now, what we, you know, the emails, Internets were just 

starting to emerge in the early ’90s. I remember in fact, if 

anybody here remembers the early ’90s and what we talked 

about, Archie and Gopher on the Internet. Emails were a very 

slow thing in the early ’90s. How far we’ve come now with 

Facebook and Twitter, and the idea of revenge porn that you 

have on the Internet now, what that all means for this. We’ve 

come so far so fast in just 20 years. I don’t know if there is any 

other area in terms of harassment or abuse that probably has 

seen so much change. 

 

So I’m glad to hear about that, and it’ll be interesting to hear. 

 

And of course this then as well gets into what we were talking 

about a year ago at this time in terms of bullying and the idea of 

bullying online and the horrific, horrific circumstances that 

we’ve seen, particularly in high school age kids or even 

younger, pictures that get floated around on the Internet. This is 

a huge, huge issue. So this is one that we think really deserves a 

lot of discussion, and I think it’s going to be an important one to 

talk about. 

 

So it would also expand the definition to include harassment 

and deprivation of necessities within the scope of prohibited 

interpersonal violence. And again this one, when we talk about 

the Jian Ghomeshi circumstance, we think of that in the 

workplace. That extended actually into the personal lives of 

many people, but it was based through the workplace that Jian 

Ghomeshi created his power base because he was a star on the 

radio, a star of a rock band. He was a major Canadian 

personality, also in the book world with the Giller prizes, and 

how he could influence people and really play that power game 

and victimize women in this circumstance. 

 

And I’m just curious where, you know . . . And I have an article 

here about, and the title is, “Don’t be the CBC: How employers 

should handle allegations of violence and workplace 

harassment.” Now that’s interesting because we’ve come and 

we’ve done an awful lot of good work here in Saskatchewan 

about workplace bullying. We are not sure how that is going on 

now, and it would be interesting to have an update on that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And it’s often interesting how we have circumstances, 

unfortunate tragic circumstances that act as triggers for better 

legislation. So I hope in many ways, right across Canada, that 

many legislatures, and if they have the good fortune to have a 

piece of legislation before them now, are taking a look at their 

own victims of domestic violence Acts and saying, are these the 

best they can be? How does this coordinate with the 

occupational health and safety legislation? 

 

Fortunately we have good, strong legislation there. We’re not 

sure how it’s being supported through operational funding and 

resources. This victims of domestic violence is outside the 

workplace but there could be connections through work. But 

this is important: to make the connection between the fact that, 

you know, we are in a plugged-in world where you might be at 

work but, if you’ve got somebody’s email or you’re a Facebook 

friend, all of a sudden you can have access that maybe goes 

beyond just what happened at work, and that’s what we talked 

about in terms of this interpersonal violence. So I’m hoping 

that’s what the minister is alluding to, and we can get 

clarification in committee. But it’s a hugely, hugely important 

area. 

 

And I’ll go on a bit more. And it talks about they will broaden 

the scope of factors that justices of peace may take into account 

when granting emergency intervention orders, including the 

consideration of past contacts by the respondent with other 

family members as well as immediate circumstances with the 

respondent such as a recent release from jail or being fired from 

a job, which we know too often and unfortunately we see 

violence that occurs because the workplace . . . where 

somebody’s had a dispute at a workplace, has been fired, has 

come back, and that has caused, especially in the States, but it 

has happened in Canada, where there’s been mass shootings 

just because of that. And it’s a tough, tough situation. 

 

It goes on to list matters that will not preclude an order being 

granted, clarify the non-contact provisions for emergency 



5810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

intervention orders including contact at school, at workplaces of 

the victim and family members, and so on and so forth. 

 

So this is one that I think is one that really deserves a lot of 

attention. And again I think that it’s important that we have this 

discussion, we continue to have this discussion, we continue to 

review it. It’s one that will not, will not, unfortunately for some 

bizarre reason, will not go away. But we know in Saskatchewan 

particularly, this is something that we share a dubious title, you 

know, an unfortunate one where we know domestic violence is 

one that is one . . . We are one of the worst provinces in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to domestic violence and 

domestic violence rates. So I think it’s very important that we 

monitor this and we watch this very closely. 

 

I just want to go through again a definition of domestic 

violence. And I know that it’s in the legislation, and I’ll talk 

about that and compare the two in a minute because so people 

know, people who may be watching or reading this or following 

this, that it’s important that we understand what domestic 

violence is. And domestic violence, and I quote from the 

domesticviolence.org website: 

 

Domestic violence and emotional abuse are behaviours 

used by one person in a relationship to control the other. 

Partners may be married or not married; heterosexual, gay 

or lesbian; living together, separated or dating. 

 

Examples of abuse include: name-calling or putdowns, 

keeping a partner from contacting their families or friends, 

withholding money, stopping a partner from getting or 

keeping a job, actual or threatened physical harm, sexual 

assault, stalking, intimidation. 

 

Violence can be criminal and includes physical assault 

[and we know that’s] (hitting, pushing, shoving), sexual 

abuse . . . and stalking. Although emotional, psychological 

and financial abuse are not criminal behaviors, they are 

forms of abuse and can lead to criminal violence. 

 

[It can take many forms of violence] . . . and can happen 

all the time or once in a while . . . 

 

[So it’s important that we know that] anyone can be a 

victim. Victims can be of any age, sex, race, culture, 

religion, education, employment or marital status. 

Although both men and women can be abused, [we know] 

most victims are women. Children in homes where there is 

domestic violence are more likely to be abused and/or 

neglected. Most children in these homes know about 

violence. Even if a child is not physically harmed, they 

may have emotional and behavior problems. 

 

And that’s huge. That’s a huge consideration especially, you 

know, in terms of the number of kids that we have that are in 

vulnerable circumstances who find themselves in foster care. 

And this may be one of those issues that lead to that. We need 

to make sure we do as much as we can to reduce domestic 

violence. 

 

So if you’re being abused, you need to remember that you’re 

not alone. It’s not your fault, and help is available. And I know 

it is. And we talked about that where in Saskatoon there are 

several organizations — the sexual assault centre is one 

Saskatoon police can point people in the direction — and I am 

sure that’s the same in Moose Jaw, Regina, right across the 

province. 

 

So we look forward to hearing more about this, but we also 

want to make sure people are feeling safe. And so this was one 

tool that we can go a long way to make sure that people feel 

that they can come forward and that the police then have more 

tools to work on this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a few questions and put the, I 

guess, the government on notice that we will be asking 

questions in committee. That we want to know. The minister 

said that it was the people in victim services who came forward 

with the idea, but we would be curious about who will benefit 

from these changes. How that will play out, and how do they 

see that going forward? 

 

And we would like to know, is this a reaction to any particular 

case? I’ve gone on about Jian Ghomeshi and how that triggered 

a national reawakening about this issue. And it’s important that 

we have that. Hugely though, that it’s come hugely, 

unfortunately it’s come at the cost to several women we know 

of, at least nine who’ve come forward. Three have gone to the 

Toronto Police Service and there perhaps could be more. So, 

Mr. Speaker, is this a reaction to a particular case? Or has there 

been an ongoing collection of, this is what we can do to do a 

much better piece of legislation here? And so this is important. 

 

So who asked for these amendments? Was it the courts? We 

know it was victim services, but if we could have more details. 

Are there any downsides of these amendments? What’s 

happening across Canada? Is there something . . . I know this 

minister in particular, because Justice ministers across Canada 

often reflect on, together in conferences, about how to have the 

best legislation and have some uniformity standards across 

Canada. What’s happening across Canada? We want to know 

what will be the implication of changing the name from 

domestic to interpersonal. Why the change? And what does this 

mean for people, and will this create confusion? You know, 

over the past many decades, we’ve come to know what 

domestic violence is and I’m not sure whether that . . . To me, I 

think of domestic violence as opposed to workplace violence. 

You know, domestic violence to me implies the 

interrelationships. The caregiver, I’m not sure if it’s necessary. 

And who asked for the expansion of types of family members? 

So we need to think more about that. 

 

And as I said, and I do want to say that I do think that in terms 

of people of disabilities, particularly because we know they can 

be victims of violence, whether it’s a physical disability or a 

cognitive disability because of . . . that we’ve . . . Really, their 

work and their advocacy has really come of age, and it’s really 

important that we think in terms of that. So I will be curious to 

know about that, and then again around the queer community, 

the gay and lesbian relationships, the trans relationships. 

 

And I’m curious to know what kind of training will be, when 

you give the police another tool, what kind of training will 

come forward with that tool? Because clearly it’s important. 

And as the police, I quoted earlier in an article, they talked 

about how it’s very challenging, and people should be clearer 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5811 

what their expectations are when they go through the judicial 

system. That’s fair enough. But how can the police be trained in 

a way so that they are, as they say, a service to people in their 

community, to say this is what your expectations can be and 

this is where you get help? 

 

But people always should feel safe, and I think largely they do 

feel safe coming forward to the police to report concerns. And 

as the person said, in some cases there’s a huge demand for 

evidence. But we all want to feel that when we come forward to 

the police service, that we’re feeling safe and that we will be 

served in a fair and understanding and a compassionate manner. 

 

And I think that some, as the groups that I’ve talked about, 

whether you’re in the trans community or whether you’re with a 

cognitive disability or a physical disability, that you may not be 

able to communicate or you might be frightened in ways that 

others may not understand. So we’ll be interested to hear about 

who have they consulted, and did they heed their advice? And if 

not, why not? That’s hugely important. 

 

So we’ll be looking at this very carefully, doing a good review 

of this. As I said, it’s a timely, timely piece, hugely timely, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the media. And whether it’s the football 

stories we’ve heard of coming out of the States this past 

summer and fall or our own situation here in Canada with CBC 

. . . But you know, those are only the tip of the iceberg. This is 

something that happens much, much more often than we would 

care to admit. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of my colleagues will 

want to comment on this. And I think they will, because as I 

said, there’s been a national reawakening of this issue. And the 

timing is of good fortune that the minister has brought forward 

this piece so we can have this discussion, and I hope we can 

have some good committee discussions about that, because it’ll 

be very interesting to hear from the people from victim services 

about what they’re finding out. 

 

But I’m also really hoping that those people who have had 

situations that they have not felt well served because of the 

limitations of the legislation, will come forward and say, this is 

my story; this is what’s happened to me — they will get served 

so that they can begin that healing process. It’s important they 

begin that healing process, but that justice will occur. That 

justice will occur. That the offender will be served what their 

due penalty will be. And that’s important. That’s important. 

And that they get their day in court. But those who are victims 

or continue to be victims, in our homes and our communities, 

will feel a sense of renewed hope that they’re not alone but, in 

fact, there are people they can talk to. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I need to move . . . I need to 

adjourn this debate. I know that many others will want to enter 

into the debate. So I move adjournment on An Act to amend The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Act and to make a consequential 

amendment to The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 

Act. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 152 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. And 

in many ways I understand this is simply amending the 

bilingual Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to update the reference in 

that Act to make sure the language is consistent through, and 

obviously that makes good sense. 

 

And so as I said earlier, my remarks about Bill 144, that this is a 

timely piece of discussion, and I think we’ll be focusing on Bill 

144 because that really sets the piece out. Whatever comes out 

of that, then we’ll have to look for the consequential 

amendments. But generally speaking, I think that we have no 

further comment on the consequential amendments and so I’d 

like to move adjournment of Bill 152, The Victims of Domestic 

Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 145 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 

Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today to speak to this bill. It was recently introduced by 

the Minister of Justice. We had second reading just on 

November 5th, 2014, and in that speech that he provided he 

indicated some of the thinking that the government is having 

regarding this type of fee waiver program. 

 

You know, in and of itself, it’s not an earth-shattering piece of 

legislation in any way, sense, or any shape or form, Mr. 

Speaker, but it certainly is another piece in the work that’s 



5812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

being done to, I guess, assist people with their access to the 

courts. So he indicated near the end of his comments that a lot 

of this is coming from the work of the Law Reform 

Commission of Saskatchewan and a recent decision from the 

Supreme Court of Canada in a case called the Trial Lawyers 

Association of British Columbia versus the Attorney General of 

British Columbia. And I haven’t . . . I don’t understand exactly 

what that case was about and the minister certainly didn’t 

indicate that. But I assume there was some discussion on this 

type of fee waiver and whether it’s appropriate for individuals 

seeking justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He indicated that he also consulted with the legal community in 

Saskatchewan and has found widespread support for the 

changes. Now as my colleague just discussed earlier in terms of 

victims of domestic violence, we’re not sure who else the 

government consulted with. And it would be interesting to 

know if they consulted with people involved with poverty 

issues, Mr. Speaker, because certainly fees are often prohibitive 

for individuals in many, many circumstances in Saskatchewan, 

especially those who are living below the poverty line. 

 

And while it’s laudable to bring forward changes to allow some 

relief in terms of access to the courts, we know that until very 

recently this government refused to even have a poverty 

reduction strategy, let alone make concrete steps to move 

forward in the reduction of poverty in Saskatchewan. And then 

we see bills like this which are maybe token efforts to deal with 

poverty issues. However, you know, we are promised a new 

poverty reduction strategy that is forthcoming according to the 

Speech from the Throne. So we’ll look forward to seeing what 

that looks like. 

 

I think in any of the literature dealing with poverty reduction 

and poverty reduction strategies however, it’s not just talk that 

will make it happen. So we’re going to look for a constructive 

plan and one that has the dollars behind it to make it actually 

effective. And that’s certainly some of the commentary is, you 

know, the best plans in the world are of no force and, in fact, if 

the funding isn’t there to support them. 

 

So we don’t know how much this is going to cost the 

government. There’s certainly no information in the minister’s 

comments in terms of how these fees are going to be reduced 

and what sort of revenues are being foregone because of it. So 

we’ll look for that information in committee for sure, Mr. 

Speaker, because that information simply isn’t available. But 

it’s a new Act. It’s not amending any other Act. It’s a shiny new 

Act all on its own. And I’ll just make a few comments, I think, 

about this bill before I adjourn the debate to allow others of my 

caucus to discuss it. 

 

Before I move on to the bill itself, I just want to highlight a 

couple of comments from the minister that he made on 

November 5th, last week. And basically he has indicated that, 

not only are this fee waiver program being made available for 

the court system — so Provincial Court, Court of Queen’s 

Bench, and the Court of Appeal — but that it would also apply 

to some tribunals that regularly adjudicate for members of the 

public. And the two he identified was the Automobile Injury 

Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential Tenancies. 

And we know those are very, very busy tribunals, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So those are . . . It seems appropriate to include these 

kinds of tribunals in this type of an Act. 

 

And also the minister indicated that other tribunals certainly 

could be added where appropriate, and again I’m not familiar 

with the fee structure for any of these tribunals or courts. I 

know there’s always fees that are attached to pretty much 

everything we do, but I’m thinking perhaps the Human Rights 

Commission, although there’s no more tribunal there, those 

folks now have to go to the courts. So maybe that’s a bad 

example. But there certainly are other tribunals in 

Saskatchewan where I assume there would be fees associated, 

maybe the Labour Standards Commission or some of those 

types of administrative bodies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister also indicated that the application process to get 

the waiver of these fees will be kept simplified, so we’ll be 

looking to make sure that that’s there.  

 

One of the questions I had as I read through his comments is, 

who is eligible for these fee waivers? Now he doesn’t tell us 

how, who is eligible. All he’s told us is that the eligibility will 

be determined by a simple set of rules in the regulations. So of 

course as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s kind of 

frustrating for us on this side of the House when those 

important factors that are going to affect the way the legislation 

rolls out are kept for the regulatory sphere. It leaves us with a 

bit of a gap because we’re being told that the eligibility criteria 

for these waivers will be a simplified criteria, but we have no 

idea what that criteria will be. We have no idea what the 

regulations are going to look like. And we certainly won’t see 

those regulations or have any opportunity to comment on them 

until after they are passed by Executive Council. 

 

So again it’s a bit frustrating to enter into debate on these types 

of bills when we don’t know the details and we have to wait for 

the regulatory process before we see those kinds of details. So 

it’s concerning when we see governments taking this kind of 

strategy. And I don’t think it’s particular to this particular 

government, but I think as a member of the opposition, our job 

is to shine light on these bills and sort of offer some public 

debate and hear from other people. And when we see these 

types of details being held back and being reserved for the 

regulations, then we know that we’re not able to fully assess the 

impact of the bill. And that’s frustrating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We do know that the bill contains some discretionary authority 

to grant a fee waiver in special circumstances. So I’ll talk about 

that a little bit when I get into the bill, and the minister is 

promising that this Act provides the flexibility that’s needed to 

make this program worthwhile. 

 

Now again, you know I’m speaking to all this in the context that 

it’s all fine and dandy to offer waiver fees for particular 

individuals who can’t access the tribunal or the court without 

money. So it’s helping people of lower incomes who would find 

this to be a real burden, access to the courts a real burden, 

without some sort of financial support. 

 

Now I think of some of the folks that I know that are struggling 

with perhaps decisions by SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance]. One individual is having a very difficult time in my 

constituency dealing with . . . He was brain-injured by a drunk 

driver. And some of the decisions made by SGI in terms of 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5813 

what his ongoing income would be were based on some very 

sort of questionable details provided by his employer And I 

think . . . He’s brain-injured. He suffers from PTSD 

[post-traumatic stress disorder]. He finds any kind of form or 

application process very difficult. Plus, he absolutely has no 

kind of income to deal with the fees that would be associated 

with any of these things that come to his, on his plate basically. 

So he’s got a lot to deal with. And then, you know, if he could 

only have a guaranteed income of some sort to help him deal 

with these issues, then this kind of bill would not be, wouldn’t 

be necessary. 

 

And again, it’s laudable that we see a government willing to 

reduce fees for low-income people in this context. But we know 

that low-income people, or people with no income, have all 

kinds of situations where they are frustrated by their poverty. 

And I think of people like diabetics for example. I’m fortunate 

as a diabetic that I have a plan that covers all the costs of the 

medications that I require in order to stay healthy. I have access 

to other kinds of health care providers, chiropractors and 

physiotherapists, and all those things that help me stay healthy. 

 

But when you look at people who have no income or are unable 

to find work for all sorts of reasons, those types of supports 

simply aren’t available. And I know that many of them are able 

to get meds through the medicare system, but this seems like 

such a piecemeal Act when you look at the issue of poverty, 

when you look at the issue of a working wage. 

 

We know that a working wage these days to stay under the 

poverty level is around $17 an hour. And when you think about 

the thousands and thousands of people in Saskatchewan who 

work for less than $17 an hour, living in urban centres where 

the cost of living is exploding — including rental, housing, 

roofs over their head, the amount of food they can eat, what 

kind of food they can put on the table — this just seems like a 

drop in the bucket, Mr. Speaker. And it certainly is concerning 

that the government is turning their attention to rather picayune 

approaches to providing support for people who simply aren’t 

making it. But nonetheless, it’s here. 

 

And I think I’ll just discuss a little bit about the bill itself in the 

time that remains for me. So we have a new bill, Bill 145, and 

it’s respecting the waiver of fees. So in the definitions, we have 

quite a few definitions that sort of set out the scene. First of all, 

who’s the court? As I indicated earlier, there’s three courts that 

this bill applies to: the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan, the 

Court of Queen’s Bench, and the Court of Appeal. 

 

And then we have some definitions of fees and a certificate. 

Who is an official? What does prescribed mean? Obviously it 

means prescribed in the regulations, so I’m not sure why that’s 

a defined term. It’s somewhat mystifying. And then of course it 

defines proceedings. 

 

Public body is another important definition here. As I indicated 

earlier, they have identified two specific public bodies: the 

Automobile Injury Appeal Commission, and there’s also the 

Office of Residential Tenancies. And as you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, those are very busy tribunals that hear a lot of cases. I 

think the Labour Relations Board is also a tribunal that hears a 

lot of important cases. Obviously the workmen’s compensation 

appeal process is another one, maybe even crop insurance. And 

any other number of agencies in Saskatchewan likely have 

some sort of appeal process. 

 

But the only two that are identified as a public body in this 

particular Act is the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission 

and the Office of Residential Tenancies. The minister didn’t 

indicate in his comments why those two were singled out and 

why the next part of the definition allows again this discretion 

at the regulatory sphere where the government can decide to 

add other bodies through the regulations at the executive layer 

of government, Mr. Speaker. So again, no opportunity for us to 

comment in this Assembly. But we will keep an eye on those 

regulations, and certainly if any concerns come to us from 

members of the public, then we would bring it forward at that 

time. 

 

So the public body, in terms of the definition, the third part of 

the definition will include “. . . any other prescribed board, 

commission, ministry, Crown corporation, or government 

body.” And so in that case, there could be any number of 

organizations. A government body could be probably maybe 

thousands of bodies that could be included in the regulations. I 

don’t know how many there are out there, but I would expect 

there’s quite a few. So we’ll have to watch the regulations on 

that front and see whether or not the definition of public body is 

expanded beyond the two that are specifically identified. An 

unusual approach, I mean they could have just done this all 

through regulation. 

 

So again we have no indication from the minister why he chose 

to single out those two, but I think any reasonable guess would 

tell you that it’s because they’re probably the two busiest 

commissions outside of the courts when it deals with hearings. 

And quite often I would suspect, in terms of residential 

tenancies when people are renters and having trouble with their 

landlord, quite likely they would . . . On the majority of them, I 

would suspect would be people of lower income who are 

struggling with making their rent payments. So that’s probably 

why they’re there, but we can only speculate without any 

comment from the minister on that part. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Section 3 gets into the meat of the Act really. And it talks about 

. . . Well it starts off the process. What is the first thing you 

have to do? You have to apply for a fee waiver certificate. And 

again when I think of my own constituent who’s struggling with 

forms, period, I mean the idea of having to apply for the fee 

waiver is unfortunate. I think it’s an additional layer of stress 

for many people who are already struggling. And so hopefully 

there will be some assistance on the part of the courts in 

question to help people out with this part of the process.  

 

Often forms and certificates are very intimidating for a lot of 

people if their literacy levels are not that high. And I think there 

are a lot of people out there who really struggle with 

terminology and legalese. I think a lot of us — and I know 

myself included — really have to sometimes read things out 

loud to even understand what the heck it is they’re trying to say. 

So when you think of people who are struggling and have other 

issues on their plate, this can be a barrier for access to the 

waiver of these fees that the whole purpose of the Act is about. 

 



5814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

So it says anyone can apply for a fee waiver and they have to 

submit an application in the prescribed form to an official of the 

court where the proceeding is going to be commenced. So right 

away you’re into a lot of administration and legalese. And I’m 

hoping that the minister will ensure that people have access to 

the supports they need to deal with the forms that are required; 

you know, you think of people with English as a second 

language or a third language. So those folks are going to need 

some help and even to understand that they have access to the 

waiver form. You know, you could just see how it can get 

complicated. 

 

So there’s a few other subsections in here that talks about how 

the application form is to be received and how it will be, the 

certificate itself will be issued. So now we have officials 

making the determination, and then they provide that individual 

with their certificate. So that’s all good. If you get through 

section 3, you’ve got your certificate to waive the fees. 

 

Then obviously once you get the certificate you go on to section 

4 which says, “No fee is payable to apply for a fee waiver 

certificate pursuant to this Act.” Thank goodness, Mr. Speaker. 

I mean that makes total sense, but I guess it had to be said. So in 

order to get a waiver of a fee, you don’t have to pay a fee to get 

the waiver of the fee, which is great. And that’s all good in 

section 4. 

 

Section 5 talks about the fee waiver certificate itself. And what 

it says is on and after the date that the certificate is issued, 

whoever gets it is excused from paying any fee of the court or 

public body with respect to a proceeding before that court. So 

you’ve got your certificate. You don’t have to pay a fee for the 

certificate, and from that day forward you don’t have to pay any 

fees in relation to that particular proceeding. 

 

Then you get into section 6. What’s interesting, it says, subject 

to the regulation. So we’ll have to look at that section in a 

minute. But it says these certificates can be cancelled at any 

time. A bit alarming, I suppose, for folks who have their 

certificate, knowing that all of a sudden it can be revoked for no 

obvious reason. But we have to look to the regulatory section, 

which is section 10, to see how these officials or judges can 

decide to yank their certificate. And I think that would be very 

concerning for people who have the certificate to realize that it 

is revocable at any point in time. Interesting. 

 

Section 7 talks about costs. So what are these costs that are 

being talked about here? The definition says, section 7(1) says: 

 

. . . “costs” means any payment by one party to another 

party in a proceeding that is intended to reimburse the 

recipient for any fee or expense paid by the recipient with 

respect to that proceeding.  

 

So okay, and I think in any court case you’re familiar where the 

judge says, costs to the defendant, or costs to the plaintiff. And 

what that means is, if you win and you spent a lot of money to 

make your case, often the court will order that the other party 

pays for your costs. 

 

So how does that apply here where there’s a fee waiver 

certificate? In section 7(2) we see that, again subject to the 

regulations, a court or any of these public bodies will have the 

discretion to make an order for costs against the holder of a fee 

waiver certificate. So even though you’re eligible to get a 

waiver of the fees for the court, this does not make you immune 

from costs. And I think that’s something the individual needs to 

understand as they go through the proceeding. If for whatever 

reason they lose and the court finds that their case was one that 

maybe shouldn’t have been brought — it was a losable, a really 

losing case to begin with and it caused the other person a whole 

bunch of expenses — that person, no matter what their income, 

is still responsible for the costs. So clearly it doesn’t apply to 

the costs. 

 

Now there are some exceptions for how these costs can be 

determined, and there’s a whole bunch of factors there that I 

think are interesting in terms of how they appear in another bill 

I’m going to be speaking to in a few minutes. But the court can 

take into a few things when they’re determining costs. And I 

think this is the case for judges already, but there’s a specific 

list that is prescribed here in section 7(3). And again, you know, 

I don’t know what the purpose of this kind of clause is when we 

know the courts already have the discretion to take all these 

things into account, but for some reason the minister and his 

officials have decided that it’s important that they identify at 

least four things that can be taken into account when 

determining whether or not costs should be awarded. I’m sure 

there’s some good thinking behind that. It just isn’t immediately 

obvious to me, but I haven’t thought about this a whole lot 

myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think we’ll have to just sort 

of ask those kinds of questions when we get to committee and 

have an opportunity to discuss it with the officials. 

 

But here it says that they can take into account these four things 

when deciding whether or not to order costs against the holder 

of a fee waiver certificate, and they’re saying access to justice, 

fairness to the parties, the conduct of the parties, and any other 

factor that they consider appropriate. So it’s a very broad list of 

things that the court can take into account. Of course the court 

can already do that when taking it into account, but for some 

reason it’s been specified here. 

 

And I think access to justice is probably the most important one 

on the list. Because if people are going to be deterred from 

bringing forward a case for fear that they may lose and that they 

may have costs awarded against them, again that’s a barrier to 

accessing the justice system and one that needs to be taken to 

account. Obviously it’s not dealt with fully in this Act, but I 

think the message from the legislators here is that if you have 

received a fee waiver certificate, there are certain eligibility 

requirements that you’ve met. So that’s one thing for the court 

to take into account, and I assume the courts will know that this 

will be part of the record that this individual has received a fee 

waiver certificate. Again there’s nothing in the Act that tells us 

how it will be brought to the court’s attention. I guess the 

application would go through that body in some way, shape, or 

form, but it could go through a clerk. So whether or not it’s on 

the record, I don’t know, and I’m assuming it will be. 

 

At any rate, the decision maker, when deciding whether to 

make an award for costs, would have to take into account these 

lists because the legislation is saying, take into account these 

lists if you so want to. But I think there’s a bit of a directive 

here just by including them. Access to justice is obviously the 

most important one on the list because if you’re fearful of 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5815 

accessing the justice system and worried about that you might 

have costs awarded against you, that will certainly impact your 

decision whether or not to go forward with a lawsuit or any 

kind of appeal or against a tribunal decision. 

 

So interesting that the legislators have done this and it’s 

interesting that it shows up in the class actions draft bill that’s 

ahead of us as well or in front of us as well. 

 

Interesting clause no. 8. So we’re now through the process. 

We’ve got the costs awarded or not awarded. Now it says in 

section 8 that any court or public body can exercise existing 

powers to waive fees for someone, notwithstanding whether or 

not they’ve got their fee waiver certificate. So basically it says, 

if you don’t go through this process, it doesn’t mean that they 

still can’t waive the fees. So it seems kind of weird a little bit, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would continue to provide the 

access to fee waivers in the general powers of the tribunals or 

the public bodies. But maybe there’s a number of pieces of 

legislation that already provide that power to the tribunals. 

 

And it seems like if you were drawing a Venn diagram of this, 

you would have the court’s authority to waive fees in a larger 

circle, and then we’d plunk this bill right in the middle of that 

circle and say, oh and by the way, they can apply to waive the 

fees, have the fees waived individually and get a certificate. So 

interesting approach. And we’ll certainly have to take a look 

and see how often this is used by individuals who are trying to 

seek justice and can’t afford the fees, and whether or not this 

just simply wouldn’t be available generally and broadly. And I 

assume it is already. So we’ll watch and see how the uptake is 

for this type of waiver certificate once the bill becomes law. 

 

Section 10 is again, as always, there’s a long list of what the 

government can do through their Executive Council and not 

through this Chamber. So a long list of regulations that can be 

made by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and of course 

that’s the Executive Council of cabinet who can produce all 

kinds of rules and regulations dealing with this bill, and as I’ve 

talked about in the past, many other bills.  

 

So they can . . . Even under the first clause, 10(a), the executive 

cabinet can define, enlarge or restrict the meaning of any word 

or expression used in this Act but not defined in this Act. So 

right off the hop you have cabinet being able to change the 

meaning of any word in this Act, and to me that just strikes me 

as a very broad expansive power that we hand over to the 

executive government. 

 

And again, as speaking from a member of the opposition bench, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s concerning. I think it’s worrisome 

when we can’t have open, public debate about all the decisions 

that are being made. However in a modern government, the 

regulatory sphere is here to stay, and I think the number of 

issues that come forward to government, certainly you know, 

it’s very difficult to do it through the, you know, passing of bills 

in the Legislative Assembly, but I just have to point that out. 

 

They can make regulations prescribing fees. They can prescribe 

who are the public bodies, which is something I’d talked about 

earlier. They can prescribe what a special circumstance is. The 

procedures to be followed with respect to applications, that 

makes sense, and I think that’s an appropriate use of regs. Also 

how the forms are going to look, that makes absolute sense to 

be in the regulatory section. Different rules about the issuance 

of a certificate in special circumstances, that makes sense again 

I think in the regulatory sphere.  

 

Oh, here’s one. They can under (j), section 10(j) the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council can make regulations prescribing rules 

respecting the payment of lawyers’ fees by the holder of a fee 

waiver certificate. Now I’m not sure how that applies to 

lawyers’ fees. This would be certainly through the private bar, 

and I didn’t practice in the private bar. I practised public law. 

So I’m not sure how that would affect payment of fees, but I 

suppose most lawyers would want to know in advance whether 

or not there’s going to be a regulatory exclusion of the payment 

of their fees if someone holds a fee waiver certificate. That’s a 

whole other issue that needs to be looked at. 

 

Prescribing procedures for the review of decisions of officials. 

So there will be some sort of . . . I’m not sure what this would 

intend to do, but it looks like there will be some sort of process 

that’s set out for decisions made under section 3. Oh, and that’s 

the application of the fee waiver certificate. So there will be 

rules to review if you’re denied. You know, how are you going 

to be denied, and then can you appeal that or have a review of 

that? 

 

And again, the rules that I’ve talked about earlier in section 7, I 

think it was, oh section 6, where a judge can cancel your 

certificate, there will be rules prescribed in the regulations about 

that. 

 

So I think that’s it for the regulatory section of the Act. There’s 

some consequential amendments as well to other bills that will 

be affected by this, particularly The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act because we’re talking about the tribunal there, 

and The Residential Tenancies Act needs to be amended as well. 

 

So I think in terms of the bill itself is pretty straightforward. 

Now he talks about in his comments how self-represented 

litigants can apply for fee waiver certificates, and apparently 

that was only available until now in Ontario and British 

Columbia. And he says, currently fee waivers are only available 

to individuals represented by legal counsel. I’m not sure 

currently where that resides, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it may be 

in one of the court Acts, and I’m sure other of my colleagues 

may be more familiar with this. 

 

[15:30] 

 

But he’s saying that what the effect of the law is right now is 

that it’s limited to fee waivers for individuals who get . . . It’s 

limited them to people who are represented by pro bono counsel 

or legal aid and family law matters, so it sounds like it’s only 

available to people who actually have legal representation. But 

now they’re expanding the eligibility to self-represented clients, 

so again it’s intended to provide broader access to the courts. 

And I’m not sure how that shows up in the Act itself, but 

there’s nothing in that Act that says you have to be represented 

by legal counsel, so maybe that’s how they’re trying to 

determine that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, in terms of the ultimate goal here — enhancing access 

to justice — this does provide some relief for, as I said, 



5816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

low-income individuals. There’s no indication how that 

eligibility in terms of income is going to be . . . Like when I 

read the section 10 that describes what’s going to be in the 

regulations, I don’t see a lot of guidance in terms of eligibility 

for the fee waiver, and I don’t know if it’s going to be 

income-based, if you just sort of have to provide your last three 

years of income tax in order to be eligible and under a certain 

threshold. We have little guidance from the minister on that 

aspect. 

 

And so it makes me think again of my particular constituent 

who needed to fill out a form for child tax benefit, and one of 

the things that the Canada Revenue Agency wanted was his 

three previous years of taxes. And because of his condition and 

his mental health issues, he had no record. He’d been living on 

the street, Mr. Speaker, and sort of sleeping on the street, so he 

didn’t carry his previous years’ income tax returns with him 

when he was homeless. So how are you supposed to be able to 

fill out the form? And when we tried to get information from 

Canada Revenue Agency — it was their form — they wanted 

his previous income, which they already have access to. So it 

was really a bizarre situation that we found ourselves in. But 

when you’re talking about people who are in dire straights, 

these kinds of things are real, real barriers for them to be able to 

access justice. 

 

So as I said earlier, I’m hoping the ministry will have some sort 

of mechanism to facilitate this process for people who are 

struggling, people who have difficulty dealing with all the 

administrative requirements. And you know, people who are on 

the street don’t have a filing system available in order to keep 

track of all the multitude of papers that we deal with these days 

and so hopefully there’ll be some support for them at that level. 

 

He’s talking about simplified application processes and 

simplified criteria for eligibility. Again there’s very little 

mention in the regulatory section so we will have to wait until 

the actual regulations are tabled before we can even comment 

on that, and again there’s no room for debate on those. So I will 

continue to make that point as I rise to my feet on these various 

bills. But at this point I think that’s the extent of my comments 

on this particular bill, and so I move that we adjourn the debate 

on Bill No. 145. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 146 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 

Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 

Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — My colleague beside me suggested that I do 

this particular discussion in French, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think 

I’ll make an attempt at that today because it would be fun, but I 

don’t have the language totally at my command at this point. 

But that’s the exact point. 

 

We talked about some consequential amendments that we found 

in the previous bill I just discussed, 145, and we’ve amended a 

couple Acts already, or the proposals to amend them, right 

within the bill. But for the bills that are prescribed in bilingual 

form, we have to have this consequential amendments Act 

dealing with the bills en français, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we have one, two, three . . . three bills that are affected by 

The Fee Waiver Act that I just spoke about that are provided to 

us in both official languages, and so these need to be amended 

separately in Bill 146. So in particular it’s The Court of Appeal 

Act and The Queen’s Bench Act and The Small Claims Act 

which are all being amended by saying that any fee payable 

under those three Acts is subject to The Fee Waiver Act. And of 

course it’s in French as well, so that’s why this wee little 

separate Bill No. 146 was necessary. And that’s really the 

extent of any comment I might have on this particular bill, so I 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 146. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 146. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 

Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s me again, and I’m 

trying to switch my brain over to this other bill that I’ve been 

asked to comment on today. And this is The Class Actions 

Amendment Act. 

 

Class actions are a very interesting part of the legal process, and 

I know we see a lot of notorious and newsworthy types of class 

actions because often the payout, if a class action’s successful, 

is very, very large. And you look at something like I remember 

the breast implants case where a number of women brought a 

case for when the implants . . . I think they were silicone-based, 

and they started leaking and making people very, very sick. So 

a class action case was brought and any woman who by virtue 

of the fact they had that type of implant would be eligible for 

the award. And so it’s kind of an interesting form of lawsuit. 

 

And as always when I take a look at these kinds of bills, I go to 

my friend Wikipedia just to find out a little bit about what it is a 

class action suit is and where they came from. There’s an 

interesting history on class action suits in Wikipedia. The article 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5817 

of course focuses more on the American style of class action 

suits, but they go all the way back to medieval England, Mr. 

Speaker. And the idea of a class action suit was actually very 

common in medieval England, and that was something I was 

surprised to find out. They were called group litigation in those 

days, and what it did is it would involve groups of people that 

were either suing or being sued in the common law. 

 

Now why were they grouped? Well it says in Wikipedia that 

these groups were usually based on existing societal structures 

like villages, towns, parishes, and guilds. And so back in those 

days, there was never any question about whether or not that 

was a proper group, because everybody knew what group they 

belonged to. I mean it was very clear back in medieval England. 

If you were part of the village, you were part of the village. 

 

I think one of the things we hear about in class action suits is 

who actually is in the class, who belongs to that group of 

plaintiffs or defendants. So back in the medieval times, I think 

your group was a lot easier to ascertain. Of course with modern 

society, through all the modern communications we have, you 

can be a member of any number of groups across the world 

without even actually having to be geographically present with 

other individuals of that group. So modern society has certainly 

changed what the notion of a group was. 

 

Why was it that the courts never questioned people to sue on 

behalf of an entire group? And Wikipedia points out that a 

professor, a UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] law 

professor, said that really the reason for that was there was no 

transportation or it was abysmally poor. There was really no 

communications, and it was impossible for the king or the 

English sovereign to manage the whole country in terms of an 

individual. So it just was easier to structure all these lawsuits in 

groupings rather than insist that it be done by the individual. 

And so they go on and talk about that a little bit. 

 

Eventually though, from 1400 to 1700, the idea of group 

litigation was eventually switched over to an individual type of 

litigation. Other problems that arose at the time was the rise of 

the use of a corporation. So they knew a corporation 

represented a group of shareholders, but what were these other 

loosely unincorporated or voluntary groups? There was a whole 

series of confusing and conflicting cases apparently around in 

that time period because of the War of the Roses and the Star 

Chamber, and at that time the common law courts were often 

paralyzed. So what you saw was the courts of Chancery then 

taking up the idea of jurisdiction over group litigation. And this 

article says that “Chancery cases on group litigation after 1700 

were a totally incoherent mess.” So things really fell apart after 

1700, and there was a number of issues that came through into 

the next century. At any rate, there was a steep decline in 

English jurisprudence and the whole idea of group litigation 

never recovered. So we see the end of group litigation, and that 

was it. 

 

Also in the United States of course there was a lot of confusion 

on the judges there who were trying to understand what 

happened in the courts of Chancery. And then because of the 

American Revolution, a lot of the judiciary then started talking 

about individualism. And this is something we see that’s 

critically important to the whole ethos of what it means to be an 

American. And so a lot of the judges took individualism for 

granted and said that you can’t allow then a court to bind 

somebody else who doesn’t even know they’re being included, 

which is the case in class actions. You can’t really bind them to 

this individual suit. So what happened over the next 150 years 

or so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that eventually the whole idea 

of a class action suit started to reassert itself, but it took a long 

time. 

 

In fact I think it was just until 1966 where what they call Rule 

23 in the United States was modernized and the modern class 

action actually binds all members of the class. The only time 

you can get out of that class action is if you show up in court 

and say, take me out; I don’t want to be involved. And so that’s 

how we now have the modern class action lawsuit. 

 

The other thing I think that came up in the ’60s, and it says 

there’s two other major developments, first of all, class action 

litigation by individual shareholders on behalf of all 

shareholders of the company could supplement direct 

government regulation of securities markets. So when you see 

shareholders being abused or disabused of their money because 

of nefarious actions, say Enron or some of those famous 

corporate rip-offs or thievery or fraud, whatever you want to 

call it, that it was very important for the security regulation to 

make sure that the companies would be responsible to every 

shareholder and not just the individual ones who had the 

wherewithal to bring a lawsuit. 

 

They say the second development was because of a number of 

movements that came up in the United States, including the 

African-American civil rights movement, environmentalism, 

and consumerism. So when you think about environmental class 

action suits . . . I don’t know. I think of Lake Erie or maybe the 

Three Mile Island, where there are environmental disasters that 

affect people, and class action lawsuits come out of that. 

Obviously the American civil rights movement would bring 

forward actions on behalf of African-Americans when their 

rights were being violated. And consumerism is I think the one 

we’re most familiar with where we see class action lawsuits 

where a particular product fails. You know, you could think of 

car failings, in particular cars where the brake systems aren’t 

working and 15 people lose their lives as a result. Well then you 

would have a class action lawsuit representing all of them. 

 

I know I think of even the residential schools where there were 

attempts, as that went through the court processes, to have a 

class action lawsuit for all individuals who attended the 

residential schools. And that’s a whole other story for another 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At any rate, I think it’s just 

interesting to think a little bit about class actions and how they 

came about and why they’re important in the modern context. 

 

What this bill, particular bill does, Bill No. 147, is just 

amending The Class Actions Act a little bit. It’s quite a small 

amendment. It only deals with one section of The Class Actions 

Act in section 40. And the minister’s comments of November 

5th when he introduced the second reading of the bill are quite 

brief but I think they’re succinct as well, which we always 

appreciate. 

 

We do want as much detail as possible though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and certainly the second reading speeches are 

something that we rely on a lot to provide the government’s 



5818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

context. And I know it’s not just members of the opposition 

who rely on these comments, but certainly for interpretation 

later on. Twenty years from now, these comments at the second 

reading are looked at to give some sense of what was the intent 

of government when the bill was passed, particularly if there is 

a dispute about interpretation of the bill. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now really all this section is doing is changing the way costs 

are awarded. And I know I spoke about costs just a few minutes 

ago in relation to The Fee Waiver Act. And the minister, his 

explanation for the change in this Act was that in the previous 

version, or in the current version of The Class Actions Act, the 

court is limited in how it can provide costs and award costs. 

 

Now he’s indicating that the court’s normal discretion to award 

costs in the regular course of proceedings was removed. I’m not 

sure that it was removed entirely. I think if you look at the 

existing section 40, it’s not removed entirely, but it is curtailed. 

And I think that might be a more appropriate description of the 

court’s ability. Because the current cost section has two 

subsections . . . or sorry, four, but two that are important here. 

 

The first subsection of the costs clause says they can’t award 

costs except under subsection (2), so it’s a restriction on their 

ability to award costs. And subsection (2) talks about some of 

the situations where they can award costs. So I’m not sure why 

the minister is saying that their normal discretion was removed. 

I guess in the general sense discretion has been removed, but I 

think it would be more accurate to say it’s limited to the three or 

four areas where . . . three areas where the courts can consider 

costs and where they do have discretion. 

 

And those three areas are this, Mr. Speaker. Under subsection 

(2)(a), it’s whether there are “vexatious, frivolous or abusive 

conduct on the part of any party.” And subsection (b), “an 

improper or unnecessary application or other step has been 

made or taken for the purpose of delay . . .” And certainly that’s 

a tactic that many people engage in in these types of lawsuits. 

And then the third one is that “there are exceptional 

circumstances that make it unjust to deprive the successful party 

of costs.” 

 

And I think those are the normal situations where a court would 

consider costs, but I may be missing something here. And I’m 

sure other of my colleagues will have something to say about 

that. Apparently the impetus here was in Alberta and Nova 

Scotia they have taken a different approach in terms of 

awarding costs in class actions, and I think the government has 

taken a look at that and decided that they wanted to introduce it 

here. 

 

So if you look at the actual new clause itself in this rather brief 

bill, it is clause 2 and it’s a definition of costs . . . or sorry, it’s 

not the definition of costs. It’s the section relating to costs. The 

current one is . . . section is being repealed and here’s the 

substitute section. And it just says the Court of Appeal or the 

courts may award costs that they consider appropriate. And then 

again, the government has taken the interesting extra step . . . 

Because the first step just says award costs that you think are 

appropriate, which maybe in a way the old section says, 

although it says you can’t award them unless you take these into 

account. But those things that they would take into account 

would be appropriate, and so now we’re saying you can do it if 

it’s appropriate. 

 

But then the section (2), 40(2) goes on to sort of direct the 

courts and tell them what might be considered appropriate. So 

what it says is, “In determining whether a costs award should be 

made pursuant to subsection (1), the court . . . may take into 

account one or more of the following.” So they’re saying you 

can do this and you can also take this into account, which is, if 

we’re doing the Venn diagram again, it would be the discretion 

is the larger part of the Venn diagram but there’s a little circle 

now plunked right in the middle of the larger authority that 

says, take this into account. 

 

What can they take into account? The public interest. Obviously 

in these types of class actions where there are maybe thousands 

of people involved — maybe it’s a car manufacturing issue or 

some sort of health product that has gone terribly bad — then 

they would want to take in the public interest. 

 

There’s another reason for . . . And I’m not sure how costs 

would apply here, but whether or not the action involved a 

novel point of law. I find that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, and 

I would be interested in knowing why the officials over at 

Justice would want to take that into account when it comes to 

costs. And again I think we’ll either have to wait until 

committee to find out or maybe speculate further. 

 

But costs are to be awarded when there’s a hardship on the 

other side because of the lawsuit. So again, I think having not 

practised in private law and only been a public lawyer, that’s 

just something that I would need to explore further. And 

hopefully my colleagues who know more about this will be able 

to explain a little better about how that would apply, or we can 

ask in committee. 

 

Again the third thing that the court can take into account under 

40(2) is, “(c) whether the action was a test case.” And again I 

don’t see the connection between that and costs. But there you 

have it. 

 

And the fourth one is, “access to justice for members of the 

public using class action proceedings.” Again, access to justice 

is always something that we want to ensure people have. We 

hear how difficult it is nowadays to even have a successful 

lawsuit because of the enormous costs that are associated. 

Again, whether this is a reason for awarding costs made by the 

Court of Appeal or the courts, perhaps that could be explained a 

little better. But we don’t have any comment from the minister 

on that, so we will look to the discussion in committee on that 

as well. 

 

Interestingly subclause (3) which is in this new section 40 is 

very similar, almost identical to the previous subsection 3. And 

I just find it interesting because it talks about if you’re a class 

member but you’re not one of the actual representative 

plaintiffs for that class . . . So if you’re way off somewhere, and 

you don’t even know that this class action lawsuit is happening 

affecting you, you are not responsible for the costs, which is 

somewhat unusual for me because I’m thinking you’re going to 

benefit from the award, but you’re not responsible for costs. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5819 

And I guess I’d have to think that through, but maybe if 

someone’s bringing a class action lawsuit . . . If I’m bringing a 

class action lawsuit, I’m very angry at my car manufacturer for, 

you know, the paint peeling off the side of my door. I’m angry 

enough to go forward and take it to the courts. But it’s found 

out afterwards that I, you know, for whatever reason my car 

was not . . . The paint peeled off for other reasons unrelated, 

and I’m awarded costs against me, then everybody with a car 

like mine isn’t going to have to pay those costs. I guess 

administratively it would almost impossible to handle, but it 

just seems weird that you can benefit from the award, but that 

you’re not responsible for the costs. 

 

As I said, that’s already in the existing Act. I’m not sure why 

it’s there. And as we go through these adjourned debates, it’s 

kind of . . . Some of these thoughts just come to you while 

you’re on your feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you start 

wondering, well why is it that way? So I think those are the 

kinds of things that we look forward to in committee. And 

certainly if, you know, folks are following this this afternoon, 

maybe there’s a few interested private bar lawyers that are out 

there right now and that deal with class action suits, maybe they 

can inform the opposition or myself in particular to let us know 

why these things are as they are. 

 

At any rate that’s the extent of this bill. There’s only the one 

clause, and it’s the removal of the existing section 40 and 

replacing it with a new section 40. And as I explained it’s 

dealing with the actual costs that courts can award when they 

are determining class action lawsuits. 

 

So the minister in his close of his comments, he said that the 

intention of these amendments is to “. . . restore the discretion 

to the courts to control their own processes, as in regular 

litigation matters, while still addressing the unique 

access-to-justice concerns that arise with class action 

litigation.” I don’t see the direct connect between that comment 

and what this bill actually does, and would look to the minister 

for more elaboration on that point as well. And perhaps that’s 

something he will be able to do in committee, so again we look 

forward to that. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

the debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 

2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise today to speak to Bill No. 150, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. Just a little bit about what this 

Act is set to do, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . Well in the original Act 

that we’re amending, governs the relationship between 

landlords and tenants of residential properties in Saskatchewan. 

And as the minister has pointed out, it’s designated to balance 

the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants while 

bringing efficiency to dispute resolution through the use of 

hearing officers. 

 

I know in my office . . . Undoubtedly when it comes to that 

balancing tenants’ and landlords’ responsibilities, it is a fine 

balancing act. But I know in my own office, I have had one 

issue in recent times with a landlord who had a concern. But by 

and large the things that I hear in my office in Saskatoon 

Riversdale are challenges that tenants are experiencing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some of the things that the minister commented about and that 

he lays out that this Act will be changing, he specifically lays 

out the expanding the time for claiming the return of a security 

deposit from 120 days to two years. And it’s interesting, he 

points out that he doesn’t think that there will be many claims 

that are made beyond 120 days, but there certainly may be 

some. That actually is not an issue that’s ever come up in my 

office, Mr. Deputy Speaker. More than anything, not so much 

around the damage deposit but people’s inability to afford rent 

in this current climate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With rising costs of 

everything from housing to utilities to food, I think one of the 

biggest challenges people face is actually being able to pay their 

rent and sometimes their mortgage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another proposal that is in this bill, which I think is positive for 

tenants, Mr. Speaker, is found in the amendment to section 60 

which allows landlords to evict tenants if the landlord wishes to 

demolish or renovate the premises or has other uses for the 

property. That notice period is currently one month, and this 

Act will extend it to two, which is, in this particular housing 

market, Mr. Speaker, having more time to be able to . . . When 

you have to vacate your premises because your landlord is 

doing something different with the building, having more time 

to find affordable housing is absolutely imperative. I know I 

have people who come into my office who are in a pinch and 

there is nothing in their, for their family size and what they can 

afford. It is still incredibly hard to find housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister talks about some of the problems that this bill will 

alleviate for landlords, and he says: 

 

In particular the bill expressly permits landlords to make 

and enforce reasonable rules in their residential premises. 

These rules may concern the tenants’ use, occupancy, or 

maintenance of the premises or the tenants’ use of 

services. Some examples may be rules concerning 

smoking or pets. If the rules are not reasonable, the tenant 

may challenge them with an application to a hearing 

officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that makes sense. If I were a landlord and I had a 

home and I was a non-smoker or wasn’t a pet person, I think 



5820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

that it makes sense to be able to set the rules on the property 

that you own, or some of those particular rules. I know that in 

my own home I don’t allow smoking. So if I were to own a 

rental property, I don’t think I’d want people smoking in my 

rental property either. I happen to be a pet person, but I know 

not everybody is, and I think having the latitude to set some of 

those rules is not a bad thing. But I think that there’ll be 

opportunity for further questions to ask the minister what else 

this might cover. 

 

I do think it’s important to point out one thing that is missing or 

that will be removed in this Act, Mr. Speaker. If you look at 

page 4 of the Act, section 58 will be amended in 12(1)(b):  

 

in clause (l) by striking out “social housing program as 

defined in the regulations” and substituting “housing 

program”. 

 

I think we have a number of questions about why you would 

want to remove the term social housing, Mr. Speaker. Social 

housing and affordable housing are not interchangeable terms, 

although we do use them. 

 

I think it’s interesting to look to the CMHC, the Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation definition of what is 

considered affordable housing and what is defined as social 

housing, Mr. Speaker. So in Canada . . . This is from the CMHC 

website: 

 

In Canada, housing is considered affordable if shelter costs 

account for less than 30 per cent of before-tax household 

income. The term “affordable housing” is often used 

interchangeably with “social housing.” [And they go on to 

point out that] . . . social housing is just one category of 

affordable housing and usually refers to rental housing 

subsidized by the government. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And on the housing continuum you can have everything which 

can fall under affordable housing, and: 

 

Affordable housing is [in fact] a much broader term 

[according to CMHC] and includes housing provided by 

the private, public and not-for-profit sectors as well as all 

forms of housing tenure [whether it’s] . . . rental, 

ownership and cooperative ownership. 

 

So in the housing continuum you’ve got emergency shelters, 

transitional housing, supportive housing, subsidized housing, 

market rental housing, and market home ownership housing. 

 

But I think it’s interesting if we . . . So that’s CMHC’s 

definition of affordable housing, which is 30 per cent of your 

before-tax, less than 30 per cent of your before-tax household 

income. But if you go to the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation’s website and look at how we’ve defined things 

here in Saskatchewan, it’s quite different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The affordable housing program, the rental program . . . Well I 

should actually put on the record here the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation is, as I think everybody in this Assembly 

knows but maybe not everybody in the province might not 

know this, that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is a 

Crown corporation owned by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

founded in 1978 to fund social housing and provide grants and 

other incentives for low-income and rental housing 

development within the province. And as at the 2013 annual 

report, Saskatchewan Housing Corporation-owned rental 

housing portfolio consists of 18,229 units and the distribution as 

follows: 45 per cent seniors, 35 per cent families, 15 per cent 

persons with disabilities, 3 per cent homeowner units, and 2 per 

cent singles. 

 

But back to my point here, Mr. Speaker, about how CMHC has 

defined affordable housing as 30 per cent, or less than 30 per 

cent of your before-tax income. Here in Saskatchewan the 

Housing Corporation, which falls under the Minister of Social 

Services, the affordable housing rental program: 

 

. . . offers rental housing for people with moderate 

incomes. The rent is set at the low end of the private rental 

housing market for each community. [It] . . . is available in 

over 80 communities in Saskatchewan and is suitable for 

seniors and families. 

 

For families, affordable housing is intended to be 

short-term until a family is able to afford to buy or rent a 

home in the private housing market. For seniors affordable 

housing is intended for the long-term. 

 

So the rent — again just to reiterate here for the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation affordable housing rental program — the 

rent is set at the low end of the private rental housing market for 

each community. I would like to point out that that might not be 

less than 30 per cent of your before-tax income, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in many parts of the province. So in fact Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation’s affordable housing program wouldn’t 

meet CMHC’s same definition of affordable housing. 

 

So now we need to talk about social housing here. The social 

housing program for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

offers rental housing for people with low incomes to people 

who are victims of abuse. The rent is based on a tenant’s 

income. The lower the income, the lower the rent. Social 

housing is available in over 300 communities in Saskatchewan. 

This housing is suitable for seniors and families, but some is 

suitable for persons with a disability. For families, social 

housing is intended to be short-term until a family is able to 

afford to buy or rent a home in the private housing market. For 

seniors, social housing is intended for the long term. 

 

So again the question around removing the term social housing 

from this particular Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not quite sure 

what the rationale is. And I know that’ll be something in 

committee that we’ll want to ask the minister and find out what 

is behind that decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know that in my own community, just one thing with The 

Residential Tenancies Act is there’s a huge exclusion in this 

Act. It would have been nice to see not-for-profit corporations 

considered under this Act. Right now there is an exclusion. So 

as of a few years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was changed so 

rents couldn’t be increased more than every six months for 

landlords, but CBOs [community-based organization] or 

not-for-profits are excluded from this. 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5821 

So what I’ve seen, and what I know some of my colleagues 

have seen in two or three different very recent examples, is 

not-for-profit organizations raising their rent frequently. And 

I’m thinking of one particular case where there was a rent 

increase twice this year already. There’ll be one on December 

1st and another one on January 1st. And I think for me that 

triggers the question what’s going on in the CBO world or the 

not-for-profit sector that they’re needing to raise rents? In terms 

of both federal and provincial government funding, are there 

pressures to bear on the CBO sector or the not-for-profit sector 

that are making them, are putting them in a position to have to 

increase their rents on what’s considered affordable housing? 

 

But this one particular building that I’m thinking about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I heard from one individual who currently is a 

single individual. And he has a criminal record and a disability, 

so finding employment is incredibly difficult. But he talks about 

he gets a cheque on the 1st of the month and after he’s paid his 

rent, he has $9 left. Mr. Speaker, $9 left to live. Then a little 

while later, he gets a second cheque for a disability rental 

supplement which does give him an extra $256 which is not a 

lot of money to live off of for the rest of the month. So in total 

he would have $265 after his rent is paid for the whole month: 

food, transportation, all those kinds of things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I would challenge anyone in this Chamber to live off that same 

amount. It’s impossible. It is near impossible. It actually amazes 

me how people do make it work, but thankfully . . . in large 

measure to many of the service organizations. But someone 

shouldn’t have to rely month after month after month on charity 

and the goodwill of their neighbours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this individual pointed out that he is in an affordable 

housing building, so he has $9 left after his first cheque after his 

rent is paid. And so with the two increases — the one that 

happens on December 1st and the one that happens on January 

1st — that will leave him with $156 after his second cheque, 

Mr. Speaker, because his money will go to that increased $100 

in rent. And this, this is affordable housing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So we have a problem here in Saskatchewan. There are people 

who cannot pay their rent and survive. It is impossible. Again I 

would challenge anybody in this room to think about how they 

would live on that kind of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again I would ask the question: what’s going on with 

not-for-profits, that they’re in this position to have to raise 

rents? What are the funding pressures that they’re experiencing? 

But secondly, there is clearly a loophole if a regular landlord is 

not allowed to increase rents unless it’s every six months but we 

have other landlords who fit into a different category who can 

and are doing it more often. This one case that I’ve just told you 

about, I know I’ve had two colleagues mention two very similar 

cases with not-for-profits, so this is not an isolated incident, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think we can’t talk about housing here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

without referring to some of the comments the Minister of 

Social Services made when the Deveraux housing project, the 

48 units, fell apart when they were over budget and the 

government decided that they were going to walk away from 

that deal — 48 units, Mr. Speaker. And our Minister of Social 

Services who is responsible for housing made the comment 

about, “You’re assuming that there are these desperate 

homeless people.” She did apologize for that after and say that 

those words should never have been said. I couldn’t agree more 

with that comment, that these words should never have been 

said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The cold, hard reality is homelessness is an issue here in 

Saskatchewan. People live and die on the streets in 

Saskatchewan. But homelessness has many different faces. 

There are the individuals that we think about who are in fact 

completely without a home and are living on the streets, but 

homelessness also comes in the form of people who are having 

to couch surf, going from place to place, staying with friends 

and family. Homelessness looks like multiple families living 

under one roof in a home made or designed to be a single 

family unit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think I want to talk about some of those impacts that living 

under those conditions have on families. So if you’re couch 

surfing or if you’ve got multiple families living in a home for 

one family . . . I know that I’ve spoken to teachers and families 

in my community who are seeing the effects of this in schools 

in Saskatoon Riversdale and undoubtedly in other parts of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, where if your parents are couch surfing 

and you’re with your parents, there is no consistency or 

reliability. So how do you continue to attend school or go to the 

same school if your house is constantly changing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Or if you are living under that roof where there are 

two or three families in a house designed for one family, how 

do you study? And how do you learn when you have no . . . 

And how do you have a high-functioning household? We all 

have stresses and pressures, which are often in some cases made 

worse by financial constraints. 

 

And so you’ve got multiple people living in a house, no place to 

retreat for space and for quiet — and I think we all appreciate 

the opportunity once in a while to have some time and some 

quiet to ourselves — no place for kids to study. And it leads to 

children leaving schools and going to multiple schools, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So that homelessness doesn’t just have the face of people living 

without a home and living directly on the street. Homelessness 

comes in many forms. 

 

I know a few years ago when Tim Richter, who is the CEO 

[chief executive officer] or the president I believe of the 

Canadian Alliance to End Homelessness, when he came to talk 

a few years ago about Housing First as a really important 

concept, I remember hearing him speak. And he talked about a 

boom town economy. There was nothing like a boom town 

economy to throw gasoline on the fire of homelessness, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And we’ve seen that in spades in our 

communities, Mr. Speaker, that housing is a huge issue. 

Affordability of that housing is a huge issue. People are 

struggling. 

 

So that point about what is missing in this Act, so the 

government is proposing removing the term social housing 

from the Act. Perhaps we should talk about defining, like 

CMHC has, defining what affordable housing is. And I think a 



5822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

good measure is 30 per cent or less of your before-tax income. 

 

I know some affordable housing units went up in Saskatoon 

Riversdale, very well-intentioned, and they sat empty until 

they’ve been rented out. They were actually units for purchase, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what ended up happening with many 

of them, there were some houses that were torn down, and these 

new units put up. But many of those people displaced by the 

houses being torn down . . . And admittedly many of those 

houses were ramshackle and needed to go. They were not 

well-cared-for rental units. But what came up were these 

so-called affordable units for purchase, Mr. Speaker, but they 

were 210, $220,000. This was a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

And they sat empty until they’ve been more recently rented out. 

They had to be rented out instead of sold because people who 

had been displaced can’t afford . . . $220,000 for some people is 

not affordable. 

 

So when you think about the average house in Saskatoon I think 

is over $400,000, the average home price, and so you think, 

well $220,000 is affordable. For so many people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that is not affordable. 

 

So with this particular Act, I think it’s again important to talk 

about what we could have done with this Act, closing up the 

loophole for not-for-profit organizations to raise rent at will. 

 

You know what? I need to talk a little bit about the Saskatoon 

housing corporation. I’ve several units or several buildings in 

my own constituency. And I know under this government, rents 

went up multiple times, again putting the screws to people and 

making it difficult for them to pay their rents. And these are 

people . . . Again, some people have families, but often I hear 

from single individuals who are really feeling the pinch, the 

fellow I referred to earlier, who after he receives his first 

cheque, he’s got $9 left. Single people often have challenges, 

but with . . . The rents had gone up in all these Saskatoon 

Housing Authority buildings early in my days as an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

multiple times in the period of a couple of years. And people 

have no money left for other necessities like food, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think about when you think about the philosophy of a 

government as well, why you’d remove social housing from 

this Act or what is or isn’t in the Act, I think we need to look 

towards this government. Their current candidate who’s 

running in the by-election in Lloydminster last week made the 

comment that governments shouldn’t be involved in housing, 

but it’s interesting because social housing by definition is 

housing subsidized by government. So does she and do other 

people in her party think that the government should not be 

involved in social housing? By its removal from this Act, that is 

a question that comes up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So I know we will have some questions, many questions in 

committee about this, and very interested to hear what the 

minister has to say on some of these issues, and as well I know I 

have colleagues who have many comments and many thoughts 

on this Act as well. So with respect to Bill No. 150, The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014, I move to adjourn 

debate. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 151 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 

Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to this bill, No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment 

Act, 2014. Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister put forward the 

second reading comments on Nov. 4th, 2014, but they are 

notable by their brevity even in a government which doesn’t 

usually give us very much information on changes being made 

to legislation. But this particular second reading speech is even 

maybe shorter than a lot that we have seen. 

 

And practically there are some quite interesting changes that are 

being made to the pharmacy and pharmacists and pharmacist 

technician legislation that perhaps could have used quite a bit 

more explanation on the record as to who requested these 

changes, why the changes are being made now, what kinds of 

things are being affected. Because so much of what is being 

dealt with here does affect people on a day-to-day basis as they 

deal with their pharmacist, the pharmacist technicians, and the 

various corporate pharmacies or larger pharmacies that are here 

in the province. 

 

So I think the first thing that happens is that they’ve changed 

the name of the legislation to The Pharmacy and Pharmacy 

Disciplines Act. And effectively what this does is then create a 

college of pharmacists that will be responsible for regulating 

not just pharmacists but also pharmacy technicians, and it will 

also clarify that this particular college will be responsible for 

issues around pharmacy ownership, which will have broader 

implications. 

 

So we don’t know, from what the minister has said or from the 

legislation, why some of these changes are being brought 

forward right now. But I think what we do know is that the 

whole world of pharmacies has changed dramatically in the last 

10 or 20 years. And what we’ve seen is that pharmacies, the 

local independent pharmacy that is there still in Saskatchewan, 

has received huge competition from national pharmacy chains 

that are present in our province but also what we would 

traditionally call grocery stores or other kinds of stores that 

have entered into the pharmacy business. 

 

And the challenge I think for Saskatchewan and for the 

legislation that is being brought forward here is to make sure 

that it deals with the issues between a patient and the 

pharmacist as the prime goal, and I think it tries to do that, but 

also to make sure that individual patients are protected in the 

larger scheme of things and also that pharmacists as 

professionals have the full protection of their agency but also 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5823 

the full supervision. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth looking at how the legislation 

has been drafted and what kinds of changes are being brought 

forward to understand what kinds of amendments are here. And 

practically some of the changes seem kind of innocuous, but 

other ones do have some fairly, fairly, I think important changes 

that are here. 

 

So we know that one of the major parts is bringing in the 

pharmacy technicians under the protection of the pharmacists. 

And this is actually a much more interesting issue than we 

might suspect because it has its parallels in other professions. 

Here in Saskatchewan we’ve been quite, I think the word is 

trusting, but also respectful of various professions regulating the 

profession plus the people who are involved in that profession. 

So for example, I’m a lawyer, a member of the Law Society. 

The Law Society also has the substantial role in legislating for 

paralegals and related people. For dentists, dentists have a 

substantial role in monitoring all of the parts of the dental 

profession. I think the same would be true with medical. And so 

this legislation follows that model. 

 

But if we look at other jurisdictions in North America, some of 

them have gone quite a different direction than what’s happened 

here. And I’m not sure what the exact word would be to 

describe it, but it’s basically people who don’t like the 

establishment organizations bring forward legislation that takes 

away some of the powers on the edges. A good example does 

relate to dentistry where, in some provinces, separate legislation 

has been created to create new dental professions or dental 

therapy professions, the dental technician professions or 

paradentist type legislation because of the concern that maybe 

the dentists have had too much control in a particular area. 

 

And this I don’t think applies as it relates to this pharmacist 

legislation, but it does raise the question of where is the 

ultimate control as it relates to the pharmacy technicians. I think 

it’s quite clear from the way the legislation is drafted that that 

job of dispensing what can be harmful substances, in 

appropriate doses and in appropriate forms, will be regulated by 

this College of Pharmacists. But I think the whole issue though 

will have to be looked at carefully if in fact there become 

difficulties in the longer term around how the various 

pharmaceuticals are dispensed. 

 

So the new name for the college will now be the Saskatchewan 

college of pharmacy disciplines. And so when we have that new 

name, what are the changes that happened to the legislation 

itself? Well one of the first things, it does relate to the whole 

concept of keeping control on how the work is done, and that 

includes how you set up the discipline committees. It’s clear in 

the new legislation that the number of public representatives, in 

other words non-dental technicians, or non-pharmacists and 

non-pharmacy technicians, will be increased to four public 

representatives. This is in line with other professions like 

lawyers and doctors and others where there are between three 

and five sort of non-professionals, if I can put it that way, who 

are on the board of governing the particular . . . So that’s one 

way that this Act does change it. 

 

Another way, it does relate to the actual discipline committees. 

And so what it states is that if a pharmacist is subject to a 

discipline committee, the committee will have three members 

and at least two of the members must be pharmacists. So that 

makes the possibility that the third member would either be a 

pharmacy technician or it could be one of the public members 

on the board of the organization. If the person being disciplined 

is a pharmacy technician, then in that particular case at least two 

members of the discipline committee have to be pharmacy 

technicians, and then the third person could either be a 

pharmacist or one of the public members. 

 

And it goes on also then to deal with some of the other issues 

around pharmacy ownership issues and sets out some of the 

rules there as well for how this particular work is going to be 

done. Now the importance of that is that it retains the idea that 

you’re being disciplined or governed by your peers when you 

are doing this. And so changes had to be made when we put 

both pharmacists and pharmacy technicians in the same group. 

 

Now another interesting section is the section 18 around the 

registration of members. And the section is amended, it says 

here in the explanation, around the minimum academic 

requirements for registration. And what we now know is that 

people with a bachelor’s degree in pharmacy will have the basic 

qualifications to move forward to be registered as a pharmacist 

in Saskatchewan. What the amendments do is recognize the fact 

of degree creep, I guess is one way to put it, but the fact that 

many schools of pharmacy are now giving a doctorate in 

pharmacy or a PharmD [Doctor of Pharmacy] designation. It’s 

not dissimilar to what’s happened in Canadian law schools 

where now all the lawyers get a Juris Doctor or a J.D. But what 

it also does is deal with the credential-based professions that are 

primarily in health care. What we know is if you’re practising 

100 miles south of here as a physiotherapist, you most likely 

have a doctorate in physiotherapy which is exactly the same as 

the bachelor of physiotherapy that’s used in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think in the same way, this change in the legislation reflects 

that change in designation around entry-level positions for 

pharmacists. Now this is an interesting phenomenon right 

across North America. When the Minister of Health works with 

the Minister of Finance and they look at the budget for the year, 

one of the factors is the number of people with various 

credentials and how they’re paid. Every time we increase the 

designation or description of a particular profession by adding 

the word doctor to the name, we increase into the bargaining 

power of that particular group. 

 

And we see that right across the board. We know that the issue 

goes right through the nursing areas. It goes through medical, 

all the different areas, but it’s especially an issue in the health 

care system because so much of the pay scales are based on the 

credentials that people have, and that’s set over and against the 

credentials that are there in some other areas like emergency 

medicine or fire or whatever. Emergency medicine has 

credentials. The fire side has basically seniority and experience, 

and often that juxtaposition does cause some issues in sorting 

out the compensation levels in negotiations. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So what we’re doing here in this legislation is, without much 

comment, basically increasing the credential capacity for the 

PharmD or doctorate in pharmacy. I’ll be curious, I think all of 



5824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

us will be curious to hear some of the explanations for that from 

the minister when we get into committee because once again 

it’s I guess positive for the pharmacists but we I think need to 

ask that question right across, across the board. 

 

Now the next section of the change relates to section 19. And 

what effectively happens here is that proprietary pharmacies, 

which I think you know are defined basically as the corporate 

pharmacies, need to have permits and permission under this 

legislation. I think that’s appropriate. How that’s done and 

whether it’s done the same way as is done in Alberta or 

Manitoba or British Columbia, I think that might be something 

we’d want to know as we move forward with this. Are we doing 

it the same as what’s happening in other provinces or do we 

have some special method of doing that kind of registration in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And the same thing also applies to the next section as it relates 

to the definition of pharmacy technicians. Is this a common 

Canadian definition, a common North American definition, or 

is it a definition that is in place primarily just in Saskatchewan? 

And does that limit some of our people who have got these jobs 

to staying within the Saskatchewan stores of a particular larger 

pharmacy corporation or national chain, or does this cause some 

difficulties for them? 

 

So practically there are a number of these changes which are 

part of this legislation. But we don’t really know from the 

second reading speech of the minister, you know, what the take 

is on why certain things have been done. And so to fill that out, 

we’ll end up asking questions here on this side of the House. 

But I think we’ll also have to make sure we get on the record as 

much as possible what’s the rationale for proceeding with this 

particular legislation. And ultimately I would say that the 

purpose of this legislation is the protection of the public, 

protection of the patients, and I don’t think there’s any 

deviation from that. But we need to know exactly how that’s 

being done and why certain provisions are set out in the 

legislation. 

 

The next section, relating to the disciplinary powers, points out 

that the level of fines that can be levied against members who 

are guilty of misconduct or professional incompetence, the 

levels of these fines have increased dramatically. And I think 

we’ll end up wanting to know what those kinds of levels are 

and also how effective they have been and how increasing the 

levels will make the legislation more effective if that’s in fact 

the case. And so it also includes substantial fines for the 

proprietary permit holders who may be guilty of some kind of 

an offence as well. So we’ll want to have more information 

about that. 

 

Now the whole area around how this applies to former members 

and former permit holders is a tricky one. We know that we’ve 

had some difficulties in some of the other professional 

legislation and I think we’ll end up having to look at that area as 

well to understand exactly how this will apply, especially as it 

applies to the proprietors or to some of the corporate situations 

because that’s a little bit trickier when it’s a whole national or 

even an international company that’s involved. 

 

So now another interesting practical section that’s been placed 

in the legislation — I think it does actually make some sense 

but it’s one that will have to be supervised very carefully — is 

that under the present legislation if a pharmacist dies, especially 

in a smaller community, it’s quite difficult for the continued 

provision of pharmaceutical services because there wasn’t an 

arrangement whereby the pharmacy technician, who would 

actually work and deal with a lot of the patients, could take over 

on an interim basis until the new management was set up with a 

licensed pharmacy. 

 

And so what the legislative change here that’s coming forward 

does, does set out a process whereby that can be done. And I 

think that’s a practical solution to a problem that we sometimes 

have in Saskatchewan. Now whether this will apply on a 

broader basis . . . We know we have some situations in the 

province where, I guess, extrajudicial individuals — I don’t 

know, that’s not quite the right word — but people who are not 

pharmacists can be in the process of dispensing pharmaceuticals 

on a special licence because they are in such a unique situation 

in the province. Presumably this legislation will deal with 

professional people in that kind of a situation who would also 

need the supervision of the college as well. 

 

And so now the legislation includes a number of amendments to 

other pieces of legislation because the title has been changed, 

and I think that obviously that’s a fairly practical one that we 

don’t have any great difficulty with. And so what we see is 

basically then legislation that has changes which reflect the 

changing nature of the dispensing of pharmaceuticals in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we know that the pharmacy profession 

and the pharmacy technician profession that’s been involved 

with the creation of this legislation, we don’t know all of the 

answers as to why specific procedures were accepted and put 

forward in the Act. We’ll be asking some questions around 

some of those things to make sure that what we have brought 

forward here is the best choice for the protection of the public. 

And we know that’s the intention of the people who have been 

involved in working with this, but sometimes more of the 

advice comes from the professional side than from the 

consumer side. And what we do know is that there’s substantial 

concern right across the world around the regulation and 

dispensing of pharmaceuticals. 

 

What we know in Canada is that we have a plan that provides 

for medical care and substantially for long-term care, home 

care, those kinds of things, but at this point we don’t have a 

national pharmacare program. I think that every time you look 

at legislation like this amending legislation, we need to keep 

asking the bigger picture about how we provide these 

pharmaceuticals in Canada. 

 

What we know from the history of the last 50 years that many 

people who are prescribed and then use pharmaceuticals can 

live relatively normal lives, not in an institution, not in a 

hospital situation, and we know that that’s an important part of 

how we live. But also we know that there’s a huge amount of 

money that is public money that is used in some of these things 

— plus it’s also money that comes from our families — and 

that we need to continue to ask questions about whether this, 

the way we’ve provided our pharmaceutical care for all citizens, 

is the best that we can do for Canadians. 

 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5825 

What we know is that, over and against our friends to the south 

in the United States, that our patent medicines do have a 

cheaper price than what they often pay. But we also know that 

their generic drugs that they’re able to purchase on a number of 

their plans, whether it’s Medicare or the private plans, are 

substantially less than what we pay in Canada. And so we need 

to keep asking questions about that. 

 

We can also look to countries like New Zealand or Australia 

where they have developed some pharmaceutical purchasing 

plans that work together with the professions that we’re talking 

about in this legislation, where they have been able to provide 

the same pharmaceuticals that our citizens get at a much more 

reasonable cost. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation may seem like 

it’s a fairly narrow change to legislation that we have in the 

province, but it’s part of a bigger question of a broader issue. 

And we will continue to ask questions when we get a chance 

about that broader issue, because it’s about making sure safe, 

effective medications are provided to all citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan at a reasonable cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be questions from some of my 

colleagues. I know others of my colleagues have some 

comments about this particular legislation, so at this point I will 

move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 141 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s great to rise with 

such an applause. It’s a kind thing of the government side. 

 

This is an interesting bill though, Bill No. 141, An Act 

respecting the Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, Public 

Records Management and making consequential amendment to 

other Acts and Regulations. 

 

I just think of yesterday. We think of Remembrance Day. And 

we think of not only the service that those who went to protect 

our country, protect our democratic values and freedom, the 

work they did. But I also have to say that the work of people 

who work in the archives, the public archives, whether it’s the 

War Museum in Canada or our own archives here in 

Saskatchewan, our archives in different public libraries, really 

brought home the message yesterday and leading up to it — the 

true story, the context of what was happening in Canada, 

Saskatchewan, our communities that led to the situation where 

we have and we mark Remembrance Day. 

 

Without them, all the work that would’ve gone into making sure 

that that memory is not lost, that we shall remember, takes on a 

whole new meaning when you talk about archives. They truly 

do the good work of what often some may say as, it may seem 

to be dry. It may seem to be mundane. It may not seem to have 

a lot of value in the here and now. But clearly in the future, 

when generations look back and say how do we understand the 

story of what happened then, public archives plays a huge, huge 

role. 

 

And I have to say that our thanks should go out to them and it’s 

very, very important work that they do. And it’s an honourable 

occupation and good work that is done to make sure that our 

story, our unique story of Saskatchewan is recorded and can be 

understood by those in the future. 

 

And whether, you know . . . As I said, the record of the world 

wars, the Afghanistan war, past wars that Saskatchewan people 

have been part of, clearly are much more understandable. And 

people appreciate the dedication, the commitment, the soldiers, 

the people who were involved in making those difficult 

decisions, the climate of the day. 

 

[16:45] 

 

It’s hard to fathom. It’s hard to fathom some of the events that 

happened in our world. But public archives makes it come 

alive, which is so incredible, because you think of the records 

that they keep and they must catalogue and organize them in a 

way that is understandable. Because, as the minister has said, 

the number of requests that they get is truly impressive. 

 

So how does one look into the future to say, how can I put 

together records that will be understandable and 

comprehensible and appreciated by those in the future? Because 

you know, it’s one thing to have a piece of paper in front of 

you, but it’s another thing for somebody to really appreciate 

what was happening around that piece of paper or around that 

document. 

 

You know, whether it’s a . . . And I see that school records may 

be part of it, you know, a simple attendance record. And I 

remember those sheets that we used to do, and I remember, 

most will remember the teachers who did the diagonal lines in 

their attendance books. Relatively mundane work that is done 

but hugely, hugely important when it comes to records of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan has an incredible history. When we talk about the 

First Nations, the treaties that were negotiated here and the fact 

that we’re all children of the treaties, how that record is kept 

and kept alive. So the meaning of that. And of course so much 

of that was oral tradition. But how do you keep that in a way 

that can have meaning for future generations? It’s important, 

and it’s more than just important in the sense of nice to have. 

It’s critical in terms of who we are as a culture, who the First 

Nations are as a culture, who are the Métis as a culture. And 

you know, we take a lot of pride in Saskatchewan because we 

say, “from many peoples, strength” and from . . . So we’re a 



5826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2014 

community of diversity, and we have to appreciate that and how 

do we have those records. 

 

The fact now that we have so many languages that are spoken 

in our communities and so many cultures, it’s a wonderful 

thing. It’s a wondrous thing. But the fact is, how do we keep 

that in a way that has meaning for generations, generations to 

come so they’ll understand this province from its earliest days 

of before being a province, before being a territory, to how it’s 

evolved through those states, through being a territory, through 

being a province, to the cities that we have now? How do we do 

that? 

 

And so this is an important piece of legislation before us, and 

we have to consider it fully. And there’s a lot of questions we 

have about who was consulted in this because this is not a small 

piece of legislation. It’s 20 pages long, and it’s one that could 

have a huge impact, a huge impact on how we gather and 

organize and keep our records. 

 

And so there are a lot of considerations we have, and we have a 

lot of considerations about how those records are, whether 

they’re paper records, whether they’re electronic records. You 

know, it’s interesting. We thought everything . . . And we’ve 

had this debate as well in terms of how the records were kept in 

this legislature, whether they were tape recordings and then 

they’ve evolved into DVDs [digital versatile disc] from paper 

and pencil and all of those things. So what will be the record of 

10 years from now? And how will we make sure . . . Well we 

will know for sure, we won’t know what it is. We know that. 

 

But what we need to know is how can we ensure that the 

records can be transferred more easily. And that’s an important, 

an important issue. And so we have a lot of questions about 

this. And of course it’s one thing to put together this legislation, 

and of course we ask, who’s been consulted and what did they 

have to say about this? 

 

But of course the other big issue will be the costs. And we 

know this government, when it can have its pet projects like 

lean, there are no bounds to what they will spend and who will 

they press into service, as we’ve seen with the Health Quality 

Council who will be pressed into service. But archives are a 

little bit different, as I’ve said. It’s a huge job but often left to a 

very few people and often underfunded. And with this kind of 

new legislation, will there be more funding? How will we make 

sure? If we’re taking this kind of a leap forward, you can’t do it 

. . . [inaudible] . . . resources. You can’t say, jump forward, 

when you’re asking people and organizations to jump forward 

into the great unknown. 

 

What are they going to do? What are the resources going to be 

for them? And we also have questions about, what does this 

mean for other archives, you know, the University of 

Saskatchewan, the University of Regina? You have huge 

collections of important public records. How is that coordinated 

into this? 

 

Of course it does talk a little about school records. That’s 

important. How is that coordinated into this? You know, and 

the wonderful thing about Saskatchewan, when you look around 

the province, you know, you have all these museums and 

people gathering important documents and whether they make 

the grade of what is a public record and who gets to decide, and 

I have some questions about that. For example when I look at 

one of the questions around the public records committee and 

who it consisted of — the Provincial Archivist which I think is 

obviously a great choice, the Legislative Librarian, deputy 

minister of Finance or his or her designate, deputy minister of 

Justice or his or her delegate, and the head of any other 

government institution that may be designated in the regulations 

or her or his delegate — and I’m wondering where is Culture in 

this? Where is Culture in this? 

 

To me, the public records really serves a much deeper cultural 

purpose than any other purpose really. You would think Culture 

would be one of the key members of the public records 

committee because they’re the people who do the archaeology. 

They do all the kind of works with Royal Saskatchewan 

Museum is under the Minister of Culture’s management. And 

I’m, you know, I’m not sure who the archives report to, whether 

they report directly to Finance or who they report to directly. I 

would almost think it should be Culture. It might be . . . I don’t 

know. That’s a question we have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Okay. I’ve just heard the answer. I’m glad that I posed that. 

Thank you very much. Thank you very much. 

 

So I think that’s why there should be somebody from the 

Ministry of Culture on this public records committee. Because I 

think if the public archives reports to Culture, why is Culture 

not there? I’m not sure. This is something we have for 

committee. I’m just saying public archives is a very important 

cultural activity, and I would like to see more profile for the 

Ministry of Culture in that because it’s much more than 

finances. It’s much more than justice records. It’s who we are. 

 

And when I think of days like yesterday when we celebrate and 

mark world wars and service of people, it’s more than just a 

numeric thing. It’s more than just a recording. It’s who we are. 

And so I would like to see the ministry take or be given the 

opportunity. We’ll find out more about that through questions, 

but we’ll be asking the questions to make sure that they are. 

 

And I do see and I do want to take a few minutes to reflect on 

the minister’s comments. And actually he did give quite . . . 

And this was very good to see, and I know my colleague has 

commented on this, that usually the minister’s comments are 

shorter, but actually this time the minister gave quite extensive 

comments. And that was very good to see because it’s an 

archival document and it’s very important to see the record. The 

public record is clear about the intent of this bill before us. So 

it’s very important. 

 

And we’re going to be seeing and asking a lot of questions. He 

did talk about providing a framework for effective delivery of 

the archives mandate, particularly in the electronic records 

environment and of course what all does that entail, right from 

film and audio to now with emails and texts. This is a brand 

new world, and I think this will be very, very important to see 

what is it that that means. And I do appreciate the comment of, 

will distinguish the role of the institution as the custodian of 

Saskatchewan’s documentary history. 

 

But also it’s the leader. It’s the leader. It sets the bar for how do 

we act as custodians of our history? And clearly how the 

government acts, the Provincial Archivist acts, so will many 



November 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5827 

others take their cue from the province. 

 

The minister goes on and talks about how the Archives 

responded to over 5,000 inquiries in 2013-14. That’s almost . . . 

That would be in the ballpark of 200 requests a day. That is 

pretty impressive — 200 a day. You know, you’re talking about 

20 or 30 an hour. It really does show that people are interested 

in the history of our province. We’re a phenomenal province 

when it comes to diversity and I think our records are strong, 

but we need to be able to provide the resources so that people 

can have access to our archival records. They’re very, very 

important. It’s a critical, important service that we provide to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do find this always interesting, how the archives provide some 

of the data. And when the minister talks about, since April 1st 

of this year, Saskatchewan Archives has reviewed 656 disposal 

requests involving over 6,000 boxes of material. Imagine what 

that would look like in the warehouse, 6,000 boxes. You could 

get lost in 6,000 boxes. I know it would be quite a thing.  

 

Eighteen hundred metres of public record for disposal and 

identified 146 metres of record for transfer to archives for a 

historic preservation. So I’d be interested in getting to hear 

more about, so does that mean they’re sending out 1,800 boxes 

or metres that’s not worthy of anything? One hundred and 

forty-six is. And so what will happen to those, all that material? 

And how do we keep it, effectively? You know, as a province 

grows, we have that challenge of how do you store this 

material? Because clearly the warehouses could fill pretty 

quickly if you don’t have a management process of keeping this 

in some sort of effective way. 

 

And of course the minister does talk about the role of the board 

in updating the responsibility of the board and setting a strategic 

direction for the institution. Now it must be strategic in some 

sense. I hope it’s not always short term because, you know, 

governments do change, and we should anticipate that 

governments change. I know governments hope they don’t 

change, but clearly this should be above that kind of short-term 

thinking, and that this is a long-term process where we 

celebrate, in fact, we celebrate our politics and the fact that we 

have a rigorous kind of province, that it’s been diverse from 

many political parties and it is worth managing, but that the 

archives can be most effectively delivered. And the type of 

long-term planning in areas of accommodation and operating 

budgets are not political footballs but in fact they have that 

long-term stability, that they can do their job without 

interference or political manipulation. And so this is something 

that we’ll be looking for in the new year. 

 

How is this legislation supported in the budget? I mean it’s one 

thing to say yes, we want to do these new things when we think 

they’re very, very important, but the second part of it is, is there 

any support for actually doing it? And that’s the key thing. 

Because we’ve known in the past where we’ve seen this 

government say one thing but do another thing. And it’s very 

important when you are putting legislation forward that you are 

sending messages that you are supporting this area, very 

interested in doing the right thing. But the question will be, will 

you support it? 

 

We are also very . . . And I’ll be asking more questions about 

this in committee and as we discuss this further, about the 

whole question around who has been consulted, that is the one 

thing the minister did not talk about. And, as we’ve said, his 

comments were fairly lengthy but he did not talk about who was 

consulted in this new legislation. I think there’s a group of 

archivists. I know that the U of S . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Company Contributes to Historic Space Mission 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5798 

 Distinguished Police Officer Retires 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5799 

 Availability of Midwifery Services 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5799 

 Teacher Achieves Decades of Student Engagement 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5799 

 Working Together to Support At-Risk Mothers 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5800 

 Hilltops Win Fourth Junior Football Title in Five Years 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5800 

 Shelter for Vulnerable Citizens 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5800 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Quality Council and the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5801 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5801 

 Replacement of Smart Meters 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5803 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5803 

 Funding for Aboriginal Education 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5804 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5804 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5805 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Government Support for Safe Housing at Kate’s Place 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5805 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5806 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5806 

 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5806 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5807 

 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence 

 Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5811 

 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5811 

 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5816 



 

 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5816 

 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5819 

 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5825 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


