
























































Hansard: November 19, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 15A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5935 
 November 19, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
it’s my privilege and pleasure to introduce 23 members of the 
public service sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They come 
from a number of different ministries such as Central Services, 
Economy, Environment, Health, Highways and Infrastructure, 
Justice, SaskBuilds, and the Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is kind of a routine appearance of public service members 
into the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They do it on an annual basis. 
I know they’ll be meeting with you, some members of the 
opposition, as well as myself. I look forward to meeting with 
them. I do have to say, Mr. Speaker, as a lifelong resident of 
Saskatchewan, you always knew there was a public service, but 
perhaps I never knew how much work they really did until I 
became a cabinet minister and see the work that they do 
first-hand. So just on behalf of government, and more 
importantly all the people of the province, thank them very, 
very much for the work that they do day in and day out for the 
people of Saskatchewan. I’ll ask all members to welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming these public 
servants to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly taking a 
greater interest in the affairs of the political side, the legislative 
side of the public service work that they engage in, is to be 
commended. I’m glad to see some participants from the 
Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy also in the 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, some top-notch folks there. 
 
And it’s also good to see one Nicole Lang in the gallery. Now I 
think she’s got some inside information in terms of how this 
Assembly works, but it will be interesting to test that out later 
on. But if we could join with the minister opposite in 
welcoming these public servants to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — If I could have leave for an extended 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to members of the Assembly, I would like 
to welcome four representatives from the Mennonite Central 
Committee of Saskatchewan. With us today, Claire Ewert 
Fisher, executive director; Peter Guenther, board Chair; and two 
board members, Peter Peters and Arlene Janzen. 
 
The Mennonite Central Committee, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
is a non-profit organization that engages in a number of forms 
of peace and human welfare ministries both in the province and 
internationally. Their legacy of charitable work is long and 
impressive, which speaks to the tremendous contribution their 
members have made over the years. To speak to just a few, 
members will be interested to hear that the history of the MCC 
[Mennonite Central Committee] Saskatchewan includes: 
founding the Menno Homes of Saskatchewan; helping to found 
the Global Gathering Place in Saskatoon; operating a number of 
thrift shops in the province including in Herbert, Lanigan, 
Rosthern, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Rosthern, and Warman; 
supporting prison ministries; and collecting funds and material 
aid for natural disasters worldwide. 
 
MCC Saskatchewan is celebrating its 50th year in 2014, one 
reason we have the pleasure of welcoming four of its 
representatives to the Assembly today. 
 
Our province has a long history of faith-based charitable work, 
and many families over the past 50 years have come to rely on 
the services of these organizations and their volunteers to help 
them in times of need. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in thanking MCC 
Saskatchewan for the work it has offered to the people of this 
province over the past 50 years in the hope that the four guests 
we have with us today will pass on our gratitude to the many 
volunteers and donors they represent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the delegation from the Mennonite Central Committee 
who are here in the legislature today. With us again is Claire 
Ewert Fisher, executive director; Peter Guenther, Peter Peters, 
as well as Scott Siemens who has joined us here today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
All members in the Assembly know of the important work that 
MCC has been doing throughout Saskatchewan and around the 
world over the past 50 years and for that reason it’s a great 
pleasure to have these fine individuals in the Assembly today. 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them and thanking 
MCC for their fantastic work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
welcome in your gallery a number of members of the 
Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association. These 
people are here to meet with MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and have been for the last couple of days. 
 



5936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

I would, while I’m on my feet, like to thank them for their 
commitment. They routinely put their lives at risk for the safety 
and security of all of us in the province. They also provide some 
amazing medical services because they’re often first on the 
scene. So on behalf of all members, I would like to thank them 
for that. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Craig Farrel — and I hope I 
have all the names and I hope I have them correctly — Jarod 
Benson, Bruce Siemens, Joel McNair, Doug McLaughlin, Tedd 
Brown, Tyler Packham, Jeff Anderson, Rod Smith, Peter 
Gunther, James Green, Jeff Reader, Jay Protz, Gord Hewitt, 
Trevor Braun, Marc Schweitzer, Brian Seidlik, Neal Matechuk, 
Brian Belitsky, and Lloyd Zwack. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
ask all members to welcome them to their Assembly today. We 
look forward to having meetings with them further in the day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the minister and introduce and welcome to you and 
through you the members of the Saskatchewan Professional 
Fire Fighters Association, IAFF [International Association of 
Fire Fighters], and recognize as well the good work they do in 
our communities right across this province. We value and, you 
know, we rest easy because we know there are professional 
firefighters who are there to put our minds at ease because 
safety is the first thing, that they’re required to make sure that 
we are safe in our homes, in our communities, in our 
businesses. 
 
I want to make sure we recognize these folks come from seven 
different communities in Saskatchewan: Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Yorkton, Weyburn, Moose Jaw, and Swift 
Current. And of course they’ve brought many issues to the 
House here today and I hope we all take them very seriously. I 
want to recognize three people in particular — the minister read 
the list of names and thank him for that — but Kirby Benning, 
the president; Lloyd Zwack, the vice-president; and Brian 
Belitsky, the secretary-treasurer. Thank you all for coming, and 
welcome to your legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly again today and ask all 
members to help me welcome another great group from the 
Yorkton Regional High School up in the west gallery, led by 
their teacher, Mr. Perry Ostapowich, and one of the other 
teachers, Mr. Steven Delong. Also out on the bus again today, 
Mr. Pat Rawlick. 
 
I was talking to Mr. Ostapowich earlier and we’re thinking we 
might have to physically drag Pat into the Assembly some day, 
but being ex-RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and very 
much a cut of the same cloth as our Sergeant-at-Arms, I think 
we may need four or five of us to drag him in the building. 
 
But some honourable mentions, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 
yesterday, Mr. Ostapowich is very good at getting the kids to 
engage with local political figures, myself specifically, through 
social media quite a bit. So I always promise them I’ll give 

them special mention. So special mention today goes to Austin 
Hilderman — give us a wave, Austin — Abigail Unrau, Zowee 
Mydonick, and Renee Walker, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 
specifically print off her tweet and quote her in the Assembly 
because I got a real laugh out of this one, Mr. Speaker. So 
@GregOttenbreit, right, this is off of Twitter: “Yo, home dog. 
I’m going to the Saskatchewan legislature this Wednesday with 
Mr. Ostapowich. Think I could get a shout out maybe?” 
Definitely. Welcome to your Assembly. I ask all members to 
welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you I’d ask all members to join me 
in welcoming Mr. Derek Giles who’s a resident of Saskatoon 
Greystone to his legislature. Derek is the general manager of 
Alsip’s construction products. He works right across the 
province. And in fact he’s kind of swinging through five or six 
communities, and he happens to be here in Regina today. And 
so I’m delighted that he’s been able to join us, a bit of a quality 
assurance session for his MLA. And I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming Derek to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And we know that in September this year, this government 
walked away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable 
housing project in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and then rent the units at full market 
price. When asked to explain how this government could allow 
this to happen with a private developer to back out of a 
fixed-price contract without any penalties, the Minister of 
Social Services said, and I quote: “You’re assuming that there is 
these desperate homeless people” — showing how disconnected 
this government is from the realities within our communities. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the Government of Saskatchewan 
to recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless 
people in our province and to immediately reverse its 
policy of now allowing private developers with whom the 
government has close relationships to default on 
fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Prince Albert. I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions as it relates to the unsafe conditions on 
Dewdney Avenue created by that government in their failure to 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5937 

plan proper and safe traffic flow. And the current conditions 
have heavy-haul truck traffic that’s inundated Dewdney Avenue 
and simply shouldn’t be there, and the petitioners are working 
to have those heavy-haul trucks rightfully moved off of 
Dewdney Avenue. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
across Regina, including those directly on Dewdney Avenue. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to raise a petition 
on behalf of Creighton, Denare Beach, and area. Many residents 
in these communities are struggling with disabilities and 
currently do not have the supports and services they need and 
deserve. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government of 
Saskatchewan to establish and build a residence and a day 
program in the Creighton and Denare Beach region to 
support the immediate and ongoing needs of the 
community, and so that persons with intellectual 
disabilities thrive in their respective communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people from 
Creighton, Denare Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition on the 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan and as well the 
city of Prince Albert will receive a commitment from 
senior government. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Moose Jaw. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens condemning this government’s 
dangerous smart meter program. In the prayer that reads as 
follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to take responsibility for 
its failure to act on readily available information about 
safety concerns with its smart meter program, including 
through the immediate resignation of the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry 
into the concerning chain of events that severely 
compromised the safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Balcarres and Indian Head. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
present a petition from people who are opposed to the 
privatization of correctional service jobs. There are a number of 
people in Saskatchewan who work in our public corrections 
facilities who are concerned about their jobs, and they have 
presented this petition. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan may be 
pleased to cause the government to cancel its privatization 
in the corrections and young offender facilities in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise to present a petition in support of better health care in 
Saskatchewan. The individuals who have brought this petition 
have highlighted a number of issues, including the fact that 
emergency wait room times in Saskatchewan have doubled 
since 2010, and the government’s own statistics show that 
patient safety is getting worse. In the prayer that reads as 
follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to recognize health care is getting 
worse under its watch and to begin fixing the basics by 
listening to health care workers, patients, and their 
families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 
and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 
spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from my 
constituency. I so submit. 
 



5938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mennonite Central Committee of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for 50 years the Mennonite 
Central Committee of Saskatchewan has been putting faith into 
action as they respond to basic human needs and work for peace 
and justice here in Saskatchewan, throughout Canada, and 
around the world. 
 
The MCC does incredible work in our province, including with 
families in core urban communities, with newcomers, landless 
indigenous bands, people in prison, and those who have been 
released from prison. And MCC is heavily involved in the truth 
and reconciliation process. 
 
They not only advocate for policies that lead to a more peaceful 
and just world, but they take meaningful action at the local level 
to achieve that. When disaster happens, when people need food 
and water, when communities seek peace, and when children 
need to feel safe, the Mennonite Central Committee is there, 
meeting the needs with love and compassion in the name of 
Christ. 
 
I appreciated meeting with MCC representatives this morning 
and I was reminded in our meeting — as I often am when I 
spend time with Mennonites — of Micah 6:8, which says, 
“What does the Lord require of you, but to do justice, to love 
mercy, and to walk humbly with your God.” Mr. Speaker, that 
is what the MCC lives out every day, and I ask all members to 
join me in thanking them for their inspiring work. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

International Education Week 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the House and announce that November the 17th to 21 is 
International Education Week. This week is held to raise 
awareness and understanding of the important contributions 
international education provides to our country, our educational 
institutions, and our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently there are just over 4,500 international 
post-secondary students from over 124 countries studying in 
Saskatchewan. This provides a unique opportunity for 
Saskatchewan to build relationships with other parts of the 
world. It encourages students to study abroad and welcomes 
international students who bring global perspectives into our 
classrooms and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the Saskatchewan plan for growth, our 
government has identified a number of goals focused around 
international education. They include increasing the number of 
international students in Saskatchewan, increasing the number 
of Saskatchewan people studying abroad, and encouraging the 
study of international languages in Saskatchewan business 
schools to better equip students and the business community to 
engage internationally. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we want our students to bring the valuable 
knowledge and skills they’ve acquired abroad back to 
Saskatchewan to help execute our plan for growth. I would ask 
all members to join me in recognizing International Education 
Week. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Professional Firefighters 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this Assembly 
today to bring recognition to the great work done in our 
communities every day by our professional firefighters. All 
across our province, firefighters serve our communities and 
keep us safe. At any hour, at any time of the year, they are 
ready to spring into action, save lives, and defend our homes 
and communities. 
 
But for most firefighters, service isn’t something that stops at 
the end of the shift at the hall. Firefighters often take on 
community leadership roles, like supporting great causes and 
coaching minor sports. It’s important to remember, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a duty to serve our firefighters as 
dutifully and faithfully as they serve us. We need to make sure 
that our firefighters and their families have the supports they 
need when they get sick or injured because of work — which is 
in part why today’s forum and discussion with MLAs on both 
sides of the Assembly is so important. It’s a forum and 
discussion that enables us to take steps that are priorities for 
those that serve us and improve community safety for all. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members will join with me in 
recognizing and thanking the professional firefighters that have 
served us and have joined us here today and all professional 
firefighters that serve our province every day, and that we will 
all commit to supporting those who keep us safe and commit to 
improving community safety. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Lows in Motion Parkinson’s Fundraiser 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On November the 1st, I had the opportunity to attend the sixth 
annual Lows in Motion Parkinson’s Shaker presented by Ens 
Auto, held at the Prairieland Park in Saskatoon. This year’s 
event was a sellout with 1,200 people in attendance. This event 
is an opportunity for people to come together to increase 
awareness about Parkinson’s disease and raise funds for the 
Parkinson’s Society of Saskatchewan. More than $125,000 was 
raised at the shaker this year. The Lows in Motion fundraiser 
has grown every year since the first event in 2009 which drew 
350 people and raised $23,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the highlight of the night was the moving video 
entitled Beneath the Tremors — Living with Parkinson’s. The 
video was produced by Living Sky Media. It tells the story of 
Dwayne Low and Dr. Kurt Williams and their experiences 
living with Parkinson’s disease. The video had all 1,200 
attendees engaged and there were more than a few tears being 
wiped away throughout the crowd. 
 
Parkinson’s disease is a progressive disorder of the nervous 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5939 

system that affects a person’s movement. There is currently no 
cure for Parkinson’s. About 4,000 people in Saskatchewan are 
living with the disease. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 
me in congratulating organizer Travis Low, the event 
committee, on another very successful Lows in Motion Shaker 
and on increasing awareness for Parkinson’s disease in the 
province, and on raising more than $125,000 for the 
Parkinson’s Society of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation 
Capital Equipment Campaign 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to rise in the House today to announce that the Moose Jaw 
Health Foundation has raised to date $2.27 million for its 
capital equipment campaign. Mr. Speaker, the capital 
equipment campaign is working to raise $8 million for brand 
new equipment that will be used in Moose Jaw’s regional 
hospital once it’s been completed. This includes the $3.3 
million cost of the new MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] unit 
which the hospital foundation has committed to raise 100 per 
cent of the cost. 
 
Once the hospital is completed, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has dedicated funding to the operating costs 
associated with the new MRI. There are currently over 50 
volunteers who have been working diligently to make this 
possible, and that number continues to grow. The hospital 
foundation expects the donor base to grow as the community 
rallies to make the $8 million grow. 
 
Raising the funds for this campaign has been no small task. I 
would like to thank all of the volunteers, the donors, the 
hospital foundation, the community of Moose Jaw, and the 
people of Saskatchewan for all the work that they have done. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me on congratulating 
the Moose Jaw Hospital Foundation and the capital equipment 
campaign on raising the $2.27 million. Let’s make sure the 
momentum continues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

University of Regina Rams’ Head Coach Retires 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today to celebrate the career of University of 
Regina’s head coach, Frank McCrystal. Earlier this year, Coach 
McCrystal announced he would be retiring from coaching after 
this season, and on November 8th he coached his final game 
with the Rams. 
 
Frank was the head coach of the Regina Rams of the Prairie 
Junior Football Conference from 1984 to 1999. Before 
becoming head coach, McCrystal spent five years as an 
assistant coach for the team and five years prior to that as a 
player. In 1998 the Regina Rams became the University of 
Regina Rams, joining the Canada West Conference of the then 
Canadian Intercollegiate Athletic Union. 
 

To date, Frank McCrystal is the only head coach in the history 
of the Rams. In total McCrystal has spent 41 years with the 
junior and university versions of the Rams as either a player or 
a coach. Frank’s teams have had playoff successes winning 
seven Canadian Bowl championships between ’84 and ’98, and 
winning the Hardy Cup and the Atlantic Bowl on the way to the 
Rams’ only Vanier Cup appearance in 2000 in just their second 
season as a university team. Many of Coach McCrystal’s 
players have gone on to pro football careers, including three 
former Rams currently playing in the NFL [National Football 
League]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Frank McCrystal on an exceptional coaching career and 
wishing him all the best in whatever he chooses to do after his 
retirement. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Long-Term Care Comparisons 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale stated that the criteria to be 
accepted into long-term care has changed and that the 
government was rationing care replacements. This is just not 
true. The assessment criteria for long-term care hasn’t changed 
since 2004. It is exact criteria used under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. 
 
In fact, if the member would have taken time to actually read 
the written questions, she would have seen the number of 
seniors who have been assessed and placed on a waiting list is 
decreasing. It was also provided to the member from Riversdale 
that the average time on the waiting list in 2007, the last full 
year of the NDP, was nearly 32 days. Under our government, 
the average time a senior was on a waiting list for long-term 
care replacement has dropped to only 23 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s commitment to long-term care 
is working. Waiting lists are shorter. The time spent on the 
waiting list is decreasing, and more of the people who need to 
get into long-term care are getting the opportunity to do so. The 
NDP know that they cannot compare closing 19 facilities and 
1,200 beds to our government’s record, so instead they 
misrepresent the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Leader of the Opposition stand up for 
genuine debate and real scrutiny and correct the errors of his 
Health critic? We are about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Care for Seniors 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Margaret Warholm was in care at 
Santa Maria seniors’ home here in Regina. She suffered severe 
malnutrition and multiple fractures, and her family believes that 
her treatment in this seniors’ care facility led to her premature 
death last October. 
 



5940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, Margaret’s family is here with us today because 
they want accountability, and they want to ensure that this stops 
happening to seniors in Saskatchewan. My question is for the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. What does he have to say to the family, 
and how can he assure them that this will stop happening? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 
the government. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a case that I’m 
not familiar with all the details on. I’d be happy to meet with 
family members after question period ends. This is obviously 
something that is a great deal of concern for the province, for 
the government — not just a case, as it’s been described by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
But any time that we can make improvements to seniors’ care in 
this province, whether they live in long-term care or whether 
they are among the vast majority of seniors that do not live in 
long-term care, certainly we look to improve the care that we’re 
able to provide and the supports that we’re able to provide to 
the seniors. 
 
So again I would make the offer to the family that I would meet 
with them afterwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the family informed me that they 
did in fact email the minister with information about their 
mother’s tragic and horrible case. 
 
It’s heartbreaking to hear how awful Margaret’s last few 
months were. She had an extremely painful illness caused by 
being malnourished and largely confined to a bed. She also had 
multiple fractures to her vertebrae caused by a bad fall while 
she was being transferred using a lift without a safety belt. For 
48 days after her fall, Margaret experienced increasingly awful 
pain. But, Mr. Speaker, instead of figuring out what the cause 
was of the pain, they just kept pumping her full of narcotics. 
Finally on October 3rd Margaret was taken to the hospital. 
That’s when they discovered the fractures and the horrific 
effects of her malnourishment. Mr. Speaker, Margaret died 
three days later. 
 
My question is for the Premier. How can he assure this family 
that this kind of neglect will stop happening in seniors’ care 
facilities here in Saskatchewan? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be responding 
in the absence of the Premier on behalf of the government. Mr. 
Speaker, again I would just offer to meet directly and personally 
with the family. Certainly I would offer my sympathies and my 
deepest condolences to the family on the loss of a loved one, 
somebody that’s obviously very important to their family, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We consider seniors’ care in this province a priority of the 

government. That’s why we have made improvements in terms 
of not just the number of staff and the equipment that we have 
in our long-term care facilities, but also trying to, Mr. Speaker, 
replace those aging facilities where we can, where we’re able to 
do that. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I would be . . . I would offer to the 
family to personally meet with them afterwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to the minister’s words, 
this government has made seniors’ care worse, and we saw that 
with the elimination of minimum care standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Margaret got to the hospital, the nurses 
discovered a bedsore they described as the worst that they had 
ever seen in 20 years of nursing. I’ve seen the photo, Mr. 
Speaker, of Margaret’s back, and it is absolutely shocking. It is 
appalling, Mr. Speaker, that a seniors’ care facility would let 
that happen to somebody. It shows, Mr. Speaker, that Margaret 
was indeed neglected. It shows the horrible pain that she 
experienced as a result, and it is not in any way acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This kind of treatment of vulnerable seniors is happening far 
too often, and it absolutely must stop. My question is for the 
Premier. What specifically will he do to put a stop to this and 
ensure that all seniors are treated with dignity and treated with 
respect? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again in 
the absence of the Premier, I will be responding on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Certainly we have tried to make 
improvements in long-term care. Members will know that in 
2007 November, when the government changed, there were 
roughly 8,700 long-term care beds in this province. That would 
be roughly the case today. But in fact over that time this 
government has added resources to the regional health 
authorities to the point where there are more than 700 full-time 
equivalents working in direct front-line care and long-term care, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we know that more work needs to be done. That’s why this 
government took, in this case, the unusual step last year, 
mid-year, to invest $10 million in urgently required equipment 
into long-term care facilities, whether that be new lifts, new 
baths, new tubs, new beds to help with those pressure sore 
issues, Mr. Speaker. But we know that there’s more work to do. 
That’s why we’ve also added over $3 million in ongoing 
funding, Mr. Speaker. But again, I’d be happy to meet with the 
family. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government that 
refused millions of dollars worth of urgent requests from health 
regions to improve senior care, all at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, as they pour untold millions into their US [United 
States] consultant. 
 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5941 

Margaret’s family told me that even as Margaret was 
deteriorating from malnourishment and dehydration, her family 
says that she did not get the help that she needed. They 
repeatedly told the facility to use orange juice instead of apple 
juice, but nearly every time they visited, Mr. Speaker, at 
mealtime, they would find an untouched plate with apple juice 
in front of their mom. Even in the simplest ways, basic ways, 
Margaret’s most basic needs were neglected. And she suffered 
terribly as a result, Mr. Speaker — malnourished, broken bones, 
horrible pain, and awful, awful bedsores. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Margaret needed an assurance of a good quality of 
care, of clear minimum care standards, and of proper staffing. 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Will he promise 
that today? It’s too late for Margaret, but it is not too late for 
thousands of seniors here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 
Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the government. Mr. 
Speaker, what we endeavour to do is provide appropriate and 
timely care for all of our patients and residents within the health 
care system, certainly for residents, Mr. Speaker, who are 
within our care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made investments over the last number of 
years to not only try to enhance the services that are already 
within existing long-term care facilities but also look towards 
planning for the future and replacing aging facilities. Many of 
our facilities, people will know in this province, were built prior 
to the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, when the model of care was different 
for long-term care. That being said, Mr. Speaker, even within 
the facilities, we have tried to enhance front-line staff to the 
point where over 700 more full-time equivalents exist. 
 
We’ve also provided additional resources for training, such as 
purposeful hourly rounding, which Regina Qu’Appelle is 
utilizing; gentle persuasion in other cases, in other health 
regions, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, some of that $10 million is 
still being accessed by health regions. It’s not quite yet in place. 
And so we’ll be evaluating once those dollars have been 
received. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is coming 
nowhere close to providing appropriate care for seniors here in 
Saskatchewan. We have Roy Armstrong, a 95-year-old veteran, 
being refused care, Mr. Speaker. We have Margaret’s story. I 
don’t know how the minister could look at the photos that the 
family sent to his office, look at those photos and then claim 
that this government is providing appropriate care. It’s not 
credible. It’s not believable. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
offensive. 
 
Clearly a lot of things went wrong with Margaret’s case 
because her family believes that clear minimum care standards 
and proper staffing would have made a difference for Margaret. 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that this government chose to scrap the 
regulated minimum care standards instead of strengthening 
them. And we know, Mr. Speaker, from the CEO [chief 
executive officer] tour last year that the Santa Maria facility was 

struggling with short-staffing, just like so many other facilities 
throughout Saskatchewan. Margaret and her family were let 
down by the seniors’ care system, and they were let down by 
this government. 
 
But it’s not too late. It’s not too late for the many other seniors 
who are in care today. To the Premier: what will it take? How 
many stories will it take for him to agree that we need clear, 
regulated minimum care standards for seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that 
question on behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I do want to say that it would be incorrect to say that 
there are no minimum standards when it comes to long-term 
care in this province. Certainly there is a document that all 
health regions and all facilities must follow that runs in the 
neighbourhood of about 160 pages that clearly lays out the 
expectations not only, Mr. Speaker, of the health regions but 
also of the individual facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t, obviously I don’t have all the details at 
hand in terms of this particular case, but again I’d be happy to 
look into this case and happy to meet with the family 
afterwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The quality of seniors’ care in our province is 
awful, and shockingly the Health minister has said there is 
nothing that the government is planning on doing this year to 
improve it. The only thing he keeps pointing to is the woefully 
inadequate one-time payment fund from last year. That’s it. No 
commitment to anything new, despite the fact that seniors in 
care facilities are still not having their needs met. To the 
minister: how is that remotely acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to correct the member who does suggest 
that it’s the position of the government that nothing will be 
done when it comes to long-term care this year. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the member will know that this government about a 
year ago took an unprecedented step to allocate $10 million in 
in-year funding that wasn’t originally budgeted for that would 
go to the regional health authorities to make some desperately 
needed enhancements, urgent enhancements to regional health 
authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 
which obviously is just 1 of 12 that’s receiving dollars, but they 
are receiving dollars: $500,000 to implement purposeful hourly 
rounding so that that will assist staff to be more proactive rather 
than reactive and organize their workload to provide more 
reliable care; $1 million in funding to provide staff with gentle 
persuasion approach, which is going to educate and train staff 
on how to deal with patients in a more healthier manner, 
particularly those that have issues related to dementia and 
Alzheimer’s; as well as $430,000 in one-time funds for 



5942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

equipment upgrades and enhancements to meals. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Let’s review some of the urgent needs that 
were brought to this government’s attention last year. In 
Saskatoon Health Region they actually need 450 more care aids 
but modestly requested 38. This government gave them just 19 
additional care aids. They need about 1,700 lifts, modestly 
requested just 100 lifts. But this government gave them just 56 
lifts. 
 
Last year’s one-time payment fund was terribly inadequate, yet 
this government has no new plans to address the desperate 
needs in our care facilities. To the minister: did he forget about 
all those urgent requests he rejected last year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — No, in fact, Mr. Speaker, what I had 
indicated in the past is that, once the $10 million had been 
allocated and once it had been fully utilized, that we would do 
follow-up work with the regions to determine what effect that 
enhancements had had. Mr. Speaker, I can report that over half 
of the dollars have been actually spent and the equipment has 
been delivered. But obviously when you’re dealing with 12 
health regions, over 700 pieces of equipment, multiple different 
suppliers, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to take, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
going to take some time to allocate the dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time when the members opposite indicated 
that we should just fund everything that had been asked for, I 
would note that The StarPhoenix editorial, in an editorial March 
6, 2014, it says, “For Mr. Broten to say that the government 
should have forked over 18.5 million in order to meet every 
request suggests he’s simply trying to pander to public sentiment 
in a sensitive area.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work very closely with our facilities 
and our regions to ensure that the care is enhanced for the people 
of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — In Prince Albert Parkland Health Region, care 
facilities requested 10 new full-time front-line workers, but the 
government gave them just three. P.A. [Prince Albert] needs 131 
lifts, but the government delivered just 53 urgent needs, Mr. 
Speaker. Five Hills Health Region urgently requested 19 bathtubs 
and 14 lifts, but the government gave them just 11 bathtubs and 
five lifts. Five Hills also urgently requested nine nurse call 
systems, but the government gave them none. Zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These were the most urgent and pressing requests from health 
regions last year, and the government did not fill them. To the 
minister: does he think those urgent needs have disappeared 
over the last year? When will he finally fix the basics in 
seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly what was left out of the premise of the member 
opposite’s question is the fact that all of those health regions 
within Saskatchewan, 12 in this province, and the facilities that 
they operate have had a share in the 700 full-time equivalents 
that are now working in long-term care, as opposed to when the 
members opposite were the government. Keep that in mind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The number of residents and the number of beds in this 
province hasn’t changed dramatically in seven years, but the 
number of full-time equivalents have, which would leave one to 
believe that if the members opposite believe that the staffing 
levels are an issue today, Mr. Speaker, what did they think that 
the staffing levels were like seven years ago when they had 
responsibility for administrating the government in this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert Parkland Health Region receives 
$320,000 for 53 track lifts: 3 in Big River, 29 in Canwood, 17 
in Leoville, 20 in Hafford, 2 in Kinistino, 22 in Spiritwood, 28 
in Leask, and 10 in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. That’s just one 
example of the work that we’re doing in long-term care in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a family 
here today, when they sent photos to the minister’s office, all 
the minister’s office does is tell the family that the photos are 
logged. That is this government’s approach to seniors’ care and 
addressing serious issues, Mr. Speaker. When will this minister 
start to take seniors’ care seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has taken seniors’ care issues seriously since 
the day that this government was elected to office in this 
province when we inherited a government in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that had seen 1,200 long-term care beds closed in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, there are 19 communities in this 
province that had a long-term care facility that today no longer 
have long-term care, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve had to dig 
ourselves out of a deficit when it comes to long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost initially when this government was 
formed, we dedicated ourselves to rebuilding long-term care in 
this province, starting with 13 long-term care facilities in this 
province neglected by the former government, Mr. Speaker, that 
didn’t have maintenance dollars when they needed it to the 
point where they are on the verge now, today because of this 
government, of being rebuilt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve also invested in the front lines. And I can tell the 
members opposite, 2,400 nurses now in this province, of all 
designations under this government. Seven hundred full-time 
equivalents in long-term care. Is there more to do? Absolutely, 
Mr. Speaker, but we’re making tremendous progress compared 
to the members opposite. 
 
[14:15] 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5943 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
heard nothing but excuses from this government when it comes 
to a second bridge for Prince Albert. Nothing but excuses, Mr. 
Speaker. This government has repeatedly claimed that Prince 
Albert doesn’t actually need a second bridge. To the new 
Highways minister of that tired old government: does she think 
Prince Albert needs a second bridge? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we will all 
recall, just this last August the Premier announced that when the 
city of Prince Albert is ready to build a second bridge through a 
P3 [public-private partnership] process, the province will be 
there. We are fully prepared to stand beside the city of Prince 
Albert as their full partners in getting a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the new study showed 
that a second bridge for Prince Albert is absolutely necessary. 
The study found that if traffic were disrupted for even just one 
day, the city’s economy would lose almost $2 million per day. 
And the study also showed that 75 per cent of the bridge’s 
traffic is not local traffic, Mr. Speaker. It’s people either 
travelling through Prince Albert or to the city from elsewhere, 
Mr. Speaker, 75 per cent of the traffic flow. 
 
This is very much a provincial bridge. So once again to the 
minister: does she agree with this study or does she stubbornly 
dismiss it? And does she expect the city of Prince Albert to pay 
the whole cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
member opposite didn’t catch the announcement that the 
Premier made this August. We are not expecting the city of 
Prince Albert to pay the full bill. We said we will be their 
partners, as opposed to what the NDP did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2003 when the bridge needed to be repaired, the current 
bridge, the then-Highways minister said, and I quote, “We have 
a law in terms of municipalities and what we are responsible 
for. And no, I don’t think that is something that we would be 
accountable for at this point.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite when they were 
government had nothing to do with the P.A. bridge. They made 
the city pay for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I have said, as the Premier said in August — and again 
maybe I’ll get him some newspaper articles so he can educate 
himself on what we’ve said, Mr. Speaker — we will be full 
partners with the city of Prince Albert when they are ready to 
build a second bridge through a P3 process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same government, in 
fact that they’ve spent $2 million in six months to replace a 
culvert, Mr. Speaker, so they’re good at giving excuses. 
 
And once again, the question or not of whether Prince Albert 
needs a second bridge shouldn’t depend on what model is being 
proposed. It either needs a second bridge or it doesn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition believes in this study. We believe that 
a second bridge is necessary, and we stand with the people of 
Prince Albert and the entire area in demanding a second bridge 
for Prince Albert.  
 
So once again to the minister: how many studies does she need 
to look at and to see before she will admit that Prince Albert 
needs a second bridge, and when will she finally commit some 
solid provincial support instead of sloughing it off on a P3 
model, Mr. Speaker? When will she do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what part of 
yes the member opposite doesn’t understand. We announced in 
August that we would be full partners with the city of Prince 
Albert when it comes time to build a second bridge, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would point out to the member opposite, when they 
released a press release prior to the Throne Speech and had their 
25 top priorities, the must-haves that they had to have in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and you know how many times 
highways was mentioned? Zero. Not a priority when they were 
in government; not a priority when they are in opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — Well members, you’ve only got one more day 
left after today, so that you have the weekend to maybe relax a 
little. So it would be nice if we could actually hear the questions 
and answers. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Government Procurement Procedures 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Saskatchewan steel fabrication 
businesses are still laying off workers because they just don’t 
have enough work. They say a big part of the problem is that 
this government keeps giving contracts to companies from 
places like Ontario, Quebec, Texas, and California. These 
ongoing layoffs should be a loud wake-up call for this 
government. 
 
We shouldn’t have to wait until these businesses shut down or 
leave the province before we see some real action from this 
government that starts putting Saskatchewan’s interests first. To 
the minister: when will this government stop dragging its feet 
and finally agree to fix its flawed procurement policy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard from the construction industry. We’ve 
heard from the steel industry with respect to some of the issues 
they’ve had. That’s why last June we created Priority 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Their mandate, their mandate, Mr. 
Speaker, is to look at what kind of obstacles are in place for 



5944 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

Saskatchewan companies to compete, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 
through Priority Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, over 75 meetings 
with many members of the construction industry, with many 
chambers of commerce and other business groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We hope to get a report with respect to the ongoing 
consultations from Priority Saskatchewan early in the new year, 
Mr. Speaker, and that will inform the discussions and the 
decisions that this government needs to make on this very 
important issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan businesses 
say that government’s current approach to procurement is lazy, 
and it’s not getting best value for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
Businesses have been pressuring this government for well over 
a year and a half, but they’ve received nothing but delays and 
excuses. 
 
We’ve listened to these businesses, and we’ve introduced 
legislation for a more sophisticated procurement policy to 
ensure fairness for Saskatchewan businesses and get better 
value for taxpayers. We’re happy to work with government on 
this front. We’re happy to discuss any amendments that they 
may want to propose. We just want a much better procurement 
policy in place this session. To the minister: will they agree to 
work with us on that front, and can we get this done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I’ve said, we’re being very, very active on this with, through 
Priority Saskatchewan. We’ve already had 75 meetings. Mr. 
Lionel LaBelle, who’s leading the discussions on behalf of 
Priority Saskatchewan, who’s well known to members of the 
legislature as a businessman in this province, Mr. Speaker, has 
been very, very active. 
 
We know that there’s some issues that need to be addressed, 
Mr. Speaker, not only in executive government but across the 
Crowns, to make procurement more clear, to make it more 
consistent, Mr. Speaker. So we’re certainly interested in having 
the discussions with Mr. LaBelle who’s going to inform the 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will say just reading from Mark Cooper who said in 2014, 
just earlier this summer after we formed Priority Saskatchewan, 
he says: 
 

We have a faithful partner in our government MLAs in the 
legislature who are committed to seeing enhanced 
procurement practices within government and are very 
supportive of the work that we are doing together. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re very clear about moving this forward, 
and our decisions will be informed by the work that’s being 
done by Priority Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
 

Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 162, The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 609, The 
Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved first reading of Bill No. 609, The Residents-in-Care Bill 
of Rights Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 610 — The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 610, 
The Public-Private Partnership Transparency and 
Accountability Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5945 

first reading of Bill No. 610, The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Private Bills 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills met earlier today and considered compliance of the 
rules for the petition for private Bill No. 904 praying to amend 
An Act respecting Mohyla Institute (1958).  
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills to present its fifth report. Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
. . . 

 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Can we hear what the member is 
moving please? I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the standing 
committee on private members’ bills to present its fifth report. 
Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills be now concurred.  

 
The Speaker: — The fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills is now concurred in. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The motion is carried and, pursuant 
to rule 102, the private Bill No. 904, The Mohyla Institute 
(1958) Amendment Act, 2014 is deemed to be read the first time 
and is ordered for second reading on the next private members’ 
day. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 159 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 159, An Act to repeal The Family Farm 
Credit Act. Mr. Speaker, this is probably the shortest bill that 
we have in the legislature in this session. It effectively is just 
one sentence: “The Family Farm Credit Act is repealed.” But 
practically, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand what it is that 
we’re repealing. 
 
And so what we have is legislation that was created in 1979 to 
add another tool to the financial world to assist family farms in 
getting finance. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 
we understand what kind of legislation it is that we’re repealing 
and why it’s being repealed now. And also I think we need to 
understand what the context of the family farm was in 1979 and 
what kind of the context is here now in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this legislation was brought forward, it had a 
longer name, if I can put it that way, and I think it’s important 
to read this, The Family Farm Credit Act, and it was Chapter 
F-5 of the Statutes of Saskatchewan. And the long title for the 
bill is An Act to provide Assistance to Farmers in the 
Establishment and Development of Family Farms as Economic 
Farm Units. Then it goes on to say that the short title can be 
called The Family Farm Credit Act. Now effectively what this 
piece of legislation did in 1979 was to add another lender into a 
situation where a number of family farmers were having 
difficulty getting credit. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now some of our members don’t have a lot of recall about what 
was happening in the late ’70s, but what we know is that the 
ability to borrow money was quite difficult on a whole number 
of levels. We know that for example in the beef industry in 
1978 and ’79 and ’77 as well, there was legislation passed and 
programs introduced called the beef industry assistance 
program, because farmers were having a difficult time 
overwintering their cattle. They did not have sufficient funds to 
provide food for them over the winter because cattle prices were 
in a very difficult spot. 
 
The sense was that if they could get enough money to feed the 
cattle over the winter, they would be able to keep the operation 
going. There were similar pressures in many of the smaller 
family hog operations that were causing difficulty. And on top 
of that, the grain farms were also in a tight situation. 
 
What we know is that the interest rates were starting to rise. 
And I think all of us recognize that some of the mortgage rates 
peaked somewhere just under 20 per cent annual interest rates, 
compared to the 3 to 6 or 3 to 5 per cent that we see presently. 



5946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

And there was all kinds of financial pressure on the family 
farms, and especially on those people who were going to try to 
establish or develop a family farm. And often these were the 
next generation of farmers who wanted to purchase their 
parents’ or uncle’s or aunt’s or other’s farm so that they could 
then continue in the farming operation. 
 
But what happened was that the banks were willing to lend this 
kind of money to them but it was at a very high rate. So part of 
the thinking behind this type of legislation was that there would 
be an opportunity for the company, which is defined under this 
family farm credit Act, the Co-operative Trust Company of 
Canada, that this company would have the ability to make loans 
to farmers who were part of a farming operation which would 
be called a family farm and that there would be, the whole 
purpose would be to create economic farm units at that stage. 
And so the purpose of the legislation at the time was stated as 
this, in section 3: 
 

The purpose of this Act is to make long term credit 
available to farmers to assist in the establishment and 
development of family farms as economic farm units and 
in the transfer of family farms from members of one 
generation to members of a later generation and to assist in 
the enlargement or conversion of family farms that are 
uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. 

 
Now that paragraph encapsulates much of the history of 
farming in Saskatchewan over the last 50 years because you end 
up having the discussion about how can farms be transferred 
over to the next generation. We have the situation where there 
were uneconomic family farms that were to be converted into 
economic farm units and it was clear that large amounts of 
capital were necessary to accomplish this purpose. 
 
This legislation, The Family Farm Credit Act, was a piece of 
the puzzle that was there to attempt to assist people in that 
process. And it’s quite interesting to look at the legislation that 
we’re repealing by the bill we have now to see what kinds of 
things were able to be done. One of the things that the 
legislation did was to authorize the minister of Finance to 
guarantee on behalf of the province the payment of the principal 
and the interest on the securities issued by the company so that 
money could be raised for the uses under this Act. 
 
So in other words, this was backstopped by the provincial 
government. It was seen as important financial legislation, an 
important political decision to support the ability for young 
farmers to get money to do some of the intergenerational 
transfer or develop some economic farm units. 
 
But it’s also quite interesting to look at the legislation and see 
how much money was involved. I mean it wasn’t huge amounts 
of money, and in fact the loans under this legislation were up to 
a maximum of $25,000 to one borrower. But what we know, in 
1979, ’80, ’81, those years, often having that amount of money 
as . . . It was available for people to make some of these 
changes, do some of the transition that was necessary to have 
the intergenerational transfer of the farm. 
 
And so what we had was then the power of the company, which 
was the Co-operative Trust Company of Canada, to make loans 
to farmers. And the purposes for which the farmer could borrow 

the money was as follows: it was available for purchasing of 
land by the borrower; it was available for construction, repair, 
or alteration of or making additions to any farm buildings on 
land owned or purchased by the borrower; or it could be for the 
making of permanent improvements to farm lands owned or 
purchased by the borrower for the purpose of increasing the 
productive value of the land and promoting the conservation of 
the soil thereof — and that probably involved rock picking, 
cleaning and clearing some land, or doing things like that. The 
money was also available for the purchase of farm equipment. It 
was available for the purchase of livestock. And probably most 
importantly, it was available for the paying off and discharging 
of mortgages, encumbrances, or other charges or liens against 
or on the land owned or purchased by the borrower. 
 
So effectively this was to be money to be used to try to solve 
some financial situations that were sometimes there in the, 
especially, in the intergenerational transfer, the transfer from 
parents to a son or a daughter, and this would give some extra 
cash that would allow for the transfer to take place and for 
parents or grandparents to retire. And so what the legislation did 
was give this extra tool to the family farmers, if I can use that 
term, in Saskatchewan as they looked at how they would make 
this transfer between the generations. 
 
Now what we know also is that earlier in the 1970s there was a 
introduction of a concept called a land bank, which also was to 
be used in a way to allow for the intergenerational transfer of 
land. It did provide that service for a number of years and some 
families were able to use that quite successfully; other families, 
it didn’t work as well. It ended up causing some complications. 
 
But the sense was among the leadership in the province that the 
family farm was changing. It was changing quickly. It was 
changing dramatically. And many of the local communities 
were suffering because of the loss of the family farms and 
suffering because of the consolidation of family farms. So this 
legislation was introduced obviously as a method of getting to 
assist in some of the options that were available. 
 
Now what happened when the number of these options that had 
been entered into in the late ’70s and early ’80s, often it was a 
combination type of a financing. It would include a bank or a 
major credit union maybe as the first lender. Maybe Farm 
Credit was involved with some of the land. Maybe there were 
some of the provincial government loans through what was then 
called FarmStart, and that included the beef industry assistance 
program loans or other loans like that. You’d have a whole 
array of liabilities that were a problem when somebody wanted 
to leave the farming business. And, Mr. Speaker, the challenge 
was always to see if there was enough cash available to pay off 
some of the creditors that would be difficult in the longer term 
process. 
 
Now in 1979, this type of legislation provided some of that 
extra cash and it had the backstop of the provincial government 
with this guarantee. Over the next few years, especially into the 
middle ’80s —’82, ’83, and ’84 — the interest rates started 
bumping up when the farmers ended up trying to rewrite or 
renegotiate their loans. All of a sudden, what was a 6 or 7 per 
cent mortgage was jumped up into the 15 to 20 per cent 
mortgage and basically it looked — and it was — impossible 
for people to continue. 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5947 

What we know at the time is that some of the national banks 
designated Saskatchewan farm loans as no longer desirable in 
their portfolio. And so you had actual situations where banks 
were telling all of their farming customers in the province, 
we’re going to try to ease out of lending you any money. Go 
and see if you can find some money somewhere else. Well that 
caused a lot of difficulties as well. And so what you had then 
was increased pressure on a whole number of levels. This was 
around the time where this pressure increased and increased. 
 
I know that just this past weekend when I was at a funeral, I 
talked with a man and a woman who had been involved in this 
whole issue about 30 years ago, where they had to do a 
farmyard stand on their farm out in the Moosomin constituency 
to keep the bank from taking all of the farm machinery that they 
needed to put in and harvest their crop. And it became a major 
issue obviously in the province and in the newspapers, and it 
also went into the courts. But with a lot of support from 
neighbours, from lawyers, from others, they were able to hold 
onto their farm, and they reported that they’re still working and 
dealing with and farming the land, and the next generation of 
their family is farming that same land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation that we’re repealing today 
was legislation that was created to help in that kind of a 
situation, and I think it did provide some help. The minister in 
his speech, his second reading speech, explained that probably 
most of the loans under this legislation, or all the loans under 
this legislation, have now been satisfied, repaid, and probably 
the last one was dealt with in 1996. 
 
But I think it’s important to keep going back and understand 
why this legislation was there and remind ourselves that we 
need to be vigilant. We need to be careful because things can 
turn very quickly in the financial world and in the farming 
world. 
 
In 1985-86, and maybe a little bit earlier, ’83-84, this was a 
time also when the provincial government ended up expanding 
their mediation services right across the province because there 
were so many disputes between banks and farmers around farm 
debt. And a number of the . . . The provincial mediation office 
that we now have in the province that deals with all kinds of 
mediation actually arose out of the farm debt crisis of the early 
’80s. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And what they learned in that process was that communication 
was absolutely crucial. The banks ended up with decisions 
coming primarily from down east that in some ways mimicked 
the kind of trouble that had hit Saskatchewan during the ’30s 
where nobody who was in charge of making the decisions 
understood what was happening on the ground in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The credit unions obviously were owned and operated by the 
local people and they had quite a different take on much of this, 
but they were also very careful managers with money. And 
there were a dramatic number of tense situations where local 
credit union boards were trying to deal with some of their 
customers and neighbours and friends in a reasonable fashion. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this legislation then comes into that 

context as well because this was authorizing the Co-operative 
Trust Company, which is a co-op but part of the whole credit 
union system, to add some more dollars into this settlement 
process. 
 
I know that I was practising law in these years and there were 
many times when the solution did not seem to be on the 
horizon, didn’t seem to be possible. I can recall speaking as a 
professional mediator. I was a lawyer-mediator, one of the very 
first ones in Saskatchewan in 1985. And it was at Moose Jaw 
and I was on a panel with a former member of the legislature, 
Lynda Haverstock. She had just completed her Ph.D. [Doctor of 
Philosophy] in psychology, and she was doing a lot of work 
around what was happening to farm families as a result of farm 
debt. I was there talking about the role of a lawyer-mediator in 
dealing with farmers and the relationship with banks. 
 
And people were uncertain what the longer term solution was 
going to be. But what they did know, everybody knew that it 
took a lot more communication, a lot more discussion, a lot 
more talk about how and where one would go in getting help to 
work on and deal with these family farms. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this legislation that repeals The Family 
Farm Credit Act is legislation that has a long history, and it 
points to a time where there were some substantial difficulties 
in dealing with the family farm. One question that may be asked 
is, was this legislation successful? Well that’s quite a tricky 
question to answer. 
 
But what we do know is that, if you talk to the people who live 
from Davidson west to the Alberta border, the size of the farms 
in that area have gone from 1,500 acres to 2,500 acres to 5,000 
acres, and now, you know, there’s really large limits. And they 
have challenges right across all of those communities in having 
sufficient numbers of people to staff the businesses in the 
smaller towns, the schools, the care homes, the health facilities. 
And basically the farms are so large that family really isn’t part 
of the discussion. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether we 
totally know what the long-term consequences of that are for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It reminds me of some of the people who are looking at our 
province from outside of the province and think that we should 
have kept the original name for Alberta and Saskatchewan as a 
province, which was buffalo. But basically this was a big 
buffalo commons that should be prairie grass and let herds of 
buffalo, herds of cattle run and take care of that. I don’t hold to 
that kind of perspective, but it does raise a question about, 
where do we as people, as families fit into the newer, modern 
agricultural system? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the ingenuity and the abilities of 
many people have allowed for the transition to much larger 
family corporation farms or much larger unit farms. But I’m not 
sure we’ve seen the end yet of where we’re going in our 
agricultural industry. 
 
And this particular legislation actually gives some hints as to 
where we are now. It’s kind of interesting to think that this is 
already 35 years ago that The Family Farm Credit Act was 
introduced. But it talked about, very clearly, this whole role of 
the establishment and development of family farms as 



5948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

economic farm units, and in the transfer of family farms from 
members of one generation to members of a later generation, 
and to assist in the enlargement or conversion of family farms 
that are uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. Mr. 
Speaker, that clause “uneconomic farm units into economic 
farm units” I think has been very much the underlying 
perspective on development of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
We now have in Saskatchewan a very different way of looking 
at how farms are built and how they operate. And to put it in 
some of the terms — the financial terms that were described in 
this legislation — we’ve separated the ownership of the land 
from the farming of the land, from the marketing of the product. 
And some units will do all of those things. They’ll own the 
land. They’ll own the machinery and have the staff or family to 
do the farming, and then they will end up selling their own 
crops. 
 
But very often we see a situation where there’s an absentee 
landlord living in Regina or Saskatoon. They have a leased or 
rented farm team that does the farm work for a cash basis or on 
a crop share basis, and then when the product’s available after 
harvest it immediately goes into another company, a marketing 
company or something else that does that kind of work. And the 
capital or the ownership of the land, the capital for the purchase 
of farm land, that role has been dispersed greatly. 
 
We know we have the situation where the Canada Pension Plan 
owns a whole big chunk of land in a way that none of us would 
have anticipated even 10 or 15 years ago. We know that we 
have investors from overseas who see the value of land in 
Saskatchewan as a good thing to invest in. We know that we 
have situations where the farm land is basically devolved into a 
corporate ownership so that family members and descendants 
can have a share over the longer term. All of these things mean 
that on that capital side or that building side on the land, it’s a 
very different situation than what this family farm credit Act 
anticipated back in 1979. 
 
We also have the same question, the same issue, on the farm 
machinery side. We know that some individual units of 
machinery are now costing between 400,000 to $1 million for 
some of the operations. These things are often then owned by 
leasing companies, which are other banking facilities or the 
capital back behind some of the farm manufacturers, or they’re 
providing financing there. So you end up with the machinery 
that’s doing the work not owned locally or in Saskatchewan at 
all. 
 
So you end up with an industry that is becoming more efficient. 
You also end up with very different fertilizers or resources that 
are needed, and the types of seed, so that some of those costs 
are actually owned or leased from international corporations. 
And so you have this transition to economic farm units, which 
are economic farm subunits owned by a whole number of 
different entities or primarily corporations around the world. 
And frankly, it’s the imagination and the skill of the lawyers 
and accountants and business people to further develop how the 
cash flow will be used from the farming of land in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I don’t think we’ve seen the end yet of the kinds of 
changes that we have described in this legislation. So we have 

this repeal bill here which repeals this family farm credit Act 
and says, okay, that’s something that’s not necessary in the 
longer term. Now I know the minister in his second reading 
speech comments that the type of lending that was necessary 
under this particular legislation isn’t needed anymore because 
producers . . . Note that you don’t use the word farmer 
anymore. But producers can get that through regular lending 
institutions which includes banks, credit unions, and Farm 
Credit Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the list of the types of 
lending or borrowing activities that were under this old 
legislation, what we will see is that even our credit unions and 
banks and Farm Credit aren’t going to be the main lenders as it 
relates to the capital around land, capital around machinery. It’s 
going to be a whole different, different world. 
 
Now on the world market, we have banking institutions that are 
looking for loans that are secure, that are long term so that they 
can be securitized, I think is the word. Some examples of that 
are covered bonds. Those are bonds that consolidate a whole 
number of loans from an institution and then sell them to a 
bigger institution. With the great financial difficulties in 
Europe, many of what had been the long-term bonds that 
provided a solid base of investment for pension funds 
throughout the world no longer are felt to be as safe as they 
were, and so people are going to other jurisdictions. Canada is 
one of the number one jurisdictions for that — I think also 
Australia, some of the South American countries — to find 
regular loans that are long term where the money’s going to be 
paid back, may not come very quickly. 
 
Well loans around farm land in Saskatchewan, around 
machinery, around grain, around fertilizer, all those things are 
prime examples of the kinds of loans that can be securitized and 
put into the world market in a covered bond form. And so all of 
a sudden what seemed like some simple legislation back in 
1979 around how you get money to finance farming becomes 
much more dramatic. 
 
And this raises another issue in Saskatchewan, this particular 
bill, and it relates to the issue of the Securities Commission. 
Basically Saskatchewan has had its own securities legislation 
that’s worked like a passport. It’s worked so it’s available right 
across the country. And that’s the present system we have now, 
so that we have Saskatchewan legislation. We have 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission. Basically their job is to 
regulate the investment or the borrowing of money for specific 
purposes in a corporation. And it’s worked relatively well 
because we’ve been able to work closely with jurisdictions 
across the country. 
 
[15:00] 
 
There is a move afoot, and I know that the minister’s been 
involved in setting up some type of national securities 
commission. And the minister has committed that 
Saskatchewan was going to be part of that. But it once again 
raises the question of whether a national securities commission, 
probably based in Toronto, will understand the needs that might 
be there for Saskatchewan businesses in agriculture. And what 
we can see is that there are going to be large amounts of capital 
needed in the longer term, especially as the equipment becomes 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5949 

more and more sophisticated. 
 
We’ll have a chance to see some of that next week when 
Agribition is on in Saskatchewan, as it relates primarily to the 
livestock industry. But what we know is in Saskatoon they have 
an automated milking station at the university so that our 
students training there know how to operate the robot milking 
system, which requires very few people in a very large barn. 
We’ll see some of that with the beef industry and handling of 
cattle and how that’s changed as well. 
 
All of these kinds of ingenuity that are used to work in the 
agriculture industry take money to do that particular work. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the change around going to a national securities 
system does provide a concern that we won’t have the same 
kind of local understanding and expertise around how we 
should borrow money and invest in companies to deal with 
specific Saskatchewan problems. 
 
The issue always with a national securities commission is that 
they’re interested in financing the big mining operations or the 
big commercial operations, maybe the 25 or $50 million 
borrowings and higher. But in Saskatchewan we have many 
businesses that need some amount of money between 5 million 
and 50 million or 5 million and 25 million. And so the question 
becomes whether that issue is going to affect our farming 
industry. Quite a contrast with what we had in 1979 with The 
Family Farm Credit Act where they were talking about a 
maximum borrowing of 25,000, backstopped by the 
government to assist in the transfer of uneconomic farm units 
into economic farm units. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s how we need to think in this province, 
is to think in the longer term about where and how we will get 
the capital needed to do the farming that we want. And the more 
that we push the borrowing and the lending away from our local 
institutions, our credit unions, our other local places, into the 
world banking market, the less control, if I could put it that 
way, or the less reach we have here as this particular legislature, 
as that kind of lending all goes into the federally regulated 
banks primarily or the federally regulated credit unions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we can be proud of and what this 
legislation that we’re repealing is obviously proud of is the 
credit union system and their company, the Co-operative Trust 
Company of Canada, and which I think now we would call, is 
now named Concentra. 
 
And practically in 2014 our Saskatchewan credit union system 
has 51 credit unions, and those credit unions are spread at 283 
locations. They serve 252 communities, and there are 186 
surcharge-free ATMs [automated teller machine] for credit 
union members. The number of members is just under half the 
population of the province, 491,095 people, and there are 
almost 3,500 employees working in this system. They have total 
assets of about $18.2 billion, and their agricultural loan part is 
2.1 billion. The commercial loan part is 4.2 billion, and their 
consumer and residential loan portfolio is 8.2 billion. This is as 
of the end of 2013. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important to recognize that 
our Saskatchewan credit union system, the system that’s 
involved with Concentra or with the Co-operative Trust 

Company of Canada, is one of the largest in the country, and we 
need to be proud of the work that they do. We were pleased the 
last while to have the special rules around taxation of the credit 
union system to continue here in Saskatchewan even though the 
federal government has made some changes that we don’t agree 
with. 
 
But I think the important thing is to recognize once again in this 
whole farm lending area that we have a major asset, a major 
tool which allows for our own people to have their money 
safely invested in credit unions which then in turn are able to 
provide financing in this new farming industry that we have in 
the province. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting to see 
the changes that have taken place and how once again we’ll 
have to make sure that we’re going to respond in the long term. 
 
I know that Saskatchewan was quite smart or the legislature 
was quite smart during the ’30s in coming up with solutions to 
some very difficult financial times that took place in those 
years. And often it was the Saskatchewan legislature, the 
Saskatchewan government over and against the national 
government and the banks that were headquartered primarily in 
Ontario and Quebec. And the legislation that was created in 
those years has provided protections that we have in 
Saskatchewan which continue but they’re slowly and surely 
being eroded as, well we haven’t used that for a while; we don’t 
need that kind of thing for a while. 
 
I think that when we look at this particular repeal bill here, we 
need to make sure that it is accurate, what the Minister of 
Agriculture says, that the financing options are available for our 
producers. Because what we don’t want to have is a situation 
where some of the options that are available all of a sudden are 
no longer available when financial times change. 
 
Now we’ve been in a situation for the last 15 years probably 
where there’s been all kinds of issues around the basically 
monies available for farming, for agriculture, for that transition 
from one generation to the next. But what’s clearly happened in 
that time is that there are fewer and fewer of what we would 
describe as family farms and that there are more and more of 
larger operations that are financed in many different ways, both 
locally and internationally. And, Mr. Speaker, as the farming 
situation becomes bigger, becomes more economic, then we 
start looking as a province at what are some of the bigger issues 
that may affect the farming industry. 
 
And one of the things that has happened in Saskatchewan, and 
it’s been developed over a number of years and it’s building 
towards this question, but it directly relates to this particular bill 
in the sense of it’s about that transition of the family farm, is the 
whole issue of water and water security and climate change and 
the importance of being ready for dramatic hits to how and 
where farms are financed and some of the family farms that are 
still there. 
 
And it’s important, and I applaud the work that we have at the 
University of Saskatchewan with the Global Institute for Water 
Security. And that’s come out of work that’s happened both 
within the federal agency, the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act, 
PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration], and their 
work from the ’30s up until just recently; comes out of the work 
in Saskatchewan around SaskWater; and it comes now from our 



5950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

Ministry of Agriculture and our ministries of Environment. And 
we see that this whole issue of water security . . . in other words 
making sure there is sufficient moisture for the agriculture 
industry to work in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that relates to this legislation which is being repealed 
because it’s about how we go from the uneconomic farm units 
to economic farm units. And you can do all you want with your 
financing with your Securities Commission, your banks, your 
credit unions, co-operative trust companies, all those things, and 
if the climate change causes or the issues that arise around 
supply of water change, it will affect everything. 
 
What we know is that we have, the water towers of the prairies 
are the glaciers in the mountains in the Rockies. And basically 
the glaciers — Banff, Lake Louise, that stretch up to Jasper — 
supply the water for the Columbia River that goes down out 
into the Pacific Ocean at Portland; supply the water for the 
Fraser River, goes out at Vancouver; supplies the water for the 
Mackenzie River going north; supplies the water for the North 
Saskatchewan River going through Prince Albert; and then the 
South Saskatchewan with the Bow River through Calgary and 
then up to Saskatoon. The South Saskatchewan River provides 
almost, I think, 85 to 90 per cent of the water of Saskatchewan, 
and a huge amount of that water also relates to agriculture and 
the things that are happening there. 
 
And so by having the Global Institute for Water Security at the 
University of Saskatchewan, we have a research base that 
allows for primarily science and engineering research, but I 
think also social policy research on a broader basis. And I think 
it’s helpful to look at their main four interdependent research 
themes as it relates back to this whole issue of the financial 
long-term security of family farms or agriculture in general in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And their four themes they’ve developed now are number one, 
the climate change and water security. What are we doing 
around adaptation? The second one is land water management 
and environmental change. And the third one is the sustainable 
development of natural resources. That’s obviously use of water 
in potash mining or in the oil and gas industry, other places. 
And then the whole issue of socio-hydrology, which talks then 
about how water fits in with our societal use. They also are 
looking at some broader themes around, that haven’t been fully 
developed yet, around water and health and water and 
wastewater treatment technologies. 
 
But all of these things there at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] in the water security area also affect back on to 
this whole concept of the family farm, and how are we going to 
do that transition from uneconomic farm units to economic farm 
units. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at much different issues than 
they did in the early years of the University of Saskatchewan 
when the agricultural outreach work was about very practical 
things about raising cattle or what kinds of chickens that you 
should have; how you develop a safe water source, a well or a 
dugout on your farm; to now looking at some of these 
worldwide issues and how they affect our world-class and 
world-scale agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 

[15:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill that repeals An Act to 
provide Assistance to Farmers in the Establishment and 
Development of Family Farms as Economic Farm Units points 
out that we have some major issues that we still need to think 
about as we move forward. And we can’t just allow that simple 
statement that, oh the banks and the credit unions and Farm 
Credit Canada are going to have all the money available for our 
producers here in Saskatchewan. I think that it takes a much 
bigger perspective, a much bigger point to describe what’s 
happening here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now a lot of what this Act is about is the family farm. And I 
think in many ways, the only place that the family farm or that 
place of memory or, as I like to call it, the virtual history of 
Saskatchewan is still really alive is in the arts. It’s in telling the 
stories in the province. And I want to read a poem from one of 
my favourite authors, who just died last year: Andy Suknaski 
from down at Wood Mountain. We had a memorial for him in 
Moose Jaw. I think it was just last year. But anyway, he writes a 
little bit about what it means to be in a place that I think is a bit 
of a recognition that this type of financial legislation is really 
about preserving some of these kind of images. 
 
So I’m going to read a poem from Number One Northern: 
Poetry from Saskatchewan, published in 1978. And it’s by 
Andrew Suknaski and it’s called “Dunc and Babe McPherson.” 
 

we notice so little in our lives 
i think 
looking again at their photograph taken 
that sunday afternoon last fall 
they standing arm in arm before the flower box 
nailed beneath the window 
and they cast a single shadow across the wall where 
the washtub hangs next to the hammer on a nail — 
i now notice in the foreground 
the large flat stones half the length of a man 
and try to imagine the energy it took to place them there 
(something in the picture turns the mind to the visit 
and how we entered their house — dunc saying: 
the smell of your pipe makes me lonely for the old days 
when i smoked my pipes 
 
sitting down in his easy chair 
dunc gazed a moment at the floating particles moving 
through a light shaft angling down to the floor — 
then he recalled their first experiences 
when he and philip well were blacksmiths east of the old 

post: 
i was shaping shoes when i heard horses whinnying 
i looked up and there was babe 
holding the reins of her father’s team 
that moment i said to myself “this lil lady’s my wife” 
and i tell you the honest God’s truth andy 
i’ve never looked at another woman since — yes 
it was pure and simple as that 
babe chuckled while she poured coffee: yes, and 
i was so afraid of him then 
all I could say was “my daddy wants you to shoe 

these horses 
please.” 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5951 

dunc talked about the tire crimping the old forgotten craft 
and the way he heated iron tires red hot 
to crimp them with the two huge vices 
how in busy times babe often helped him 
throw the hot metal rings back 
on wooden wheels 
suddenly immersed in a water trough to keep the 

wood from burning 
dunc remembered how once a year 
news arrived about a certain horserancher coming to have 
his team shod: 
they would jump half their height straight in the air — 
the night before he arrived 
i smoked myself hoarse andy and I even loaded a pipe 
to calm myself in the middle of the night 
when I woke up shaking from nightmares about them 
dunc compares shoeing horses to tuning a banjo 
and says one can tell by the sound of the nail 
if one is doing it wrong and hurting the horse) 
 
returning to their photograph 
i notice how the garden has been extended 
beyond the old fashioned well . . . 

 
The Speaker: — I wonder if the member could relate how that 
refers to the bill other than simply reading a story to put the 
opposite members asleep. And I don’t need any assistance, 
thank you very much. I recognize the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that members who are 
listening to my speech understand that how this particular poem 
fits and this story fits with what we’re talking about here, is that 
this legislation is about family farm credit. It’s about the whole 
issue of how the Act that’s being repealed was set up to make 
long-term credit available to farmers to assist in the 
establishment and development of family farms as economic 
farm units, and in the transfer of family farms from members of 
one generation to members of a later generation, and to assist in 
the enlargement or conversion of family farms that are 
uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this poem is about the blacksmith who works 
with farmers and ranchers in the Wood Mountain area and 
about how that world no longer exists except in poetry and in 
photographs. And it’s about looking at a photograph and 
remembering that old time and remembering how the change 
and the financing for farms has been absolutely hard there. 
 
So I will finish with the last paragraph of the poem: 
 

returning to their photograph 
i notice how the garden has been extended 
beyond the old fashioned well 
note how they extended their boundaries 
to include the abandoned house turned into a guest house 
and i praise their full happy life here 
where they found everything they ever needed 
here in wood mountain where the stars are still distinct 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s that last sentence about the praise by this 
writer about our ancestors, all of us I think in this place . . . who 

he praised: 
 

. . . their full happy life here 
where they found everything they ever needed 
here in wood mountain where the stars are still distinct 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is legislation about 
financing family farms, which were the backbone of 
Saskatchewan. We’re repealing that legislation which is part of 
the transition or change of Saskatchewan from a place where 
families were very much a part of agriculture to one where 
agriculture is big business where there’s huge amounts of 
money involved, where it’s pension plans. It’s where it’s 
international corporations that are involved in the financing. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s the type of issue we should 
be talking about in this legislature more often because it’s the 
type of thing that people are concerned about. 
 
We have some other pieces of legislation on this docket this 
time that talk about archives, that talk about the memories or 
the photographs and things like that, that I was just referring to 
in this particular poem. But all of these things relate to a 
changing place, a changing province. 
 
We know that the health care issues that we hear day in, day out 
are about how the health care in the big cities is having to 
provide the health care for the whole province as people move 
away from the family farms, they move away from the small 
towns, and they live in a very different place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that one of the fundamental questions 
that all of us will be asked who are in this legislature and have 
been for the last couple of decades is, what did you do to deal 
with these changes in our society? How did you respond? What 
did you talk about? What did you see? And I, what I’m saying 
here, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular legislation just repeals a 
form of financing for preservation of the family farm. It doesn’t 
talk about what kind of other support is going to be there. It just 
says, oh let the banks, credit unions, Farm Credit do that. We’re 
not concerned about that anymore. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s fundamentally wrong. I think we all need to look at and 
talk about how and why our province is changing and do it in a 
way that looks to the long-term future. 
 
I think, and I’ve said this before many times, that Saskatchewan 
is a green place on earth. We all love the colour green in 
Saskatchewan. We have the job as stewards of one of the least 
populated places on the planet, and we need to understand that 
role is just as important as some of the other things that we do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that this particular legislation is about 
the family farm. It’s about the history of our province. It’s about 
how and where we come from. And we can’t just set it aside. 
We can’t just get rid of this type of part of our history without 
reflecting on what’s happening to our province as we move 
forward. 
 
And I think we also need to be ready to deal with changing 
financial times. It doesn’t look as if interest rates are going to 
change very much in the next few years, but I think there will 
be times when we will be challenged with the same kinds of 
issues that were challenging the province and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan in 1979. 



5952 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to add my comments 
about this particular bill, and at this point I would like to move 
to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 153 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. It is a pleasure to rise 
today and enter into this debate on this legislation. It’s a hefty 
piece. It’s some 27 pages long. And while it may seem 
relatively straightforward, that when we talk about legislation 
and modernizing our statute law, it really is interesting. As I’ve 
read through most of the explanatory notes, I have to say that I 
have a lot of questions, and I will take some time this afternoon 
to raise some of those because, you know, it’s important we get 
our legislation correct. 
 
It’s important that it reflects the common language so people 
can understand it, that it’s written in clear language, whether 
that be in English or French, because we are bilingual. Some of 
our bills are in both languages, and we see that, and that’s an 
important function of our legislation. And every once in a while 
we have to take a look back and say, is it as current as it might 
be? But I will have some questions about this particular bill 
because of the way the process goes. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will remember that a 
few years ago I had the privilege of introducing the R-word 
private member’s bill because it was clear that not all the work 
was done in removing the R-word. Now the R-word is a very 
offensive term that is used, that was used in the past to describe 
people who had capacity issues in terms of developmental 
issues, cognitive delays. And it was offensive and it was . . . 
 
It had actually gone through a process. In fact actually I think it 
was in the early ’90s that the statutes were reviewed to make 
sure that they were current both in terms of modern language 
but in terms of gender identification, that it wasn’t solely 
written from a masculine point of view but both reflected if 
possible a neutral gender and so that it reflected more of our 
society norms. But at that point, we found that across the world 
there were still offensive terms being used in our legislation. 
And so whatever we can do to make sure those offensive terms 
are removed, it’s important to do, and this was one. 
 
This initiative actually came up from America because the 
initiative, the drive, the impetus of this initiative that . . . 
Actually it was the People First organization of Saskatchewan, 
related to the community living. And we’re all very familiar 
with that. I know you are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very familiar 

with the good work that they do. They want to make sure 
people live within their communities and they feel whole and 
they feel respected. 
 
So language that would be offensive should be removed. And 
so this is the intent of this legislation: to modernize the 
language. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I’ll show you a few interesting examples as we go forward 
in this debate today about this legislation. Because as I will go 
through the legislation, and there’s some 126 pages of 
explanatory notes, now one suggestion I would say that would 
be . . . You know, I did a little work here preparing for this 
speech because it is important. Because as I’ve said, I’ve had 
experience where we’ve gone back and we’ve said, so how 
many times was a certain word used? 
 
And we found that in fact in this case we had to go back to 
1929, a rare piece of legislation that actually wasn’t online. So I 
think that’s why it wasn’t found. When you do the google 
search for the word, you couldn’t find the word because it 
wasn’t on the government legislative website, I think. I don’t 
know why it escaped that. 
 
But interestingly, interestingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we 
did find when we did a search — and I shared this with the 
Minister of Justice at the time — that in fact the R-word was 
used several times in day-to-day government work, that whether 
it was the Ministry of Education, whether it was the Ministry of 
Health, whether it was the Ministry of Justice, the R-word was 
still being used. 
 
And it’s really important that, not only when we change 
legislation and what we’re talking about here today, that if the 
government is serious about updating its language and making 
it current, that it happens right across the board. And that means 
in terms of any documents that come out, any circulars, any 
bulletins that explain legislation. I mean it was really 
interesting, and I do feel it was a bit of a negative slight on the 
state of affairs when we found out that actually many people 
who should know better were actually still using the R-word. 
 
And so we hope in this case, when people do this review of this 
legislation, that they take a look and say, okay, so we are 
changing some of the language. We are all changing some of 
the language, just not in legislation. But you don’t have people 
on one hand using certain words in the Ministry of Justice when 
it comes to legislation, but out in government-land they don’t 
use that language. They use another term. 
 
So I hope everybody’s on board with this, and it’s critical that 
they are because, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the point 
being, if we’re going to do legislation, there’s no point doing 
legislation if it’s not enforced, if it’s not carried out. And the 
unintended consequences are that, at the end of the day, you 
have confusion because here you have a certain language used 
in this Chamber because of the new statutes that the 
government has seen fit to bring forward. And I’ll explain some 
of the concerns that I do have about some of them because I 
think that actually they’re vague and they’re without meaning. 
And in fact I think it’s going to add to some problems. 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5953 

And one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I go through my remarks, 
you’ll find for example the meaning becomes more and more 
strayed. It’s like a stray dog, you know. If it’s in your backyard, 
it’s not really a stray dog. It’s just a dog off a chain. But if it’s 
in your town, then it’s a bigger problem. It’s a bigger stray dog, 
and then you’ve got problems. 
 
So this is what I’m worried about with some of the language 
here is that in fact I don’t know if we’re solving problems here. 
And I have some real concerns about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because as I said, we don’t have a lot of resources that, you 
know, people say, well you should do a good job. You should 
do it right the first time. Make sure you do the job right the first 
time. And if there’s problems, we don’t want to be coming back 
in just a few months later to have an amendment to say, wow; 
we didn’t really understand the implications of our first 
go-round. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has asked 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Yorkton. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce three special guests of mine in your gallery. First is 
Anton Yanko, and his grandmother, Shirley Michalski. Anton is 
a grade 5 student at Walker School. He’s an amazing young 
man. He’s into baseball, basketball, recently got involved in 
curling, and enjoys participating in Hungarian dance. 
 
With him today is my mom Pat Ottenbreit who I think — full 
disclosure, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 51 years ago today, right 
now, she may have been in labour with me. So it’s great to have 
them in the Assembly visiting. So I’d ask all members to help 
me recognize Anton and our other two special guests and 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I welcome as well the guests here, from this side of the 
House, and recognize the family relationship. Maybe birthday 
wishes are in order as well. We won’t ask the House to break 

into song, but today or tomorrow we wish you happy birthday, 
and that’s a good thing. But anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
digress here, but I think it’s good when we can take a break and 
introduce family and friends. So welcome to your House. 
 
I was saying though, in terms of An Act to amend The Statute 
Law, how important it is to get it right and how people look to 
us and look to the Ministry of Justice to make sure they are 
doing the best job possible, that we’re not revisited later on in 
months to come with revisions because some of the language 
they thought was being introduced is not right, and that leads to 
bigger problems, unintended consequences. 
 
And we don’t want to see confusion. We absolutely don’t want 
to see confusion. Because you know, as we’ve debated a lot in 
this House, especially from the Ministry of Justice, people want 
to see justice served and they want to see it served well and they 
want to see it served quickly and efficiently. You know, we 
don’t want to have misunderstandings. We often hear that 
saying: justice delayed is justice denied. So if there’s confusion 
that we’re creating and we’re not flagging right up front, then 
we have some issues. 
 
So I do want to take a minute to review the minister’s 
comments, and then I do want to talk about some stuff that, you 
know, as I said, I did some work to prepare for this because if 
we are . . . The intent of this legislation I understand and I hope 
would be to make legislation better for all of us in 
Saskatchewan. And we’re doing a broad stroke here with many 
pieces of legislation. I have some suggestions that the Minister 
of Justice or maybe some of us should be thinking about how 
we could do that when it comes to this kind of thing. So I will 
be putting some of those points forward in the few short 
moments ahead. 
 
But I do want to take a moment and talk about the minister’s 
remarks. And actually it was just introduced just a few short 
days ago, when he talks about, “This bill will make 
amendments to over 100 Acts to update outdated language, 
ensure gender-neutral language is used, and correct grammatical 
and reference errors.” 
 
He talked about how the “. . . last general statute revision 
occurred in 1978.” And I stand corrected. He would know. I 
thought it was in the early ’90s, but clearly it was 1978 because 
as I was saying earlier about the work we had done on the 
R-word, that I thought it was in the 1990s. But he talks about 
how as time progresses, certain terms have fallen out of favour. 
And it is interesting. 
 
One that we’ll talk about is the whole issue around Internet and 
websites, whether it’s helpful to have those two words together. 
I’m kind of in the camp that it is. I don’t know where else you’d 
have websites. You might have intranet websites, but I think 
when you’re talking about Internet websites for example, you’re 
really talking about public websites that anybody can access. 
But if you’re talking about intra-websites, we know that’s 
limited to only a few select people with access either through 
hard-wiring or through passwords. And so it’s not a public 
portal at all, but it’s actually something else. 
 
And he talked about how: 
 



5954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

In 2012 an inter-ministerial committee with representatives 
from the ministries of Justice, Social Services, and Health 
provided a report with recommendations on potential 
amendments . . . affecting adults in vulnerable 
circumstances. One of the recommendations was to update 
antiquated and offensive language in Saskatchewan . . . 

 
And I applaud that. That’s a very important issue. 
 
And I know that the term that they will use is capacity, and 
that’s one that I really want to explore in a few minutes ahead, 
is really what does that mean? And when I look at the 
legislation, and we’ll take a look and we’ll review it, but we 
don’t see the definitions of what capacity means. Often we 
think of capacity meaning, how much does this glass hold? 
How much does this tank hold? We also know capacity means 
the ability to do something. But as I’ll show in the explanatory 
notes ahead that actually there’s a whole range of what capacity 
can mean. And I think this is something that’s maybe a 
problem, maybe overreaching too far to one side because they 
were very much explaining some very specific situations where 
capacity . . . 
 
You know, we can have range of definition of capacity meaning 
somebody who has a difficult time, say, chairing a meeting. 
You know, somebody who likes to talk too much should not 
maybe chair a meeting because they’re always interrupting. 
You’ve probably been to those kind of meetings. They don’t 
have the capacity to chair a meeting. Well then you have very 
much the other extreme where someone doesn’t have the 
capacity due to developmental delays, that type of thing where 
clearly, clearly we’re talking about two different kinds of 
capacities. And so I’m curious about what that means. 
 
He talks about amending “. . . four Acts to remove the term 
lunatic and another eight Acts to remove reference to mental 
incapacity or incompetence in favour of lacks capacity. 
Similarly as technology advances, terminology used in relation 
to technology also changes.” Fair enough. Because you know in 
’78, we were sure not using the Internet. We weren’t using 
email to the extent that we are now. But as we go through this, 
we’ll have some questions about that as well. 
 
“What we previously referred to as telephone or facsimile 
transmission, [I’m quoting here] electronic mail and Internet 
website are now commonly referred to as fax, email, and 
website.” And again I think that may be problematic. We 
know that a facsimile comes from the word . . . A reasonable 
facsimile means a reproduction. And so you really 
understood when you were reading the legislation what you 
meant. Electronic facsimile meant that it was a reproduction 
sent electronically. I am disappointed that we’re using the 
word fax. I know what a fax is. But it’s, you know, we talk 
about . . . So where did that language come from, and what 
are we using for a basis for that? It’s commonly used, but I 
think that something may be lost in translation here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And so I have some concerns about that. 
 
So he talks about updating “. . . this terminology in 18 Acts. 
This bill will also amend over 40 Acts to repeal the terms 
chairman and vice-chairman in favour of gender-neutral 
chairperson and vice-chairperson.” And that’s fair enough, you 
know. I mean I do have a little story here to say actually, with 

chairman, that actually . . . It’s interesting that I’ve heard 
debates about where the word chairman came from. And I know 
you’re a historical fan. That actually might be related to the 
Latin manus, referring to the hand, the hand of the Chair as 
opposed to the gender of the Chair. The hand of the Chair 
controlling the meeting; that’s where chairman came from. 
 
Now I don’t know if that’s true or not, or whether that’s an old 
myth. But I find it very interesting that it’s actually not a gender 
term. It’s an old Latin term from manual, hand, hand of . . . 
[inaudible] . . . So I found that very interesting that sometimes 
we react to it. But the common understanding is chairman 
comes from, is a gender-based term. And so it’s fair enough that 
we move to chairperson, and that’s good. And so we’ll see if all 
the pieces of legislation are doing that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And one I might have an interest is, you know, the chairman of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board. Will that go to a 
chairperson? I’ll have to take a look in the statute law and see if 
that is in fact the case, because it’s pretty critical. You know, 
some of these terms, the chairman of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, is just part of our lexicon. So if we take it 
. . . And we can. We can change it. It’s fair enough. We know 
that it has come to be in society really accepted that we should 
change it. So that’s fair enough. 
 
So and “. . . also repeal and replace words that have a variety of 
spellings such as extra-provincial, in so far, subject matter, safe 
keeping, judgement, pipe line to work toward more consistency. 
[And] this will assist in more accurate electronic searches of 
Saskatchewan’s legislation.” And that’s fair enough and I think 
that’s great. 
 
But you know, in many ways, and I think this is an important 
piece of legislation, but I do have to say that, you know, when 
we think about important pieces of legislation that’s before the 
House, you know, as we’re coming up to an election, that in 
fact this is the extent to the priority of this government, is how 
you can make sure you have hyphens in certain words and other 
words are joined together, that it really does show that maybe 
this government is getting a little tired, getting a little weary, 
getting a little . . . running out of ideas. If the best thing they can 
do is go back and do a spellcheck or maybe this . . . Maybe 
they’re all researchers over there. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe you’ve been . . . People have 
just been sending you notes about how I cannot operate after 
seven long years. We cannot operate search engines to find out 
pipelines. Now I don’t know if that’s a problem over there. But 
you can put in two or three different versions of how you spell 
pipelines. You might find that out. Maybe it’s an issue over 
there. Maybe they’re running out of ideas. I think this is an 
example of them running out of ideas and this is the best they 
can come up with is how to make sure you spell insofar or 
safekeeping. 
 
This is where we’ve come to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Is this 
where we’ve come to? Is this where we’re at? This is the height 
of the best legislation the Minister of Justice can put forward? Is 
this the best work they can put forward? I’m not sure. In the 
year before, in months before we come to an election, in the 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5955 

months we’re coming before an election, this is where we’re at. 
 
You know, and I see the two pieces of very good legislation we 
had today before us, and just in comparison, here we have this 
piece where we’re correcting the right way to spell pipeline and 
insofar. And what are the other words? Safekeeping and 
judgment. Don’t put an e in judgment. That’s for sure. Don’t 
put an e in judgment. That’s the best this government can do? I 
don’t know. I don’t know if they’ve been laying awake at night 
worried about how to spell judgment. I don’t know. 
 
Is the court system falling apart over there because they . . . Is 
this government falling apart . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
don’t know. Campfires, is that one word or with a hyphenated? 
I’m not sure about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I won’t sleep. I 
am going to lie awake tonight, and I think we’re going to have 
to have a debate on that tomorrow. 
 
But campfires didn’t make it into the top 10 words here that this 
government . . . I don’t know. I wonder if the, you know, 
member from Watrous, whether he was worried about 
pipelines, whether he was worried about safekeeping, or subject 
matter. That would be a . . . Is that one word or two words? You 
know, and so I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is 
the best that we’ve got from this government in this term, this is 
a sad state of affairs. 
 
In comparison, in comparison, two bills that came before us 
today, you know, for example An Act respecting the 
Transparency and Accountability of Public-Private 
Partnerships, now I have to tell you, public-private has a 
hyphen in it. And so I think that will be searchable, so it will be 
good. But here is a good piece of legislation. Here not so much, 
not so much. And I don’t know if not so much is one word or if 
it’s hyphenated or if it’s all together, but really . . . 
 
Or insofar. Well when we get to committee, when we get to 
committee in May or June, I tell you, we’ll have lots of 
questions for this. We’ll have lots of questions for this. 
 
But here is a good piece of legislation that these folks on the 
other side should be laying awake thinking about how are we 
going to get our best value from our P3s, not about whether 
pipelines has a hyphen or not. Here we have . . . This shows 
where we’ve come to. This is where we’ve come to, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I think it’s a real shame. 
 
And today we had great questions. We had great questions 
about senior care. Unfortunately we had a family come, and it 
was a very sombre moment. It’s always sombre in the House 
when we have people who feel they have to come to the House. 
 
Here we have another bill. We should be really considering it, 
and I hope this government considers this. They should be 
laying awake at night, and I hope the Minister of Health is 
laying awake thinking about that, thinking about that as 
opposed to whether insofar is one word or is it three. You know 
I mean, really I think we have to have some . . . We have to 
think about priorities as we’re coming into an election. 
 
This is a tired, old government that it sort of, you know, it sort 
of reminds me of the old teacher in the school, and you know, 
who would make sure . . . Yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

don’t know if you remember me talking about legibility, 
legibility. We had the Minister of Culture, you know, saying 
and he’s going to legislate that the ministers have to have 
legible cursive handwriting. And the Minister of Education 
chirped in and said he was going to standardize handwriting . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Just the cursive part, just the cursive. 
And here we are standardizing words like this. This is 
something else and they’re all after consistency. 
 
So this is what we’ve arrived at. This is what we’ve arrived at 
in this House, Mr. Speaker. This is a shame, Mr. Speaker, 
because . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can always tell when I hit a 
nerve when the member from Moose Jaw wakes up with his, 
you don’t know what you’re talking about. I clearly have hit a 
nerve, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve hit that note, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
unbelievable, unbelievable, unbelievable that you know so . . . I 
don’t know. I bet it was the member from Moose Jaw who is 
laying awake at night or couldn’t find these words like subject 
matter, insofar, judgment. I wonder if that’s the one that got 
him. 
 
So here we have bills before the House that really show 
innovation, vision, leadership, commitment to people. And 
we’re talking about the public-private partnerships, 
transparency, accountability, and An Act respecting the Rights 
of Residents in Special Care Facilities and Personal Care 
Homes. These are bills that really show vision and integrity and, 
you know, the issues that people are talking about in 
Saskatchewan. And then we have this bill before us, Bill No. 
153, An Act to amend the Statute Law which really I have to 
say, while there is a place for that, I have to say it should be like 
Bill No. 75. How many bills do we have before us today? 
About maybe 20, of which five are consequential bills. We 
really have a pretty lean agenda, pretty lean agenda. And this is 
the best that this government could come up with, you know. 
 
They take, you know, and we often hear about they take a lot of 
pride every summer going out and having conversations with 
their constituents. And I’m not sure. I mean which member 
came back to their huddle, their conference in August to say, do 
you know what we’ve got to do? What we’ve got to do is 
improve the language in our statutes. And so this is something 
that we really have to think about. 
 
So anyways, Mr. Speaker, I have not yet got to the explanatory 
notes, and I do want to go through that because they are pretty 
significant. They’re about 126 pages, and I do want to review 
some of those pages. But I have to tell you that I do have some 
suggestions, and I told the minister earlier that I would. I did 
some homework, and I did take a look at what are people 
talking about. How can they improve people’s access to fully 
understanding the statutes that we have before us? How can we 
more . . . How can we meet that in a better way? 
 
And of course, you know, one thing I have to say: hats off to 
the people across the way and how we work together in terms 
. . . And I hope one of the things we never see . . . And one of 
the things that I would really would have liked to see, if there’s 
a way of doing this, but we did do the directives, and that was 
around the whole issue of the omnibus legislation. We won’t 
see that kind of stuff here in Saskatchewan. That’s really, really 
important, so we both have agreed to that, the directives. And I 
know the former House leader worked very hard on that, and 



5956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

that was a good thing. 
 
And when we come to people understanding . . . Now I don’t 
know if those members over there are saying no, repeal that, 
that we actually want omnibus legislation. I don’t know. You 
know, I don’t think they could . . . It would be a poor imitation 
of Mr. Harper’s omnibus legislation when he can do bills that 
are hundreds of pages long, hundreds of pages long, and ram 
them through the House. So I’m not sure if the opposite side, 
when I heard them chirping over there, if that’s what they’re 
calling for. Now the Minister of Health is weighing in on this 
debate here. Is he looking for . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not on this debate. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Not on this debate. I won’t bring him in, fairly, 
if he’s . . . But I am concerned because that’s a good thing we 
don’t get in omnibus legislation because then speeches would 
get really long. And that would be a problem; we don’t want 
really long speeches. We don’t want long speeches because, 
you know, yesterday we had concerns about the fact that we’re 
not doing our homework. But I got to tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re doing our homework. We’re doing our 
homework. But you know when we go out and knock on doors 
and say, so what do you think about this word or that word, 
we’re going to have a hard sell. But some of them are good. 
Some of them are fair, you know. 
 
And as I said earlier, around the R-word, and I have to say to 
the Minister of Justice that he was part of that conversation I 
had about the R-word, and he was really, he was really 
appropriate to that. 
 
Now I am in debate right now, so it’s very hard for me to read 
this. But oh yes, so here we go. But what I am saying, I am 
agreeing. I am agreeing. But no props in this. No props are 
allowed, right, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
At any rate, I do want to say about the omnibus bills that it’s 
good that we don’t have them, that they’re not part of the 
process here. And we have worked together to do that, and 
that’s a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Quite often people say 
we don’t work well together. But you know what? That’s not 
the case. Sometimes we do work well together, and this is one. 
And so I appreciate the member opposite for sharing that piece 
with me because it is the fact here. And we won’t be seeing that 
kind of thing. 
 
The other thing that I saw — you know, it’s interesting that the 
minister talked about technology and the importance of that — 
but we’re seeing . . . And I just went online, just before I came 
back in here to say . . . So what are people calling for when it 
comes to improving statutes and improving the circumstances 
around how people can best respond to legislation? And there’s 
a movement afoot in North America — and you may find this 
interesting, other members may find this interesting that we can 
do this — that actually that they’re looking forward in the 
States to have a 72-hour notice, that before any legislation is 
debated in a House or in a Chamber, it must be online for 72 
hours. So essentially that adds a three-day window. 
 
So of course what we have is, they’re introduced in the House 
here. I think it’s appropriate that it would be here. But there’s a 

72-hour window where it must be online so any concerned 
citizen can have a chance for reviewing that. I think that has a 
lot of merit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because then you can have 
input. Things are not rushed through. And we’re seeing that, we 
see that in the States too much. 
 
And I do want to think that sometimes there’s an appropriate 
time when we do put legislation forward, we pass it very 
quickly. And I think about on Monday when we recognized the 
new member from Lloydminster. That was quite an appropriate 
piece of legislation to push through. The people have spoken, 
and I want to welcome her. And that was the right thing to do. 
So in those cases it would not be right to delay. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But sometimes I think we should strive to make sure that we do 
our best to make sure people have the information before them. 
And then they could put ideas forward because, you know, 
sometimes the government, especially at the beginning we don’t 
have a lot of legislation before us. And that’s the case before us 
now. We’re halfway through the fall session and we should be 
seeing the bulk, if not almost all of the government legislation, 
except for those budget bills that will come in the spring 
obviously because they’re budget bills. But we’re not seeing 
bills to the same extent that we would have seen a year ago or 
two years ago or three years ago.  
 
So just to reiterate my point, you know, it really does seem like 
the government is running out of ideas because we’re not seeing 
the legislation. They’re not bringing it forward. And we’re 
getting the kind of housekeeping legislation that, while it has 
merit, really clearly has not the impact it should have on people 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing, there’s two other points I want to make in 
terms of good ideas. And I really want to see, actually this 
government hasn’t done it, but it’s again the thing the federal 
government has done an awful lot of. And I really hope we 
don’t see this happening with this government here, is the rise 
of private member bills from the government side that really is 
government business. And we see that federally around justice 
bills that really should be coming from the ministry of Justice, 
or we saw labour bills federally that really should have been 
coming from the Minister of Labour but they were coming from 
private members. And it was a way to go around a process of 
checks, checks and balances. 
 
You know, we do value, and I think both sides of this House 
value public service And I’m not sure completely when those 
folks did their 16 or their four-by-four cutbacks. I mean that’s 
an odd sign to say, we value you, and you’re cutting back. 
Here’s your pink slip. But we do need to have our public 
servants scrutinize our legislation, if not only to make sure 
insofar is spelled correctly. That’s an important one. Or 
judgment’s spelled correctly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . All 
words. Well we’re singling out one or two words because 
there’s seems to be a top 10 words that this government is 
fixated on. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not me who made that list. It’s 
not me who made the list. You know, if I had my way, there’d 
be many other words on that list. But of course there are foreign 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5957 

words to these folks like, you know, social housing. That’s one 
that’s not on that list. Transgendered rights is not on that list. 
You know, we need to have those words on that list. We need to 
have gay-straight alliances. It’s not on that list. And so we need 
to make sure this is . . . Seniors’ care, that’s not on that list, you 
know. Public-private partnerships, transparency and 
accountability, not making that list. So those would be the kind 
of words I would want on that list. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I digress just a little bit, not much because I 
do think this is an important piece of legislation. But I do want 
to say about private member bills, I have a lot of respect for 
private member bills because, you know, they are an important 
tool. But we do see some governments misusing them. 
 
And we see in Saskatchewan that they, I believe, that they’re 
used quite well. I can remember when the Minister of Health 
introduced his private member’s bill about reservists, and we 
were glad to work with him, in opposition. I do want to 
acknowledge the Minister of Labour, when we worked both on 
Jimmy’s law and the asbestos registry. We can work on these 
things, and it’s an appropriate way to see things move forward. 
 
I am concerned, and I want to put a flag out right here right 
now, that they can be abused by a government who doesn’t 
want to use the scrutiny of their own public service and put 
forward bills that they know will get passed. And we see that in 
Ottawa where there was completely inappropriate labour bills, 
questionable justice bills, bills that should have gone through 
those departments but would have been vetted much stronger if 
they had gone through the appropriate way. 
 
But before I go on to the part that I really want to talk about, 
and that is around the explanatory notes, because I want to go 
through this and I want to explain about how some of these 
words are problematic, I want to raise the whole issue around 
explanatory notes. And that is the fact that online we don’t have 
. . . And I could be corrected on this, but bills are posted online 
but the explanatory notes are not posted online. And that’s a 
problem. 
 
And I would say to the government and to the Speaker and to 
those who might have . . . Minister of Justice, that if they really 
want to have an impact, here we have a bill that’s 27 pages 
long, but the explanatory notes, 126 pages, are not accessible to 
the public, are only accessible to the members here. 
 
Now I don’t know if somebody came in off the street and asked 
for them whether they would get a copy. I assume they would, 
but for some reason they are not online. And I would think that 
would be a good idea, and if we could correct that, that would 
be great. Because I know I’ve been home in Saskatoon — and 
you know, we’re all from all over Saskatchewan — and if we 
could access those explanatory notes from home, that would be 
a big improvement. So I hope that’s something that we can take 
back, particularly in this case. I’ve just noticed that, you know, 
I’ve often looked for explanatory notes online and they’re not 
there. The bill is there, but not the notes that go along with 
them. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I get into the explanatory 
notes discussion — because they are 126 pages and I know 
other people have other bills they want to get to today — but I 

want to talk a bit about them. I want to illustrate the point about 
some of the language I’m not sure is appropriate, or not so 
much appropriate, but appropriate in the meaning that it doesn’t 
help a lot. And not that it’s offensive or anything like that; there 
are no offensive terms that were used in the making of this bill. 
 
But I have to say that one of the things I was hoping that the 
minister would have cleared up, you know, when you listen to 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] every once in a 
while they’ll make a reference to where they . . . what guide 
they use for their pronunciation guide or their spelling guide.  
 
I think if you went to CBC you could say, so what guide do you 
use? What is your standard? Is it the Oxford dictionary? Is it 
The World Book Dictionary? What dictionary do you use? Is it 
the Winston school dictionary that I used, you know? The 
Wikipedia, we often use Wikipedia. Wikipedia is good. They 
have a dictionary as well. 
 
So what dictionary are they . . . What is their standard, and 
where is that, if I were to ask the minister in a written question, 
what is the standard book that they’re using for this . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Now I will have to . . . I heard 
something there, so I’m glad that there seems to be a standard, 
but I would have liked to have seen that in the book. OED 
[Oxford English Dictionary] is the, apparently, standard. OED. 
And so this is something that was missed out in this. 
 
And I think, as I look through this, it does list the different bills 
and how they’re amended, whether it goes from The Accounting 
Profession Act and what’s . . . It was a tabling part that needed 
to be upgraded. And then we’re talking about telephone 
transmission facsimile and substituting fax; safe-keeping, taking 
out the hyphen and putting them together, and going through 
like that. And I will talk about some of these: him and hers, how 
we’ve dealt with that. 
 
But what I did not notice in the, as I said, the whole issue 
around these terms, I would have appreciated what the 
definition is. And I would have thought that it would have been 
appropriate to be in the legislation what the definition is. And it 
is interesting as you go through this and what it means. You 
have pipe line and, you know, with that then you take out the 
space and it looks like a double space and now you have no 
spaces. I would have thought there would have been definitions 
and that would have been helpful. Especially, as I say, some of 
them don’t need definitions. But I think fax needs definition 
because when you are going from the word facsimile, which 
means a copy of, and one has a telephone transmission copy, 
then we understood what it meant. But now we have fax and so 
what is a fax? You know, and there is no definition of what a 
fax is. 
 
As I said earlier about the word capacity, we had the whole 
thing about what does capacity mean? And it’s quite a range, 
and I’ll take a few minutes to talk about that. But going from, 
you know, the ability, what is the capacity, how much does a 
glass or a tank hold, or the ability to do a certain task or 
something much more than that. Now where are those 
definitions coming from? Particularly in terms of the word 
capacity, is it the American Psychiatric Association, their 
definition of capacity? Is there a Canadian equivalent to that 
definition of capacity? 



5958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

These are legal documents, and so what does capacity mean? Is 
it just simply the inability to carry out a task? Or is it a much 
deeper, deeper meaning? And relating to a person who has an 
ongoing disability, is that what we’re referring to? And that’s 
not clear in the new legislation because they’re just taking out 
one word and substituting another word, and I think that may be 
problematic down the road. I’m not a lawyer but I can say that I 
think we could have done better in that, you know. 
 
I understand I’ve got some lawyers who’ve got my back here, 
and I’ve got them in the front too. I’m surrounded by lawyers 
here. I’m glad I am looking this way here. But I’m just saying, 
you know, our job here is to see problems and say, so in this 
case it’s a little bit more complicated than that, you know. 
 
We see a whole range of what we’re assigning to one word 
through many pieces of legislation. And in the old legislation, it 
was very clear about what it meant even though now that term 
— and I’m referring to the term lunatic — is offensive and is 
not helpful. But at the time, it really set the stage of what it 
meant at that time because of a certain mental health or mental 
condition or state. And so I have problems with that word in 
that it’s not . . . I can see how we’re going to have issues as we 
go down the road here. And maybe I’ll just take a minute to 
highlight that. 
 
And so we were talking about The Business Names Registration 
Act. And again, you know, we’re talking about fax. They’ve 
taken out the word “telephone transmission, facsimile”. But 
clause 16(1), and this is clause (c)(b)(11), and it’s amended 
that: 
 

(4) Clause 16(1) is amended by striking out “mental 
incompetence” and substituting “lack of capacity”. 
 

And then the next clause: 
 

Clause 18(1)(e) is amended by striking out “becomes 
mentally incompetent” and substituting “lacks capacity”. 

 
And that’s what they’re doing there. That’s fair enough if that’s 
what that means in that situation. But again there’s no definition 
to say, this is what the parameters are around capacity. 
 
The Cities Act is also amended. And The Cities Act is a fairly 
important piece of legislation. Again it goes through the 
“facsimile or electronic mail” and substituting “fax or email.” 
And it goes through that. And I mean I don’t think that’s going 
to be a huge, huge problem, but again I don’t think it’s as clear 
as it might be. 
 
But section: 
 

309(9) is amended in the portion preceding the clause 
(a) by striking out “, a mentally incompetent person or a 
person of unsound mind” and substituting “or a person 
who lacks capacity”. 

 
And so now you have that same word capacity, but now you’ve 
added person of unsound mind, and maybe that seems . . . And 
I’m not a psychologist, but I don’t know if that means the same 
as a mentally incompetent person. 
 

[16:15] 
 
But here, when we get into The Companies Act section: 
 

. . . 108(1) is amended by striking out “lunatic” and 
substituting “a person who lacks capacity”. 

 
So you’re starting to add a dimension, several dimensions to the 
word capacity that I’m not sure capacity means that, and is there 
a better word for meaning, you know, in today’s language? 
What is the modern meaning of the word lunatic, and what do 
the psychologists and people in the professions, in the field, 
what do they say a better word for that is now? Is it people who 
lack capacity? 
 
And because you have that range — mentally incompetent, 
person of unsound mind, now you’re introducing lunatic — so 
you’re getting a pretty wide range of what does it mean to be 
lacking capacity. And again: 
 

. . . The Conservation and Development Act is amended 
by striking out “, a lunatic or person of unsound mind” 
and substituting “or a person who lacks capacity”. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this goes on in several examples, and I could 
go through some of these. Well, and this is another one here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is from The Municipalities Act and 
The Municipalities Act is amended . . . Oh no, sorry, my 
mistake here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s The Provincial Lands 
Act, section 57(1) is amended by saying a person who has 
become insane or mentally incompetent now lacks capacity. 
 
So now you have four, you’re taking out four words that 
lacking capacity means: you can have becoming insane, you 
could have lunatic, you could have mentally incompetent and 
mental incompetence, all of those, or unsound mind. Is that the 
definition of lacking capacity? 
 
So I think I’m just saying that, you know, I look at this Act and 
I say, so those four phrases — granted it’s inappropriate 
language now, very inappropriate language now — but I think 
that we need to think about maybe there’s a bit of . . . it could 
be . . . There should be more clarity here, more clarity. I’m 
looking for the right word. I’m looking for the right word, 
especially in this debate. It’s important to have the right word, 
you know. Maybe I’m not spelling it right but I . . . this is not 
lacking, this is lacking clarity because you have four 
dimensions to the word capacity, or lacking capacity, right from 
becoming insane to mental incompetence. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
I think this is a real issue. This is a real issue and we could do 
better. We could do better. And I have some real concerns about 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, if this is the best this government’s 
come up with and they couldn’t take the time to say, okay, we 
have these four words. Are there four words that mean in 
today’s language, lexicon, that really hits that spot clearly so we 
don’t have . . . because . . . Oh. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Why is the Minister of 
Health on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5959 

guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and to members for allowing me the opportunity to 
introduce a couple of guests. Seated in the west gallery we have 
four guests that have joined us to watch the proceedings this 
afternoon. And I think they’re very excited to be here this 
afternoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are two daughters of one 
of our Pages, Leslie, as well as a niece, as well as the girls’ 
grandmother’s watching them here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have Verra, if she could give us a wave, 
and Arraya, if I said that right, Arraya, yes, she’s the younger 
one. I think she’s two years old. And, Mr. Speaker, Brie who is 
Leslie’s niece, and Brie, today is Brie’s fifth birthday. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they wanted to come to the castle as a part of the 
birthday party, and they’re here with their grandmother. And so 
I would ask all members to help and join me in welcoming 
these four lovely guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into the debate again, and say hello from the 
opposition side to the guests in the gallery as well and wish Brie 
a happy birthday. This is our second happy birthday person in 
the House today. We have somebody from Yorkton, but he’s 
not in the House. But anyways it seems to be a good day for 
birthdays, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And while I had a chance to sit 
down, I did want to thank the members opposite for sending 
over this piece about the rules in the House here and section 
74(1) about omnibus bills. And that really, I think this is an 
important piece, that we don’t have omnibus legislation. 
 
And it’s important that we do all that we can to make sure that 
we have legislation that is clear, straightforward, so it can be 
debated in a very meaningful and pithy, straightforward 
manner. That we don’t have situations where we have people 
going on and on. It’s very important that we have legislation 
that is straightforward. 
 
So as I was saying though, Mr. Speaker, as you’re joining us 
here today, that I do have some questions about some of the 
work that’s before us and how I would have liked to have seen 
more thought put into this. And I do have a lot of tags on my 
explanatory notes. As I was saying though, my biggest concern 
was just the issue around capacity and the fact that we have 
some real issues about definitions, and how will this add to 
clarity or will this cause more problems? 

And what about the definitions of some of the language and 
whether they’re by the professionals in the field of psychiatry or 
psychology or the World Health Organization? That’s an issue, 
because particularly as I’ve illustrated with the word capacity, 
it’s a well-used word and many of us have different ideas of 
what that means. 
 
But when it comes to legislation, we really have to say what we 
mean and mean what we say. And then we have these four 
circumstances where capacity can reflect on somebody who, the 
old term was somebody who’s insane or somebody who’s a 
lunatic or mental incompetence or unsound mind. Are all those 
four words interchangeable? I’m not sure they are. And 
especially when it comes to, you know, if someone has a 
permanent disability, or is it just a certain situation, you know. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have to really, have to think on 
this. 
 
Now I heard members opposite talking about this the worst 
piece of legislation they’ve heard, but I’m not sure, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, we had a discussion earlier about how this 
seems to be a tired, old government because if this is one of 
their flagship pieces of legislation that they’re bringing forward 
. . . They’re bringing forward this piece of legislation and really 
what it talks about . . . And the minister talked about how we 
spell certain words correctly, and they have their top 10. And I 
understand the member from Moose Jaw gets really kind of 
worked up about these kind of things, about making sure that 
we spell extraprovincial correct, insofar correct, subject matter 
correct, safekeeping. Is this the best we have? We’re seeing 
really good pieces of legislation come from this side talking 
about issues that are really important, like seniors and senior 
health care, transparency and accountability in P3. But here we 
have from this side their top 10 spelling words. 
 
And I think this is something that, while it’s very important, 
that at this point where we should be seeing 30 or 40 pieces of 
legislation — because we should be seeing the bulk of their 
legislative agenda by now — I am really concerned that we’re 
actually not. We’re not. And if this is . . . Is this sort of how 
we’re wrapping it up? This is not a good sign for people of 
Saskatchewan, except for those who are using search engines to 
search for certain things. 
 
And we’re talking about certain words that we would like to see 
in the legislation but we’re just not seeing them, Mr. Speaker. 
But I did raise . . . And some of the things that we think we 
should be doing that would improve access and people’s ability 
to . . . And talk about search engines. You know, there is a 
movement afoot that we had talked about that bills should be 
posted 72 hours prior to debate in the House so people could 
search and find them and talk about issues that are important, 
and make sure that people are up to date on those issues. 
 
So one of the things that we talked about earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
we talked about how some of the stuff that’s online right now 
. . . The bills are online but unfortunately the explanatory notes 
are not online, and we think that could be something that could 
be improved. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to go through some of 
these bills that I think are very, very important in terms of the 
explanatory notes. And I will tell you that this is something 
else, because while the bill’s 27 pages, the explanatory notes 
are 126 pages. 



5960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

And they talk about certain pieces of legislation that are 
important. And you know, when we are changing this, this is 
really, you know . . . The language really shows who we are 
and, you know, what are our priorities. And as we said earlier, 
there’s certain words that we would like to see more in the 
statutes. And we’re talking about whether that would be 
gay-straight alliances, transgender rights, affordable housing, 
that type of thing that’s really important. 
 
So we look through the business . . . You know, there’s Acts 
that are amended like The Accounting Profession Act, and we 
think that’s a hugely important thing. But that’s really around 
updating the language from faxing. Also The Archives Act. 
 
Now here’s an interesting one, The Archives Act. So mark my 
words, Minister of Justice, mark my words. Here we are 
amending The Archives Act of 2004 to update the spelling of 
safekeeping. But are we not dealing with The Archives Act to 
get rid of it? Aren’t we getting rid of The Archives Act? And 
now it’s going to become The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act. So why are we updating an old piece of 
legislation that is going to be repealed? So we’re already in the 
business of setting up for another piece of legislation. So if you 
want to credit me with that amendment, I don’t know why 
we’re updating The Archives Act. Mark my words, we’ll be 
back to do that one. So don’t think we don’t read these things, 
Mr. Speaker. We read these things, and I think it’s important. 
So I don’t know why we’re doing that. 
 
But you have the automobile insurance Act, and it’s amending 
the spelling of judgment. And just very clear, at TV and at 
home, judgment is without an e. There’s no e in judgment in the 
province of Saskatchewan, except for the province of 
Saskatchewan has an e. We want to make sure you spell 
Saskatchewan correctly. All right? 
 
So anyways, this goes on and on. There’s some really important 
pieces of legislation that I do want to reflect on. And as I said, 
we were talking about the . . . Now this is about again when we 
were talking about updating the language respecting persons 
who lack capacity, updating the spelling of judgment, 
extraprovincial, and the language around The Business 
Corporations Act. 
 
And again I’m talking about capacity, and you see the evolution 
from meeting someone who just may not have the ability to do 
the work but how we move forward. And again, it goes through 
this quite extensively. And it’s important to do this every once 
in a while, as I’ve said, but I want to get to the piece around The 
Crown Minerals Act. Again, you know, what they’re updating 
here is around an Internet website. And it may seem to be a 
small thing, but there are different kinds of websites. There’s 
intranet websites; there’s Internet websites. Now I’m not a real 
techie type guy, but I know there’s internal websites and there’s 
external websites. So you know, we want to make sure that 
people have access to the public websites for sure. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So in this case are we talking about, and we are talking about 
. . . And the quote is, if the minister . . . And this is section 
27.54(1): 
 

The minister may require specific information or types of 
information to be provided to the ministry in paper form. 
 
(2) If the minister requires information to be provided in 
paper form pursuant to subsection (1), the minister shall 
give notice of the requirement in any manner that the 
minister considers appropriate to bring the requirement to 
the public’s attention, including posting the requirement on 
the ministry’s Internet website. 

 
So clearly that’s the public website. That’s not the internal 
website. All right. So this adds clarity. You take out the word 
Internet, and you have which website? Which website are we 
talking about? Are we talking about . . . And I assume, I assume 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. So which websites are we 
talking about? So this is a problem here. Now I could be wrong 
on this, and we’ll get into committee and we’ll ask questions 
about this, but websites have different meanings, Mr. Speaker. 
Okay. 
 
And in here, going further on, this is about the Chief Electoral 
Officer. This is The Election Act. And again this is an important 
piece of legislation that we have. And it talks about 87.1: 
 

A voter who wishes to be considered an absentee voter 
shall apply to the returning officer or the Chief Electoral 
Officer by submitting: 

 
This is clearly . . . And this is becoming a bigger, bigger issue 
all the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(a) the satisfactory evidence of the voter’s identity and 
ordinary residence required pursuant to section 72.1 to 
the returning officer or the Chief Electoral Officer, as the 
case may be; and 
 
(b) a prescribed voter’s declaration form . . . is fully 
completed. 

 
And then it talks about an application that has to be done at 
least eight days before polling day. 
 

(3) An application pursuant to this section: 
 

(a) may be made by facsimile or other means of 
electronic transmission; and 
 
. . . voter’s signature in a graphical representation. 

 
So you know, again this is where I think facsimile is a 
reasonable word. Facsimile means a copy, a representation. 
What does it look like? You know, a fax. I think that we’re in 
fact cheapening our language by saying we use shorter words. 
But a facsimile means a facsimile and I think that’s hugely, 
hugely important. 
 
Well you know, this is an interesting concept when we talk 
about 3-D printing and facsimile could mean, and I don’t know 
if the ministry has taken into account 3-D printing and 3-D 
facsimiles. But facsimiles would mean a copy of that. A fax is 
something quite two-dimensional. 
 
And I think that if we’re anticipating new changes, it would be 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5961 

interesting to hear particularly from those in the know about 
what are the upcoming changes to language that we should be 
anticipating. And I think this is an important issue, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think that as we move forward and . . . Particularly 
when we talk about voting, I think that we may be moving into 
a much more electronic world. It’s the Old World where you 
had to go in or maybe you had a thumbprint in this purple ink 
so everybody knew if you had voted because your thumb was 
purple. Well we’re moving away from that. 
 
We’re moving into a much more technologically advanced age. 
We’re moving into a much more technological age where we 
should be thinking, anticipating the kind of changes in 
particular that we want to make sure that language does. So I 
am disappointed to see that we’re moving away from using the 
word facsimile and using the word fax. It just does not capture 
the meaning of the intention of the words here. 
 
And so again, you know, they talk about The Election Act. It’s 
safekeeping and faxing again. Here’s a word, safekeeping. 
What does safekeeping mean? What does safekeeping mean? I 
mean it could mean a whole variety of things to a certain 
person. To another person, it’s just street money that, you 
know, doesn’t really matter because you’ve got a, you know, a 
wide tolerance of what that really means. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just, again I speak about what do these words 
really mean? And I have some real concerns about that. Now 
The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 
is amended to remove the word Internet because the current 
drafting standard is to refer to website, not an Internet website. 
And you know, I find that interesting because that’s not that old 
a piece of legislation and I think that we would . . . I again, 
especially when we talk about foreign workers, we want to be 
clear on what we mean. Is website just an internal portal for the 
government or when we talk about . . . And particularly in this 
case where we have people who are coming to work in 
Saskatchewan and our province, and that’s a good thing, of 
course we want to make sure we follow the rules. And 
interestingly, interestingly, and I don’t know if many of the 
members over there would know that in fact this piece of 
legislation is highly regarded by people in the labour world, that 
if it is followed, it can be a good standard. But the question is, is 
it followed and is it understood? 
 
So I have a circumstance here where, what does it mean? And I 
mean we have people coming whose first language, spoken and 
written language, may not be English, may not be English. They 
want to be clear when we talk about website, that they can find 
it on the Internet. Like where do you mean website? Is it the 
government website? Is it one that it’s in the office website? Or 
is it one that I can go to the library or I can access at home? So 
this is huge. This is huge. So I have some problems with that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other one that I wanted to talk about, 
and this is one that just caught my eye, just caught my eye, and 
I thought we should have a discussion about this today because 
it’s an important piece of legislation. And this is under The 
Funeral and Cremation Services Act. And I’m thinking, you 
know, as we’re modernizing language, funeral is not a very 
modern language, is it? I mean people do many things to 
recognize and celebrate the passing of their loved ones, but it’s 
not . . . They’re referred to in a whole host of different words. 

So I’m not sure, if you’re . . . [inaudible] . . . language, you 
might — and I see the minister is not able to take a note right 
now — but he may want to think about that piece of legislation, 
the funeral and cremation Act. 
 
Cremation is pretty well straightforward. We all know what 
cremation means and that’s straightforward. But what is the 
word funeral, and is that offensive to some people? Are there 
different cultures where we don’t have funerals? I’m not sure. I 
haven’t had the ability to go back and do the homework on that. 
That might have been something that I should have thought of a 
little bit about, but I don’t think funerals is a pan-cultural term. I 
mean even with our own, you know, family, I think that we 
have funerals, but we have also celebrations. And we have 
different ways to mark the passing of our loved ones, and it’s 
very important that we use the right terminology. 
 
So a note for the Minister of Justice that I have found yet 
another problem here on page 49, that I think that we need to 
rename the funeral and cremation Act because I’m not sure 
funeral is the best phrase for that event, because it’s not a 
pan-cultural term. People do recognize what that is, and of 
course when we get into such things as the owner of a funeral 
home or funeral services, people may not say that they provide 
funeral services. They provide other services that are 
appropriate to mark the passing of loved ones. But funeral 
homes, I’m not sure if they call themselves funeral homes. 
Wakes is another example of how we recognize the passing of 
our loved ones. 
 
And of course they were just focusing on, in that Act, The 
Funeral and Cremation Services Act, the idea of faxing and 
safekeeping. And again, safekeeping in that term, safekeeping 
when it comes to, especially to human remains, it may be quite 
different than when we were talking earlier about those in the 
business community when we talked about records or archives 
and that type of thing. 
 
So that’s an important piece of language. The Homesteads Act, 
which is a huge piece of legislation, when we talk about 
spouses and their relationships and the one who owns and the 
non-owner, this is a very complicated but very important piece. 
This is an interesting one because here again we have that issue 
is raised again about capacity. Because it talks about the 
application to dispense with consent, which is hugely, hugely 
important. 
 
You know, when you dispense of the ability with the consent 
. . . And there’s three circumstances where you can dispense 
with consent: 
 

11(1) Where: 
 

an owning spouse and non-owning spouse are living 
separate and apart; 
 
the whereabouts of the non-owning spouse are 
unknown; or 
 
the non-owning spouse is a mentally incompetent person 
or a person of unsound mind. 

 
So again here we see that phrase. The word capacity will be 



5962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

introduced. And so again the dimensions of that word, capacity, 
will not be defined in The Homesteads Act. It probably should 
be. It should be defined somewhere because we’re talking about 
the four different dimensions of what capacity may mean and 
again, you know, as I was hoping the minister could have been 
more clear about what he was using as a benchmark or a 
definition. Is it the World Health Organization, WHO? Is it a 
Canadian or an American professional organization that deals 
with psychological situations such as this? Because we know 
we have to modernize our language. Again I think this is simply 
dismissed. 
 
Again you know, The Hotel Keepers Act, a very important 
thing. We’re talking about safekeeping there. You know, I think 
that I would liked to have seen . . . You know, it’s interesting 
when we have standards for drafters of legislation, and they like 
to have common language so that it can be used across many 
pieces of legislation. But here you have the hotel keepers 
legislation, when we talk about safekeeping, and then you have 
funeral home operators and their world view of safekeeping. I 
think this is something that we should be looking at very 
carefully. 
 
And so I think that, Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of meat here to 
talk about, and I really am concerned that maybe . . . And you 
know, I could go on, but I know that there is other issues that 
we want to talk about. But I do want to review this because I do 
think that it goes on and on about the Acts that have been 
amended in this way, and I hope that we do have some time 
further on to talk further about this. 
 
But I think it’s not just a simple piece of legislation and it’s one 
that we do need to take time to make sure that we’ve got it 
right, that people do have the ability to access and understand 
and utilize, use fully the statutes of our province. And if we 
don’t do a good job of that, if we’re just trying to make it easier, 
then that’s a problem. And as I said earlier, I think we do have 
concerns in a major way that here we are in this week, just one 
week left in November. In fact if I’m not mistaken, there’s only 
three more government days in November, three more 
government days in November, and yet this is one of their 
flagship pieces of legislation. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And it’s a situation of woe betide the province of Saskatchewan 
because we should be seeing some bigger pieces of legislation. 
Nothing wrong with this legislation in terms of the fact that we 
should be reflecting on how we can make our legislation the 
very best that we can. But the fact of the matter is that here we 
are, and we should be seeing bigger, better pieces of legislation 
and ones that will affect people so we can get out and talk to 
our constituents about this, and that we’re not just talking about, 
how do you spell insofar? And not just spelling, not worrying 
about whether pipeline is hyphenated or not. 
 
I mean that’s . . . And it is interesting that on a go-forward basis 
that we’re seeing issues that we talked about, say with The 
Election Act. How do we anticipate and make sure we have the 
best language here? I don’t know. And maybe it would be 
interesting to hear from the drafters of legislation that they have 
some real concerns about misunderstandings that may spring up 
between pieces of legislation if there are inconsistencies. 

But I just have a bad feeling that we’re going to see some issues 
here because some of these things can be too broad sweeping, 
and particularly around words, like I’ve said, around capacity. 
Now I’ve been educated myself now that capacity, not having 
capacity, can have at least four different meanings here. And 
I’m not sure, and we’d be very interested to hear from the 
people in the field about whether or not this is a fair benchmark. 
Because essentially that’s what it is, a benchmark. You’re going 
to be measured, you know. And as I said with the homesteads 
piece of legislation, when you’re dismissing consent, it’s just a 
simple term of capacity. In a law, that might be a harder or an 
easier thing to justify. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we do have some 
concerns. And as I said, and I would hope that some of the 
people will take to heart some of the concerns that I raised 
earlier about how we can improve this. And one of them is the 
fact that we do make our explanatory notes online. We had a bit 
of a discussion earlier about that and how important it is that we 
can access complete notes about what does this really mean. 
 
And I do have to say that we have a phenomenal service in the 
Legislative Service and how they do their very, very best. And 
this is something that I haven’t raised, I don’t think, so it’s news 
to them. But I think it is something that would make us . . . It 
would be a good thing. But we do phenomenal work, and I 
think Hansard does a phenomenal job of helping in terms of 
people getting to know what the debates are. And I don’t know 
whether anybody will be listening to this speech or not or read 
this speech. And I won’t have an opportunity to do a repeat. I 
could do it in French maybe next Monday night. 
 
But I think that as we’re approaching this, and I am going to 
wind up my remarks just before we end the day, but I do think 
it’s an important piece of legislation. Because as I said, the 
other issue really before us, and I’ve said this earlier, but for 
some people who are tuning in and maybe some folks in 
government-land, that not only do we make things consistent 
between pieces of legislation but consistent about what happens 
with our forms, with our circulars, with our bulletins, with our 
other notes, that we’re not using different language. But again 
as I say, words like capacity I think will prove to be a problem 
because we’ve tried to reach too far with one term. 
 
Now I don’t have a problem with pipeline, whether it’s 
hyphenated or not. I don’t think that’s a big problem. Or 
insofar. And I don’t know whether the members opposite will 
sleep easier tonight because they don’t have to worry about 
inconsistency. I would have loved to have heard the debates 
around their caucus table about whether insofar is three words. 
And maybe the fellow from Moose Jaw would say, it’s a three 
worder. That’s for sure, you know. 
 
The next thing we’re going to see: Moose Jaw, is Moose Jaw 
hyphenated or is it one word? I think this is going to be . . . That 
will be the debate of the day. Is that the debate of the day over 
on the other side? I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. I think that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about Lloydminster? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Or Lloydminster. Now you have Lloydminster 
hyphenated. But why they need two Ls, I don’t know. I don’t 
know why they need two Ls. I think this is an issue, Mr. 



November 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5963 

Speaker. 
 
And I think that once . . . Now I don’t know who the keeper of 
the names, whether it’s the Minister of Justice. Maybe the 
Minister of Education is the keeper of . . . Now I know the 
Minister of Health’s thinking about this. Is he the keeper of the 
names? How we start to standardize that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . He’s in charge of capacity. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of 
legislation. It’s good that we take a look every once in a while. 
The minister said it was 1978 when they last looked at this but, 
you know, as I was saying earlier, we did find a piece, we did 
find a piece of legislation from 1929 that had escaped the eye of 
the drafter. 
 
But interestingly that was not where we found the problems. 
The problems were not in the legislation so much as it was in 
government-land where certain words we’re using were 
inappropriate. And I’m talking about the R-word. Really I don’t 
know if there may be more, but I was looking only for the 
R-word. So I don’t know if this is a bigger problem that this 
government has discovered in terms of the ability to spell in 
government. I’ve not run into that problem. It’s not the one 
thing that I’ve had a problem with. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, it was when I was working on my 
master’s, and I was able to do that online myself. It’s funny 
how when you first . . . Now younger folks may not relate to 
this, but when I did my first degree I had to pay the person 25 
cents a page to type it out for me, and I expected great work, 
right, and to finish the uncompleted sentences and that type of 
thing. But now when I did my master’s, I was able to do it 
myself, and I was able to do a standard, and it was just great. 
 
But I still would get grief from my supervisor about spelling 
mistakes or different things, and he would call it white noise. 
This is white noise. I said, well what’s white noise? It’s the 
stuff you hear in the background. It’s the traffic. You know, it’s 
that kind of stuff . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it’s like 
the backbenchers across the way. They’re the white noise. You 
know, you just sort of hear them like the semis going down a 
road that are either too flat, haven’t been inflated properly, that 
type of thing. 
 
But you know, is this what we’re really trying to do here is to 
fix those kind of issues here, Mr. Speaker? So I would say that, 
and I do hope . . . And I saw the Minister of Justice, he did take 
note of the issue around The Archives Act, that it is interesting 
that we’re amending Acts that will no longer be with us all that 
long. So but at least it’s consistent, consistent while it’s alive. 
But I do think that it’s an important piece that we have the 
ability to talk about that and that we work as hard as we can to 
make sure that, as I say, the statutes are as accessible as 
possible to people, and that we do look online to say, how can 
we make sure that they are? That’s a very, very important piece. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important piece of legislation 
before us. And I know others will want to get in and talk about 
this as I only got to page 55 of the explanatory notes. And I 
know others will want to go from page 56. But I don’t think, I 
have to really stop the explanatory notes because I don’t think 
it’s allowed to read them aloud while I’m going through this. 

And I know that we’re getting close to the end of the day. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that, I know others will 
want to get into the debate on this piece of legislation, and I 
think that it’s really important that we take a look at this. And I 
do feel encouraged. It’s good that . . . You know, last week 
when I got applauded, I have to thank the members opposite for 
the, you know . . . And I know especially the Minister of 
Culture is appreciative of the good work that the Archives . . . 
Now it will be interesting. It will be interesting. I guess what 
I’ll have to, what I may add, what I may add at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, is the question that, have the . . .  
 
Well and now I have been complaining here a bit about the lack 
of the legislative agenda, that we’re only up to 16 or 20 bills 
before us. Now you know, has there been a coordinated . . . 
Have they done a search, or what’s up with this? You know, has 
there been a search for the language here? Are pipelines . . . 
And what are the terms that we’re looking for here? 
 
You know, and I’m curious about this because if we could find 
out, and I know we’ve got lots of researchers over there, but in 
the legislation that’s coming before us, is it gender neutral? 
When we talk about the Archives Board, is it gender neutral? 
Or do we talk about the chairman, or chairperson? I am curious 
about that. What are we talking about when we talk about The 
Archives Act? This is really, and so we’re . . . I think I may have 
to come back and talk a little more about this because I’m not 
sure. I didn’t have a chance to take a look at the new legislation. 
I don’t know. I don’t know. We have an example of Justice 
wasn’t on the same page as Culture about bringing The 
Archives Act here. Now was Culture aware of what Justice was 
doing? I don’t know. I mean, were they on the same page? Now 
maybe they were. As I said, it would have been priceless to be 
in that caucus when they were debating, you know. 
 
It would have been priceless to hear those folks over there 
because sometimes they’re described as dinosaurs. They’re the 
dinosaurs of the political universe over there. And dinosaurs 
would be quite appropriate. It’s gender neutral. So how did that 
debate go about replacing the gender-neutral “chairperson”? 
How did they . . . I would have loved to have heard that debate, 
been a fly on the wall to hear what some of those folks over 
there had to say about we are changing, we are changing the 
Archives chairman to the Archives Board chairperson. 
 
What would have happened? What would have happened? Now 
it would have depended on what time of day we had that debate, 
you know. But when the dinosaurs over there get revved up, 
these certain things are really, really important to them, Mr. 
Speaker. And so here we have, I mean we know what’s kept 
some of them awake at night, and it’s really . . . So this is 
important that we have this kind of debate before us. But you 
know, and it’s important. 
 
But as I said, we could be debating important pieces of 
legislation like we saw that were tabled today, that were tabled 
today. We could be debating An Act respecting the 
Transparency and Accountability of Public-Private 
Partnerships. That shows real vision. That shows real 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. We’re heading into 
an election year. But what are we debating here? The statute 
law amendment of 2014 that talks about how you spell certain 



5964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2014 

words in Saskatchewan, certain words that only dinosaurs 
would think are important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and we could be debating An Act respecting 
the Rights of Residents in Special Care Facilities and Personal 
Care Homes, but we’re not. We’re talking about whether 
insofar is three words or one word. Is it three words or one 
word? That’s the state of which we are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of Bill 153, 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate of Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5935 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5935 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5935 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5935 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5935 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5936 
  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5936, 5953 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5936 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5959 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5936 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5936 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5937 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mennonite Central Committee of Saskatchewan 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5938 
 International Education Week 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5938 
 Professional Firefighters 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5938 
 Lows in Motion Parkinson’s Fundraiser 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5938 
 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Capital Equipment Campaign 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5939 
 University of Regina Rams’ Head Coach Retires 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5939 
 Long-Term Care Comparisons 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5939 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Care for Seniors 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5939 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5940 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5941 
 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5943 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5943 
 Government Procurement Procedures 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5943 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5943 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5944 
 Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5944 
 Bill No. 610 — The Public-Private Partnership Transparency and Accountability Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5944 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5945 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5945 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5952 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS

