




















































Hansard: April 29, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, APRIL 29, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5241 

 April 29, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, colleagues, and 

thank you to you as well, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure to 

introduce four young ladies who have joined us in your 

Speaker’s gallery here today. They are Ms. Helen Huber, Ms. 

Agnes Ottmann, Ms. Betty Rivett, and Ms. Joyce Luther. And 

they’re joining us as residents of Wintergreene Estates in the 

great constituency of Regina South. Hello, folks. Give us a 

wave. Yes, please. 

 

Now as many folks here will know, Wintergreene is a great 

facility. It has wonderful people, wonderful staff, and I hear the 

food is pretty terrific too. Would you agree? Yes, I see a few 

nods up there. Joining these fine young ladies today is also Ms. 

Jolene Caswell who is the activities coordinator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank all of these folks for coming today, and I 

warmly encourage everybody to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it is with a 

great pleasure and pride today I get to introduce to the House 31 

students from grades 6, 7, and 8 from King George School in 

Prince Albert. It’s my second school group to visit me in the 

Assembly since I was elected in 2007. So it’s great to have the 

best and brightest from King George School here today. 

 

With the students today in the west gallery are the teachers, 

Darlene Handley and Mr. Vince Brittain, accompanied by the 

chaperones Maxine and Darryl Dragseth. Now Darryl and I 

share the same first name. We also share a great time working 

together at the special handling unit of the penitentiary, 

Saskatchewan Penitentiary in Prince Albert, as correctional 

officers. And that was a great bond that we formed there. So it’s 

good to see you, Darryl and Maxine, as well. And to the 

students, welcome. Enjoy your visit. Watch a lot that goes on 

today. Ask lots of questions to the tour guide because I get to 

talk to you on Friday morning at school, so I’m going to answer 

all your questions then. So thank you for joining us today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce guests in the Speaker’s gallery from Merit 

Contractors Association of Saskatchewan. Our guests today are 

board members, Ian Knibbs from Coram Construction, Cory 

Richter from Graham Construction, Denise Peter of Peter 

Crushing and Hauling, and Ron Carson of Carson Energy 

Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our guests share a rich experience in the 

construction business, contributing their expertise and 

knowledge to the industry. Founded in 1988, Merit is the only 

open shop association in Saskatchewan providing support for 

business of all sizes. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the 

Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming our guests 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister opposite and welcome these 

representatives of Merit Contractors Association here today to 

their Assembly. Thank you for joining us. We’ll be joining you 

later for a meeting and a reception. And thank you for your 

work in the construction industry in our province and all you do 

within the economy of our province. So welcome to your 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, sitting in the west gallery is a group of nine 

individuals from the All Nations Healin’ Thru the Artz. I had 

the pleasure of attending the sixth annual talent show fundraiser 

at the Regina Performing Arts Centre. And with us today, and 

give us a wave, is Monica Fogel, Scott Carson, Chuck Jordan, 

Jaime Reban, Challen McKay, Roland Brass, David Blondeau, 

Junestarr Toplikon-Bowers, and Raevon Pratt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the All Nations Healin’ Thru the Artz is an 

after-school multimedia arts program that provides cultural 

teachings and life skills that runs for eight months. The talent 

show is the culmination of the program. And I ask all members 

to join me in welcoming this talented group to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member from Coronation Park in welcoming All 

Nations Healin’ Thru Artz to their Legislative Assembly. 

Certainly with Scott, Chuck, Jaime, the rest of the group, but 

particularly I want to say a special welcome to Monica Fogel. 

 

This is a group that works with young people, making sure that 

they’ve got that healthy way to express themselves through the 

arts and also to bring about that healing, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 

make this year’s show and I’m sort of shamefaced to admit that 

here on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve made 

many of the ones before. And I know that the member from 

Coronation Park would have been in for a treat in terms of the 

production that would have been put on. 

 

So I want to join with the member opposite in welcoming All 

Nations Healin’ Thru Artz to their Legislative Assembly and to 

thank them for all the great work that they do. 

 



5242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 

laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the 

Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 

health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 

for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linens. And we 

know that as a result of that decision to privatize health care 

laundry, six non-profit public health care laundry facilities will 

be closed within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, 

Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And 

we know that the privatization of health care laundry will mean 

that fair-wage jobs will be replaced with poverty wages and 

public accountability will be lost. I’d like to read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in 

the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. 

 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 

over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 

outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue, the concerns 

over the inundation of Dewdney Avenue with heavy-haul truck 

traffic, a consequence of a decision made by that government. 

And the petition calls on government to act, recognizing that 

this was an issue created by this government and any further 

delays to address it and to ensure safety are entirely 

unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again today to present a petition to build a second bridge for 

Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 

serves central and northern Saskatchewan as well as the 

city of Prince Albert will receive a commitment from 

senior government. 

 

And as in duty bound [Mr. Speaker], your petitioners will 

ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition are from Regina 

and from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 

people who bring this petition wish to bring to our attention the 

following: Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas 

emissions per capita in all of Canada, and slashing programs 

such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses 

energy efficiency program set the province on a backwards 

course. Since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has 

reduced climate change funding by 83 per cent. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the 

provincial budget to tackle climate change by reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented by individuals from 

Saskatoon and Martensville. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the 21st annual Saskatchewan 

Book Awards, which took place on April 26th at the Conexus 

Arts Centre in Regina, featured guest speaker Warren Cariou, 

originally from Meadow Lake. 

 

Lisa Bird-Wilson from Saskatoon won the coveted University 

of Regina Book of the Year Award. Her book Just Pretending 



April 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5243 

was published by Coteau Books of Regina. 

 

Regina’s James Daschuk took home four awards for his 

remarkable book Clearing the Plains: Disease, Politics of 

Starvation, and the Loss of Aboriginal Life, published by the 

University of Regina Press. 

 

The University of Regina Press was also recognized for Fists 

Upon A Star: A Memoir of Love, Theatre, and Escape from 

McCarthyism by Florence James with Jean Freeman. 

 

Paul Wilson of Regina won the Poetry Award for his book The 

Invisible Library, published by Hagios Press, and Dianne 

Young of Martensville won the Children’s Literature Award. 

Adam Pottle of Saskatoon took home the Saskatoon Book 

Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the nominees 

and award winners for their outstanding works. I would also 

like to thank the Saskatchewan Book Awards staff and board 

for over two decades of work recognizing and celebrating 

excellence in Saskatchewan writing and publishing. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Disability Strategy Public Consultations Begin 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

announce that last night was the first public consultation for the 

Saskatchewan disability strategy. The public consultations are 

critical in helping our government create a strategy that will 

change how disability is viewed in our province and will 

support the inclusion of people who are impacted by disability. 

 

The public, members of the disability community, 

community-based organizations, employers, municipalities, 

school divisions, post-secondary institutions, and health 

authorities will be able to participate in the public forums that 

will be taking place across the province from April 28th to May 

29th. The public forums, led by the citizen consultation team, 

will be taking place in Swift Current, Yorkton, Regina, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Prince Albert, La Ronge, 

Melfort, North Battleford, and Meadow Lake. For those who 

are unable to attend but still wish to participate, online 

submissions and discussions are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the disability strategy will focus on six priority 

areas: employment, education, housing, transportation, 

community inclusion, and support for caregivers. Citizens will 

have the opportunity to address the issues they are facing in 

their lives and will be able to make recommendations for 

creating the best possible disability strategy for our province. 

All information collected through the public consultation 

forums, as well as online submissions and summaries of 

individual stakeholder meetings, will inform the strategy’s 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage the public and community to attend 

one of the many public forums to help create Saskatchewan’s 

disability strategy. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Innovation in Hemophilia Research 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to 

the attention of the Legislative Assembly some innovative work 

that will improve the lives of men living with hemophilia, a 

sex-specific inherited blood disorder that interferes with blood 

clotting. 

 

This month people around the world recognized World 

Hemophilia Day, and I want to acknowledge the work by some 

Saskatchewan health and technology innovators who are 

working to improve the lives of people living with hemophilia, 

including Saskatoon physiotherapist JoAnn Nilson, and the 

development of a self-assessment tool for young men with mild 

hemophilia. 

 

Now, along with colleagues in Manitoba, Nilson has 

collaborated with University of Saskatchewan computer 

scientists Richard Lomotey and Dr. Ralph Deters, and Mitacs, a 

Canadian non-profit that brings researchers and businesses 

together. The result is an iPhone app that will launch in May, 

allowing men to self-assess their condition and determine if 

they need medical attention. 

 

I want to congratulate JoAnn Nilson and her Winnipeg 

counterpart Kathy Mulder, who will present their work at an 

international hemophilia conference in Melbourne, Australia in 

May. I understand the two physiotherapists will also receive a 

Bayer award for their research work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in recognizing the important work 

of JoAnn Nilson and her colleagues and the difference they are 

making in the lives of men with hemophilia. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Terriers Saskatchewan Champions 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to rise in the House today to recognize my constituency’s 

hometown hockey team, the Yorkton Terriers, as the 2014 

SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] Canalta Cup 

Champions. 

 

The series started off with an intense game against the Melville 

Millionaires. The game went into the third period with the 

Millionaires one point up. With just 40 seconds remaining, 

Brett Boehm of the Yorkton Terriers scored, sending the game 

into overtime where Kailum Gervais scored just over two 

minutes in, winning the game for the Terriers. 

 

Game 2 was another tense repeat of the previous game. Again, 

the Terriers were able to defeat the Melville Millionaires in 

overtime. In game 3, the Terriers had a quick lead and were able 

to beat the Millionaires with an easy 3 to 1 win. The Terriers 

swept the series with four games to zero when they beat the 

Millionaires in the fourth and last game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the second year in a row, the Yorkton Terriers 



5244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

won the SJHL Canalta Cup and are Saskatchewan champions. 

They moved on to the 2014 Canada Cup in Dauphin, Manitoba 

and are representing Saskatchewan, currently one loss to 

Winnipeg, 3 to 1; and one win against Dauphin, 8 to 6. And 

they play Spruce Grove, Alberta, tonight. 

 

I’m very proud to say that my nephew, 16-year-old Turner, 

started the year with the Yorkton AAA Midget Terriers, 

finished the season with the Saskatoon Blades, and now is 

playing with the SJHL Yorkton Terriers in the Western Canada 

Cup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Yorkton Terriers on winning the Canalta Cup and wish them all 

the best as they play their third game in the Western Canada 

Cup against Spruce Grove tonight. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Weyburn Gold Wings Win National Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, normally when one thinks of hockey in Weyburn, it’s 

the Red Wings that comes to mind. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s add 

the Weyburn Gold Wings to that list, who returned home on 

Sunday from the Esso Cup national female midget AAA hockey 

championship hosted in Stoney Creek, Ontario. Mr. Speaker, 

the girls clinched their first ever Esso Cup on Saturday with a 

2-1 win over the Edmonton Thunder. 

 

Saturday’s big win capped off a very successful season for the 

Gold Wings, who finished the regular season in second place 

but prevailed in the playoffs, unseating the Regina Rebels as 

provincial champions in a four-game series. They moved on to 

win their western regional best-of-three series against the 

Pembina Valley Hawks to advance to the Esso Cup. 

 

Not only, Mr. Speaker, is this something for Weyburn to 

celebrate. It speaks volumes to the quality of our hockey 

programs here in Saskatchewan. This year both the male and 

female national midget AAA titles went to Saskatchewan 

teams, with the P.A. [Prince Albert] Mintos capturing the men’s 

title on Sunday. This is something that we can all be proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to personally recognize Chad Kish, 

head coach of the Gold Wings, for his work with the team and 

in the community. Chad was recently recognized for his efforts 

with Weyburn minor hockey, being the Volunteer of the Year 

Award winner. As well, goalie Jane Kish who absolutely stood 

on her head and was named the goaltender of the tournament 

and has signed a letter of intent to play at the U of R [University 

of Regina] with the Cougars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Weyburn Gold Wings female midget AAA 

hockey organization on their first national title. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Construction for New Saskatchewan Hospital 

North Battleford to Begin in 2015 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to share 

with the members of the Legislative Assembly today that earlier 

today I was able to see the ministers of Health, Corrections and 

Policing, and SaskBuilds announce a major step forward for the 

new Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford project. 

 

Our government has an unwavering commitment to replacing 

the century-old hospital. Today in North Battleford they 

announced that the replacement of the hospital will proceed 

with a public-private partnership approach, with construction 

targeted to begin in the summer of 2015 and an integrated 

correctional facility to be built as part of the hospital 

construction project. The new complex will include a 188-bed 

replacement for the existing 156-bed Saskatchewan Hospital 

North Battleford, and a 96-room correctional facility that will 

house both male and female offenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new hospital will better meet the mental health 

needs of patients who require in-patient rehabilitation, ensuring 

they receive the care and support they need in a modern 

environment. And it was my pleasure to attend all three of the 

3P [production preparation process] reporting sessions and to 

feel the excitement of the staff as they were involved in the 

planning of their new hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, building this new complex through a 

public-private partnership will allow the project to benefit from 

private sector ingenuity and innovation while maximizing 

operational efficiencies. The process will help deliver the new 

complex on time, within budget, and ensure the complex is 

properly maintained over the term of the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an exciting day for the community of The 

Battlefords and I, along with all the residents of The 

Battlefords, look forward to the opening of the new complex in 

2018. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Number of Nurses Hits All-Time High 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it is an exciting time in 

Saskatchewan. This month the number of registered nurses and 

nurse practitioners in Saskatchewan hit an all-time high of 

11,042. According to the SRNA’s [Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses’ Association] latest annual report, there was an increase 

of just over 300 RNs [registered nurse] and nurse practitioners 

in 2013. It is the first time the province has ever had over 

10,000 nurses, according to the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, Karen Eisler. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this news should come as a relief to the members 

opposite, especially the member from Regina Rosemont, who 

earlier this month had this to say: “The NDP has been very 

concerned about this government’s move to have fewer workers 

on the front lines of basic services, especially health care.” The 

member from Regina Rosemont will be relieved to hear that 20 

per cent more nurses call Saskatchewan home than did six years 

ago. The members opposite should be relieved to know that this 

is a government that is determined to ensure that all 

Saskatchewan residents, both rural and urban, have quality 

access to health care. 

 



April 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5245 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont can 

rest easy knowing that we are moving away from a time when 

low staffing levels produced quotes like the following: “There 

is no light at the end of the tunnel unless it’s a train. These 

staffing levels are dangerous.” Who said that, Mr. Speaker? 

Rosalee Longmoore, then president of SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses] in October of 2007. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Jim Miller, a 

highly respected and award-winning historian at the University 

of Saskatchewan, says TransformUS is the “. . . biggest disaster 

that’s happened to the University of Saskatchewan apart from 

the Great Depression in the 1930s.” 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: does he agree 

with Dr. Miller that TransformUS is the biggest disaster to face 

the university since the Great Depression? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to talk about the University of Saskatchewan. The 

University of Saskatchewan is the best-funded medical doctoral 

university in Canada, based on page 100 in Macleans, Mr. 

Speaker, per student. 

 

In fact the member opposite references the work of Jim Miller, 

and Jim Miller is one of the most highly respected and regarded 

historians all across the country. And, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to his work, that is without question.  

 

Regarding the question of TransformUS, Mr. Speaker, that is an 

internal review process and prioritization process at the 

University of Saskatchewan. The members opposite are 

probably aware that this process has four or five different 

phases to it. It includes task force reports that have been 

submitted last December, consultation and feedback that has 

occurred in December through into January, analysis and 

implementation which is currently under way, and there’ll be 

forthcoming actions, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite simply too early to 

determine what will be included in TransformUS because that 

final allotment has not taken place yet. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, enough has occurred through 

TransformUS that many academics and people in the university 

community are greatly concerned. The question was whether or 

not the Premier, this government agrees with Dr. Miller in his 

assessment. But it’s not just Dr. Miller who’s raising concerns. 

 

Dr. Eric Howe was actually on the TransformUS academic task 

force because he wanted to be part of it to help make the 

process work. But he resigned last October, Mr. Speaker, 

because it was clear to him that the process was incredibly 

flawed and it would lead to disastrous outcomes for the 

university and for our province. Dr. Howe says this: 

 

At the conclusion of TransformUS, with the U of S no 

longer responding to the urgent social needs of the 

province, having eliminated its elite “boutique” programs, 

having transferred away or gutted many of its colleges, it 

would be appropriate to rename the U of S too. Meewasin 

Valley Community College would seem to be appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: when we hear such 

serious concerns from respected academics at the university, 

how can this government not be concerned about what is 

happening through TransformUS at our province’s largest 

university? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to have the member 

opposite belittle the University of Saskatchewan, which is seen 

across this country and around the world as one of the foremost 

institutions, Mr. Speaker, institutions, especially in key areas of 

the life sciences . . . It is the home of the Western College of 

Veterinary Medicine that the members opposite tarped. Tarped 

— they didn’t complete the construction. We had to complete 

that. 

 

It’s home to InterVac [international vaccine centre] and VIDO 

[Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization] which we as a 

government have helped to fund operationally. It is home to the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron, the only synchrotron in the 

country. And the members opposite should know about that, 

Mr. Speaker, and the work that’s under way. 

 

And as far as the work that continues to be invested, there are 

record investments being made at the University of 

Saskatchewan. The University of Saskatchewan is an 

independent, and rightfully independent, post-secondary 

institution, leading post-secondary institution in this country. 

And we will let the university do its business. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we have respected 

professors at the University of Saskatchewan saying that 

TransformUS is the worst thing to hit the university since the 

Great Depression, that we might as well at the end of 

TransformUS rename the university Meewasin Valley 

community college, Mr. Speaker, I would expect a little less 

bravado from government members. And I would expect a lot 

more concern about what members of the university community 

are saying. 

 

It’s not just these academics, Mr. Speaker, that have said this. 

The University of Saskatchewan Faculty Association has 

expressed significant concerns about the implications of 

TransformUS. The University of Saskatchewan Students’ 

Union, Mr. Speaker, has passed a motion of non-confidence in 

the TransformUS process. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: when we have students, 

when we have staff, when we have faculty all voicing their 

concerns about the TransformUS process, how can this 



5246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

government not be concerned about what is happening at the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] under its watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes the 

University of Saskatchewan and all our post-secondary 

institutions very seriously. That’s one of the reasons that there’s 

been a 65 per cent increase in operating funding under this 

government to the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, importantly, importantly, Mr. Speaker, we also 

know that there are independent structures of governance at the 

university. Now the member opposite may be suggesting that he 

would become involved, and I’d be very curious to hear about 

that. He’d be involved in these kind of governance deliberations 

as a public official. 

 

But what I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that before he makes any 

more allusions, what I do know is that under the NDP 20 years 

ago, the operating budget of the University of Saskatchewan 

was cut by 4 per cent. This year, Mr. Speaker, this year, the 

operating budget has gone up by almost 4 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re making an investment because we know the 

University of Saskatchewan continues to lead the way across 

the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we hear a very defensive tone 

coming from the minister. And that defensive tone when 

combined with the dismissive attitude, Mr. Speaker, is a very 

dangerous combination for the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are many concerns being raised about the TransformUS 

process, about it not being open and transparent; about students 

not being properly involved; about the process being biased 

against smaller programs, against specialized programs, against 

Aboriginal programs, Mr. Speaker; about deans, about deans 

and executive directors, Mr. Speaker, not being free to express 

their views and express their concerns. And those are just some 

of the concerns about the process. 

 

But the real concerns, the greatest concerns, are about the 

long-term ramifications to the University of Saskatchewan 

when colleges are gutted, when programs are ended, Mr. 

Speaker, and when there is long-term damage being done to the 

University of Saskatchewan, when they are shrinking our 

province’s largest university. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how can this 

government not be concerned when these serious concerns are 

being expressed? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue to defend the 

University of Saskatchewan as long as I stand here. And, Mr. 

Speaker, here’s a direct quote from the website of the 

University of Saskatchewan directly from the TransformUS: 

 

Relative to the four western Canadian provinces, an 

increase of 2% of the base provincial grant in 2014 was 

among the highest. Manitoba increased its base grants for 

universities at 2.5%, Alberta maintained grants at 2013 

levels after reducing grant levels by approximately 5.6% 

in 2013, and the provincial grant for British Columbia 

universities was reduced by 1.1% for 2014. When we 

compare the U of S to other provincial universities, we are 

in a more favourable funding circumstance and receive 

more public support, both as a funding priority and in 

terms of public acknowledgement and recognition of the 

value of the U of S. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re making investments that are making a real 

difference at the University of Saskatchewan for the students, 

for the scholars, for the researchers, and families right across 

the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do 

that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Motor Vehicle Fatality 

 

Mr. Vermette: — John Boxall was killed in a car accident on 

February 20th, 2013. The driver of the other vehicle had a blood 

alcohol level that was well above 1.08, but the Crown stayed 

the impaired driving charge. Instead that driver was convicted 

of criminal negligence causing death. Because the driver was 

not technically convicted of an alcohol-related charge, John 

Boxall’s family and children are not able to receive 

compensation for pain and suffering under The Fatal Accidents 

Act. That isn’t fair and it needs to be made right. 

 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has discretion on 

these matters. To the Minister Responsible for SGI: will she 

undertake to fix this today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, although I am not 

familiar with that specific, very detailed situation, the answer to 

the member’s question is we can’t fix it today. But yes, we are 

reviewing this. Another case very similar had come to my 

attention, and so this very policy within SGI’s coverage is being 

under review. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — If the other driver had been convicted of an 

alcohol-related offence, John Boxall’s family, wife and 

children, would have received appropriate compensation for 

pain and suffering. But now because of a technical, they are not 

eligible for this funding. Again, that’s not fair and it’s not right. 

SGI has discretionary. 

 

But Rosmarie Boxall had written to the opposition because she 

hadn’t been getting the help from the government. In fact she 

said, “Hopefully you have better luck with SGI because I’m 

not. I get worse news from them every time I talk to them.” 

 



April 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5247 

To the minister: will she commit today to make this right and to 

finally treat Rosmarie and her family with fairness and 

decency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I’m not familiar 

with the specific case, but I am more than happy to take a look 

at it. I am also not sure that it is discretionary. A lot of the 

policy or the parameters in which SGI pays their insurance is in 

legislation. It’s not just a discretionary decision. So again I 

would have to see the specific case to know whether or not it’s 

discretionary. 

 

I know the other case that I had come before me was not, and 

that’s why SGI is undergoing a review. There’s been a press 

release on that review. We’re looking forward to the input from 

the public, from stakeholders, and from people, you know, 

around the province because there are situations in SGI that I 

think we could do better. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ministry of Highways and the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a lot 

about how multi-million dollar lean consultants have been 

tearing through Saskatchewan’s hospitals and classrooms to 

implement the lean experiment. 

 

But now we’re hearing from front-line Highways workers too, 

who tell us that the team of managers and consultants as large 

as 20 people have shown up at Highways’ shops to lean them 

in. 

 

To the Minister of Lean: how much has this government spent 

in total to have consultants and managers implement and 

promote the lean experiment throughout the Highways 

ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on an annual basis, I think in every ministry, we look 

to find efficiencies, programs that may not be as effective as 

they once were. Mr. Speaker, we look at shops and the delivery 

of the services that we provide within the Ministry of 

Highways. 

 

I do know that we’ve looked at the service delivery, for 

example in those shops, and reduced some of the waste that was 

in those shops. Those dollars that were put into waste in 

previous years, for example under the NDP, now are being put 

into the pavement, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re seeing 

records amount of work being done in this province, far 

outstripping what was ever done under the former government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, front-line workers describe these 

lean consultants as not knowing and not caring which tools and 

supplies were valuable or useful. It seemed like their goal was 

to lean the shop by throwing stuff out. For example, one 

Highways workplace with several workers maintaining multiple 

vehicles was left with one set of standard wrenches and one set 

of metric wrenches. All other wrenches went in the trash, along 

with valuable supplies like hydraulic cylinders. 

 

To the Minister of Lean: is restricting multiple workers to one 

set of tools while filling up garbage bins with tools and valuable 

equipment this government’s idea of Saskatchewan common 

sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

asking the question, his colleague was at committee last night 

and asked a similar question about the management of supplies 

and tools that are needed in a specific workplace. Mr. Speaker, 

part of the lean initiative is to make sure that the right things are 

in the right place for people to do their job. And to the Ministry 

of Highways, I have a quote from one of their mechanics. He’s 

a fleet services employee. And he says, and I quote: 

 

We used to run around like chickens with our heads cut 

off. Our tools resembled the kitchen drawer. You know the 

one where the ice picks and egg flippers and tongs are all 

jammed together and you can’t find anything. Well now 

our diagnostic carts are outlined on the floor and every 

pin, screw, and gadget has a place. All the stuff you need 

to do the job is right where you need it. You don’t have to 

keep walking back and forth to find things. I think lean 

can help to improve all kinds of government processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s exactly what lean is about, is to allow 

our front-line workers to do the absolute best job and to deliver 

those programs and services that the people of this province 

deserve. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, one worker told us that he really 

didn’t mind the red tape the lean team put all over the floor of 

his workplace outlining where they thought everything should 

go. What he minds is how much this must have cost. Talk about 

your costly red tape, Mr. Speaker. He figures it’s a pretty big 

price tag to have 20 managers and consultants spend five days 

throwing out tools and putting tape on the floor. 

 

Front-line workers think they could have organized their own 

workplace if they were given the time to do it, and they could 

have saved a lot of tools and taxpayer dollars by doing it 

themselves. To the Minister of Lean: are taxpayers actually 

paying for managers and consultants to put red tape on the floor 

and toss tools into the trash against the advice of front-line 

workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The money 

that this government has invested in lean has paid for itself and 

then some, Mr. Speaker. Not only do we have cost savings, we 

have cost avoidance. We have better customer service to the 

people of this province, whether it’s in schools or hospitals or in 



5248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

government itself, Mr. Speaker. In the Ministry of Energy and 

Resources, there’s some great examples as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have quote after quote from employees within 

the Government of Saskatchewan who are excited about the 

lean initiative. And if the member opposite is concerned about 

tape on floor — for some reason they’re hung up on that, Mr. 

Speaker — I would encourage them to go visit Brandt 

Industries, which is an incredible company in this province and 

go through their workspace, Mr. Speaker. There’s tape on the 

floor showing where stuff is supposed to be so that people can 

do their jobs in the most efficient manner possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s sounding like how many 

consultants does it take to tape the floor over there. 

 

But the deputy minister of lean admitted in committee last night 

that lean consultants recommend getting rid of items that are 

not frequently used, generally within the last six months. Fair 

enough, but front-line workers in health care or in schools or in 

highway shops are the experts on what tools and items are 

needed and how many they need. They don’t need high-priced 

lean consultants coming in and telling them what to do, where 

to put things, and what to throw out. 

 

To the Minister of Lean: will she commit today to investigate 

how many government workplaces have been instructed by lean 

consultants to throw away tools and equipment against the 

advice of front-line workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy that the 

critic in charge of this file managed to read Hansard from 

committee last night. If he would go over that and read it in 

some more detail, what the deputy minister responsible for lean 

had indicated as one of the examples of things that got thrown 

away were I believe at the Moose Jaw Hospital. Using up 

valuable storage space were 60 decorated Christmas trees. I 

don’t know what any hospital needs with 60 decorated 

Christmas trees, Mr. Speaker, and they certainly don’t need to 

be taking up valuable storage space. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many avenues within government, within 

our third parties where efficiencies can be found. And one of 

those, Mr. Speaker, is storage space so that we don’t have to 

build new buildings to store more stuff that’s just going to 

collect dust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, despite hearing a lot of 

concern about the surprise lean initiative clawback that’ll rip 

back millions of dollars from school boards across 

Saskatchewan, it’s clear that this government is just plowing 

ahead with its plan. In fact yesterday, the Education minister 

said there’s no plan not to impose that lean clawback on our 

schools, in our classrooms. 

 

To the minister: how can he possibly say that when our 

educators, when locally elected school board trustees are raising 

serious concerns about this lean initiative clawback and the lack 

of support for education under that government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we provide large amounts 

of funding, $1.88 million per year. We will not make any 

apologies in the House or elsewhere for wanting to have 

efficiencies of the work, to develop efficiencies within the 

school division. I met with officials from the School Boards 

Association yesterday. We will have ongoing discussions with 

them. They understand the need to meet efficiency targets. They 

will continue to work with us on that, and we will continue to 

find ways to try and make every effort to ensure that the dollars 

are spent in the classroom where they belong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite, and I’ve done 

it regularly, that they have had an increase each and every year 

to the overall operating grant for school divisions, over 26 per 

cent since 2007, as opposed to the members opposite who 

closed 176 hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not the direction we’re going. We provide 

total funding for pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] 

education, $1.8 billion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s evident that this 

government, that minister, that Premier are unwilling to listen to 

school board leaders across this province, to teachers, to parents 

that are sharing significant concerns. And you know, for the 

minister to brush off and boast about a record that’s a poor one 

once again here today, instead of standing up and bringing 

forward actions to address the problems, is really weak. 

 

It’s evident that that government’s not listening when it comes 

to education and that they’re just plowing ahead with their lean 

pet project. The government though can take some very 

important steps here today. They could take two steps here 

today. They could scrap the lean initiative clawback. And they 

could take the $5 million that that minister, that government 

earmarked for standardized testing, and they could redeploy 

those to the front lines of education to enable student success. 

To the minister: will he take those steps here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the school divisions in our 

province have worked together, all 28 school divisions, and 

developed a sector plan. The members opposite are stubbornly 

dismissive. They discredit that. This is a plan that was 

developed by the school divisions in consultation with the 

teachers to try and make sure that we deliver the best possible 

services to our students, that we move our students forward. 

We’ve asked our school divisions to look at efficiency targets, 

one half of one per cent, Mr. Speaker, that we felt was an 

appropriate type of goal for them to meet. We will work with 

them to try to see that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we have raised incredible 



April 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5249 

amounts of funding. As opposed to the 176 schools, we’ve 

raised, built and announced 40 new schools. We have a $700 

million record capital investment. We have reduced property 

taxes in this province by $165 million. We have spent three 

years listening to and working with our sector partners to help 

them develop a new formula partner. We’re continuing to listen 

to them, and we’ll make changes to that as are appropriate. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t highlight that 

he surprised school boards with a lean initiative clawback that’s 

ripping back millions of dollars from the school boards of this 

province. He conveniently doesn’t mention that point. 

 

Here’s what the Minister of Education had to say two weeks 

ago about the $5 million set aside in this year’s budget for 

standardized testing when we were pressing him and that 

government to redeploy those dollars to a place that matters: 

“The money is in a capital line budget, so we may have to go 

back to treasury board, whether it would fall into capital or 

supports for learning.” He went on to say that he hadn’t yet had 

conversations with officials. Well that was two weeks ago. He’s 

had some time to figure this out, to talk to his officials and 

correct the budget.  

 

To the minister: why hasn’t he done so? Why won’t he redeploy 

the earmarked dollars for standardized testing to where it 

matters? Why won’t he work with the locally elected school 

boards to improve education across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite just 

simply don’t get it. They lost an election because their leader, 

Dwain Lingenfelter, went out and foolishly promised $5 billion 

in new expenditure. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to take a careful, 

reasoned, and measured approach. We’re not going to be like 

them and make foolish, wild promises. 

 

Nor are we going to go back to what they did. In 1993 and ’94, 

the NDP actually reduced the operating grant from the 

province. In 1995 they gave school divisions zero per cent at a 

time when there were 20,000 more students in our education 

system than there are today. We’re not taking lessons from 

them, Mr. Speaker. We’re not taking advice from them. We are 

going to do everything we can to ensure that we provide the 

best possible funding and the best possible education. And 

quickie fixes from the member opposite, not on — stubbornly 

dismissive of the things that the school divisions are doing on 

their own with the plan that they have developed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the announcement of the 

lean initiative clawback was a complete surprise to boards. It 

shouldn’t have been. The government pretended it was giving 

one budget number at budget day, and then they were taking 

with another hand at another time. And they left it for boards to 

see the devil in the details and realize that the government was 

actually clawing back all sorts of dollars. As partners in 

education and as locally elected leaders across our province, 

school boards deserve better. They deserve the facts and they 

deserve to be consulted. They should not be surprised and they 

shouldn’t be dictated to by a stubborn government that thinks it 

knows best and forces forward with the lean initiative 

clawback. 

 

When will this government, when will that minister, when will 

that Premier start treating locally elected school boards with the 

respect they deserve? And why won’t they redeploy the dollars 

for standardized testing to where they count in classrooms 

across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we inherited a $1.2 billion 

deficit in capital in our province in education, schools across the 

province. We’ve invested more in our first seven years than the 

opposition did in 16 years. We’ve had a 268 per cent increase in 

school infrastructure spending. The NDP chose to close 176 

schools. We’ve announced and built 40. Some of the very first 

money we allocated went to completing projects that were 

announced back in 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 70 per cent of our schools are 40 years old, 

and we’re still making up for years of neglect. We’re going to 

continue doing that. We’re not going to be shipping students to 

Alberta like the members opposite. We’re going to go forward 

with growth in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can give you some examples. In Saskatoon, public school 

enrolment is up 59.9 per cent, operating up 33.2 per cent; 

Saskatoon Catholic enrolment up 12.2 per cent, operating up 

32.7 per cent; Regina public enrolment up 5 per cent, operating 

up 30.8 per cent; Regina Catholic enrolment up 7.5, operating 

up 26.8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’re going forward, not 

backwards. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be consider in Committee 

of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 125, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 with amendments and that 

the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 



5250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety  

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

132, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2) and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 132, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 

2014 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2014. This is a bilingual bill without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 



April 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5251 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

133, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014/Loi 

de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 98, the child 

care amendment Act. This is a bilingual bill without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill and the 

bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 98, The 

Child Care Act, 2013 and that it now be read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les 

garderies d’enfants 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 128, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 128, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 and that the 

bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 



5252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2014 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 

I move that this House be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:27.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5241 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5241 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5241 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5241 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5241 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5241 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5242 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5242 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5242 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5242 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5242 

 Disability Strategy Public Consultations Begin 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5243 

 Innovation in Hemophilia Research 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5243 

 Yorkton Terriers Saskatchewan Champions 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5243 

 Weyburn Gold Wings Win National Championship 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5244 

 Construction for New Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford to Begin in 2015 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5244 

 Number of Nurses Hits All-Time High 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5244 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5245 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5245 

 Motor Vehicle Fatality 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5246 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5246 

 Ministry of Highways and the Lean Initiative 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5247 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5247 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5247 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5249 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5250 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5250 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5250 

 Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5250 

 Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 



 

 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5252 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


