






















































Hansard: March 03, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 3, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4447 
 March 3, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce to the House some 
new Pages. Sarah Cheshire and Breanna Goertzen will be 
returning as Pages for this session. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I would like to 
take a moment here this morning to introduce my Saskatchewan 
legislative intern, Ms. Taylor-Anne Yee. Taylor and I have had 
the opportunity to have a few good discussions on — surprise, 
surprise — agriculture and our sustainable production and 
export system that we have here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I also have gained great respect for Taylor, with the 
level of time and expertise as a young lady that she’s able to 
give back to her community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she’s been very involved with the Open Door 
Society as well as been a homework helper, the Hands On 
Street Ministries as well as the Women of the Legislature 
program. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me 
in welcoming Ms. Taylor-Anne Yee to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce Ms. Kaytlyn Criddle. I’ve had the 
privilege to be working with Kaytlyn as part of her experience 
with the Saskatchewan legislative internship program. 
 
I’d like to introduce some of Kaytlyn’s background, her 
interests, her experiences, her education. She graduated with 
distinction from the University of Regina with a bachelor 
degree in anthropology. She is a tremendous athlete. She 
competed with the Cougar track and field as well as 
cross-country teams and was named academic all-Canadian for 
her athletic and academic accomplishments. 
 
She’s a competitive ringette player, avid runner, and she’s also 
supported youth in the city at Albert School with an 
after-school program. Kaytlyn has had significant international 
experiences, including building a school in Kenya. She studied 
indigenous development initiatives in the Brazilian Amazon. 
She’s researched food security and worked directly with women 
farmers in Ghana. She’s done a lot of really remarkable work. 
 
It’s been my privilege to work with Kaytlyn in this short period 
in the legislative internship program. She’s been highly 
interested in connecting with community. She’s been involved 

in going out to community meetings. She’s been part of 
developing a community petition drive. She’s had meetings as it 
relates to education with stakeholders that are interested. She’s 
toured schools along with me, teachers, students, and parents. 
She’s toured and met with the Autism Resource Centre and 
First Steps Wellness. She’s attended community celebrations. 
She’s laced up her blades and assisted with the Rosemont 
Outdoor Hockey League. She’s a good skater, Mr. Speaker. 
She’s participated in community office meetings. She’s done 
great research in areas of pensions and our finances. Quite 
simply, it’s been a privilege to work with Kaytlyn. 
 
On top of all the other work she’s done as a Legislative intern, 
her own research as well, what I see in Kaytlyn is someone with 
exceptional abilities and someone with a bright, exciting future 
ahead of her. So I ask all members in this Assembly to give a 
warm welcome to Ms. Kaytlyn Criddle. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I 
would like to introduce a young fellow who’s been working 
with me as an intern, Dipo Ziwa. Now Dipo was originally born 
in Zambia and then he went, their family moved to Alberta, but 
he’s been in Regina since 1995. 
 
Dipo is a great person, and he’s presently in his fourth year at 
the U of R [University of Regina] here in Regina. He’s doing, 
taking, majoring in human justice, and he will be pursuing a 
master’s degree in human justice and then going into law 
school. So we won’t hold that against him if he wants to 
become a lawyer, Mr. Speaker, but he’s, like I said, he’s a great 
person. 
 
He came up to Carrot River and went through our community 
and was absolutely amazed at the amount of trees that we 
actually have up there, which is a lot different than southern 
Saskatchewan where trees, you know, aren’t really a big thing. 
We also went out sledding, Mr. Speaker, and he really enjoyed 
going out on the snow toboggans and seeing the great tourist 
attractions that we have in northeastern Saskatchewan. He was 
also quite amazed at all the small businesses there are 
throughout the whole community and the lumber mills. We 
were very fortunate to be able to tour the Weyerhaeuser mill in 
Hudson Bay and see a lot of the various things that are going on 
in what I consider some of the nicest spots in all of Canada, 
actually in all of the world. 
 
So I want everyone to welcome Dipo to his legislation 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce my intern with the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program, Mr. Dustan Hlady. Dustan was born in 
Alberta, but we will not hold that against him. He is firmly 
entrenched here in Saskatchewan now at this point of time. Mr. 



4448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

Hlady is an accomplished musician and an accomplished writer. 
As a matter of fact, he won a writing contest last week that he 
was telling me about. 
 
Dustan has finished a Bachelor of Arts in humanities from 
Briercrest College and is working on an education degree. 
We’ve had an opportunity to do some work together in the past 
month or six weeks or so, and I’ve enjoyed the work that he’s 
already done for me. And he visited actually Saskatoon 
Riversdale last week, which was his first visit to the 
constituency. 
 
I look forward to getting him there a couple more times over the 
course of the next month or so, but I would like to ask all 
members to welcome Mr. Dustan Hlady to his Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery, there are two gentlemen representing the Leading 
Influence Ministries. They are Tim Schindel from Victoria and 
Barry Berglund from Saskatoon. Tim is the one with the yellow 
tie. Barry and I go back a little bit in our media days together. 
He worked with me, then he worked against me and then, at the 
end, we kind of worked together. He’s now taken on a new 
leadership role with the Leading Influence Ministries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Leading Influence Ministries has been established 
in BC [British Columbia] and in Alberta in providing spiritual 
encouragement and support for members of the Legislative 
Assembly. They’re in the process of establishing their ministry 
here in Saskatchewan and will be contacting many of the 
members, I’m sure, and introducing the ministry and talking to 
them about it. So we will probably see more of them in the days 
to come. I wish them well in all their new endeavours and ask 
all members to welcome Tim Schindel and Barry Berglund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this House, I’d like to 
introduce some members of the SEIU, Service Employees 
International Union. Members are up in the east gallery. And of 
course we know these folks are very interested on the activities 
of this province, this government. They’re an integral part of 
our health care system; they serve the people of Saskatchewan 
well. And of course when the government makes some 
decisions and takes certain courses of action, they want to make 
sure their voice is heard loud and clear. And so today we have 
some petitions and, of course, they’re very interested in Bill 128 
as well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members . . . Or I 
should tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have today with us Linda 
Zemluk, Dorothy Turgeon, Lou-Ellen Murray, Celeste Dixon, 
Dennel Pickering, Esther Dupperon, and Tom Howe. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite and with all members in welcoming 
the individuals from SEIU to the legislature today. We’re 
always glad to see people participating in the democratic 
process. As the member opposite indicated, we will be dealing 
with issues regarding the employment Act later on in the day, 
and we’ll have comments made. But I would like to thank them 
for the very good work that they continue to do in our province 
ensuring that our citizens are kept healthy and safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to take the 
opportunity to introduce, in the west gallery, Bill Gowen, one of 
my constituents who is down in Regina for purposes of having 
attended at Telemiracle this last weekend. He brought with him 
his brother who is a challenged individual from Yorkton who 
had done a fundraiser in Yorkton, I think raised something in 
excess of several thousand dollars for Telemiracle. So I’d like 
to have all members welcome Mr. Gowen to the gallery to his 
legislature today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the east gallery, I recognize a couple 
individuals seated up in the far benches there. I’d like to 
welcome to the Assembly here today Mr. Chris Gardiner, along 
with Shannon Berard-Gardiner. And they’re interested in the 
proceedings here today, and they’re interested in some 
initiatives and progress with government on a file that’s 
important to them. They also have a tremendous amount of love 
and care for their adult son Matthew, and it’s my pleasure to 
welcome these two individuals to their Assembly here today. I 
ask all members to join me in doing so. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to introduce in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a friend and a former colleague, 
Audrey Trombley. Audrey was a long-time career administrator 
for the rural municipality of Griffin. She’s also former president 
of the Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan, at which time I had the privilege of serving as 
her vice-president, Mr. Speaker. She’s retired from municipal 
work now, but her days in public service aren’t over. She’s now 
a board member with the South East Cornerstone School 
Division. She was here for a meeting this morning which I had 
the opportunity, along with the Minister of Health, to be at. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like all the members to please welcome 
Audrey to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d just 
simply like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming Ms. 
Audrey Trombley to her Assembly and thanking her for her life 
of service to the province of Saskatchewan in capacities with 
rural municipalities and now continuing on with our school 
divisions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4449 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
present a petition today against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen, and that as 
a result of the decision to privatize health care laundry, six 
non-profit health care laundry facilities will be closed within 
two years in the communities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon.  
 
And that the privatization of health care laundry will mean the 
devastating loss of over 300 good-paying jobs, devastating local 
economies and families, and that the privatization of health care 
laundry will take money out of Saskatchewan’s health care 
system to instead be used to boost the profits of an 
Alberta-based corporation; that the privatization of health care 
laundry will put patient care at risk as health regions lose direct 
control over health care laundry services; and that privatization 
of health care laundry will mean that fair-wage jobs will be 
replaced with poverty wages and public accountability will be 
lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in 
the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayers’ dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation and lose direct control over 
laundry, and thereby will have significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Weyburn, Estevan, Yellow Grass, Pangman, Goodwater, 
Stoughton, Radville, Midale, Halbrite, and McTaggart. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 
Saskatchewan as it relates to the management reporting of our 
province’s public finances. People find that it’s unacceptable 
that this government failed an audit, the first of its kind in 
Canadian history, and have done nothing to fix the books, Mr. 
Speaker. Quite simply, they believe they deserve books they 
can trust. We believe they deserve nothing short of that. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 
true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting, reporting that is in line with 
the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 
accounting standards and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 
to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 
financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 
people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 
taxpayers, and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents from Regina. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, we’re coming up on a 
year since that gymnasium at Sacred Heart was closed on an 
emergency basis, and the petitioners here point out the 
following. The school and the community have raised this issue 
with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 without 
satisfactory resolution. They point out the fact that any school 
needs a gym as a place for the school and the community to 
gather together to engage in cultural and educational activities 
and to promote physical activity, which is good for the mind, 
body, and spirit of all children. 
 
They point out the fact that the gym at Sacred Heart has played 
an important role in the school’s efforts to become a literacy 
leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 
successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 
out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 
north central Regina, with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 
whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 
enrolment has increased by 100 students over the past four 
years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 
improving. And they point out, as a matter of basic fairness and 
common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym.  
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly take the 
following action: to cause the Sask Party provincial 
government to immediately commit to the replacement of 
the gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Birch Hills, 
Swift Current, and Yorkton. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Support for People of the Ukraine 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



4450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

recent events in the Ukraine have resulted in great turmoil for 
that nation. As a Ukrainian Canadian, I am shocked and deeply 
saddened by the violence committed against the people of 
Ukraine, and by the loss of life.  
 
However, I am hopeful. We are all hopeful that with continued 
efforts, Ukraine can move forward on the path to freedom, 
democracy, and the rule of law. Our government has been 
working closely with the Saskatchewan Ukrainian community, 
the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, and the Government of 
Canada to support Ukraine in the resolution of this conflict. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January the 29th of this year, our Deputy 
Premier wrote to Minister Baird in support of the federal 
government’s effort to promote democratic values in Ukraine. 
As well, our Premier issued a statement on February 19 
condemning the violence and expressing thoughts and 
condolences for those killed and injured. And recently, the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina 
Dewdney, along with the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, raised 
a flag in support of Ukraine at our legislature. And a few days 
later the member spoke at the rally attended by dozens of 
people calling for freedom in Ukraine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ukraine remains very important to Saskatchewan. 
Over 130,000 people of Ukrainian heritage reside here and over 
320 new residents arrived in 2013. As well, Mr. Speaker, we 
have important trade relationships between Saskatchewan and 
Ukraine. We are committed, Mr. Speaker, to continue working 
with the federal government and the Ukrainian Canadian 
community to advance the cause of freedom, prosperity, and 
democracy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I know many of us are following 
closely the volatile situation in Ukraine. We are trouble and 
appalled by the violent and brutal acts we witnessed in Ukraine 
over the last weeks, and we are deeply concerned about the 
aggressive actions of the Russian Federation in the last several 
days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ukraine needs and deserves our support. So I rise 
today in this Assembly to clearly say that we stand in support of 
a free and democratic Ukraine where freedom of expression and 
the rule of law are guaranteed. We condemn in the strongest 
possible terms any action that could lead to an escalation in 
tensions or to more violence. We call on all sides to respect 
international law and to respect Ukraine’s territorial 
sovereignty. And we urge the Canadian government to play a 
leadership role in working for a peaceful resolution to this 
troubling situation. 
 
The people of Ukraine and Ukrainians around the world have 
demonstrated time and time again just how resilient and 
courageous they are — always refusing to give up, never letting 
their spirits be broken, and always pushing for a better and 
brighter future. Mr. Speaker, I join Ukrainians the world over 
and right here in Saskatchewan in praying for peace and 
working for that better tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 

38th Annual Telemiracle 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Saturday and 
Sunday another successful Kinsmen Telemiracle was held in 
Regina. And Telemiracle 38 did not disappoint. The phones 
were ringing off the hook and Kinsmen Telemiracle raised a 
grand total of $5,285,744, again demonstrating the tremendous 
spirit of generosity that exists within our fine province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year some of our very own members 
participated in Telemiracle 38. The member from Regina 
Dewdney, Regina Coronation Park, Regina Walsh Acres, and 
myself all answered phones at this event. 
 
This year’s Telemiracle’s great cast consisted of Bob McGrath, 
Brad Johner and the Johner Boys, Beverley Mahood, Andrea 
Menard, and Donny Parenteau. The event also had a large list of 
great Saskatchewan performers and entertainers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no matter how large or how small the donation, all 
contributions to Telemiracle and the Kinsmen Foundation are 
greatly appreciated. These funds go a long way in supporting 
those that require special assistance assessing medical treatment 
within our province, with all the money raised and staying here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like all members to join me in thanking all of the 
volunteers for their efforts and congratulations to the organizers 
of the 38th annual Telemiracle. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Regina this 
weekend, Telemiracle, the Kinsmen Foundation held their 38th 
annual fundraiser. The event brought people from across 
Saskatchewan together to raise money for those struggling with 
mental and physical disabilities. Telemiracle has been hosting 
on-air events to raise money to meet the medical needs of 
Saskatchewan people since 1977. Their first telethon was held 
in the Centennial Auditorium in Saskatoon and raised nearly $1 
million in its very first year. 
 
Saskatchewan is a generous province, and I am pleased that we 
have again demonstrated our support for Telemiracle’s 
initiatives. This weekend’s event raised almost $5.3 million in 
its annual 20-hour telethon. The event got under way at 
Regina’s Conexus Arts Centre on Saturday night and finished at 
5 p.m. on Sunday. 
 
The funds raised, Mr. Speaker, will help assist families with 
medical expenses, equipment, and travel costs. In recent years, 
money raised has also been donated to children’s hospitals and 
the Wascana Rehab Centre to help with equipment upgrades. 
After 38 years, the partnership between Telemiracle and 
Saskatchewan citizens has raised over $100 million. 
 
This achievement wouldn’t have been possible without 
Saskatchewan people showcasing their generosity and kindness. 
I ask all members to join me in thanking all those who’ve 
donated their time, money, and energies to make this year’s 
Kinsmen Telemiracle another success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4451 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Saskatchewan Breaks Record for Agricultural Exports 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to report 
that Saskatchewan for the third consecutive year has broken its 
record with agricultural exports. In 2013 Saskatchewan 
exported a record $11.7 billion in agricultural exports. 
Saskatchewan’s exports represent 23 per cent of Canada’s 
overall $50.4 billion in agricultural exports and more than 
one-third of our provincial exports. 
 
In 2013 wheat was the top export at $2.08 billion, followed 
closely by canola seed at $2.05 billion. Other top exports that 
we had include canola oil at $1.5 billion; durum wheat at $1.3 
billion; lentils, 1.2 billion; as well as peas at $1.1 billion. 
 
Our top export markets include the USA [United States of 
America], China, Japan, India, and Mexico. A few of these 
markets significantly increased their imports of Saskatchewan’s 
exceptional agricultural products, including India which was up 
54 per cent; United States which was up thirteen and a half per 
cent; as well as China was up five and a half per cent this past 
year, Mr. Speaker. We’re well aware . . . We’re well on our way 
to meeting our growth plan goal of $15 billion in agricultural 
exports by the year 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join me in thanking our 
producers and all stakeholders in the ag industry for their 
dedication and commitment, and congratulate them on breaking 
our export record for the third consecutive year. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Huskies Win Canada West Women’s Hockey 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to congratulate the University of Saskatchewan Huskies 
who won the Canada West Women’s Hockey title in a 2 to 1 
double overtime victory over the University of Regina Cougars 
last night. 
 
This series was an entertaining showcase of the fantastic 
women’s hockey talent we have in our province. Mr. Speaker, it 
took a total of 17 periods over three games this weekend to 
declare a winner between the two teams. Friday’s match ended 
in favour of the Huskies when Marley Ervine scored in double 
overtime to give them a 1-0 lead in the series. The Cougars 
came back on Saturday and evened the best of three event with 
Alexis Larson’s goal halfway through the fourth — yes, fourth 
— overtime period. The game, which was held over a five-hour 
span, set a new Canada West record for the longest game ever 
played, breaking the previous record by 36 minutes. 
 
The epic series was capped off on Sunday with the Huskies’ 
Kaitlin Willoughby scoring five minutes into the second 
overtime period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should be so proud of both our teams 
competing over the weekend, and the series was a big win for 

female hockey in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating both the Huskies and 
Cougars teams on their hard work over the weekend, and wish 
the Huskies luck in the upcoming CIS [Canadian Interuniversity 
Sport] national championship in New Brunswick. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Athletes Compete at Sochi Olympics 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to commend the Canadian Olympic team, who 
took part in the 2014 games which were held in Sochi, Russia 
last month. The games ignited national pride and united 
Canadians everywhere, sometimes in the wee hours of the 
morning in order to catch a live event to support our athletes as 
their years of hard work materialized on the world stage. We 
should be extremely proud of each and every athlete who 
represented our country. Together they brought home a grand 
total of 25 medals from the 17-day event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the 16 
Saskatchewan athletes who competed in Sochi. Each was an 
exceptional ambassador for our province and showed the world 
as well as all the young people right here at home that you can 
grow up to be a world-class hockey player, figure skater, or 
snowboarder right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to make special mention of our Saskatchewan athletes 
who won medals at the games, including Mark McMorris who 
took home a bronze medal in the snowboarding slopestyle 
event, Hayley Wickenheiser who played a pivotal role in 
helping the women’s hockey team win the dramatic gold medal 
final against the US [United States], and Ryan Getzlaf, Chris 
Kunitz, Patrick Marleau. They were players. Mike Babcock was 
the head coach who helped Canada capture gold in men’s 
hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
of our Olympic athletes on their performance and would like 
them to know how proud we are of them all. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Financial Support for Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve obtained 
internal documents, Mr. Speaker, that the government refused 
to make public. And what those documents show is that this 
government did not listen to the urgent need in seniors’ care 
facilities. 
 
Health regions, Mr. Speaker, brought forward their most urgent 
requests, but this government made them revise those proposals 
and water down those urgent requests. It’s bad enough, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government wasn’t even devoting new dollars 
to fix the problems with seniors’ care — it was simply 
reallocating existing funds — but it’s especially frustrating, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government forced health regions to actually 
change their urgent requests. 



4452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

My question to the Premier: who was it in the government that 
forced health regions to significantly scale back their urgent 
requests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to clarify what the Leader of the 
Opposition had to say in terms of where the dollars came from. 
Mr. Speaker, the $10 million that we announced in the Urgent 
Issues Action Fund, as well as the commitment to $3.8 million 
in ongoing funding as a result of the Urgent Issues Action Fund, 
Mr. Speaker, did not come from the regional health authority 
budgets. So it wasn’t dollars that they were asked to allocate, 
reallocate internally, Mr. Speaker. Those were new dollars that 
the regional health authorities didn’t have access to previously, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we had asked, Mr. Speaker, within the confines of $10 
million, is that the regional health authorities seek dollars that 
would be roughly in proportion to the number of beds that they 
have within the health regions, Mr. Speaker. When it became 
clear that that was going to be greater than the $10 million, Mr. 
Speaker, we asked them to revise their proposals to fit within 
the $10.04 million that was provided by this government for the 
Urgent Issues Action Fund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the health regions knew there 
were limited dollars available, and for that reason they put 
forward very moderate proposals. The Saskatoon Health 
Region, Mr. Speaker, says that it actually needs 450 more care 
aids, but it simply requested 38 because they knew that 
resources on this, Mr. Speaker, were extremely limited by this 
government. They said, Mr. Speaker, they actually need 450. 
They asked for just 38, Mr. Speaker, but the government, this 
government, still said that they were asking for far too much. 
The government forced them to slash that very moderate 
request in half, to just 19 additional care aids. 
 
Also in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, in the region, about 1,700 lifts 
are required. It requested, the health region, just 100 lifts, but 
the government once again forced them to slash that number 
and to request just 56 lifts. 
 
My question to the Premier: who was it in the government that 
forced the Saskatoon Health Region to slash their moderate 
requests for urgently needed staff and urgently needed 
materials, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
thought I had answered that first time around, but I will repeat 
myself, Mr. Speaker. When the requests were coming in for 
dollars, knowing that the government had available $10.04 
million in immediate dollars, as well as a commitment to $3.8 
million, Mr. Speaker, we did urge the regional health authorities 
to make revisions to their proposals so that, Mr. Speaker, not 
one health region would get 100 per cent of the dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. We wanted to ensure that all the health regions did 
receive some dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of lifts and other types of equipment that 
the regional health authorities require, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
just leave it to a $10 million Urgent Issues Action Fund to 
address those. That is done on an ongoing basis, Mr. Speaker, 
through the maintenance dollars that are provided annually to 
health regions. Mr. Speaker, as an example, we have provided 
in capital, in terms of new buildings, new renovations, and the 
maintenance of health care facilities, $1 billion in just six years, 
Mr. Speaker, compared to just 300 million by the members 
opposite. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t have been digging 
ourselves out of such a deficit in terms of maintenance dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, had the members opposite invested more. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government was 
strong-arming the health regions, telling them what in fact are 
their urgent needs when it comes to seniors’ care. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the people working on the front lines delivering care to 
seniors in our province know where in fact the urgent needs are 
and at what level they are at. 
 
In Prince Albert Parkland, seniors’ care facilities said they 
urgently needed about 10 new full-time workers, but the 
government made them resubmit their request and say they 
needed just in fact three workers. P.A. [Prince Albert] needs 
131 lifts, but the government made them resubmit that request 
to say they just need 53 lifts. The government also forced P.A. 
Parkland Health Region, Mr. Speaker, to entirely remove their 
request for dementia units in the health region. Again to the 
Premier: why did this government force the P.A. health region 
to ask for fewer workers, for fewer lifts, and no dementia unit at 
all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, is it the 
position of Leader of the Opposition that all $10.04 million and 
the ongoing $3.8 million should have gone to one health 
region? Is it his position that P.A. Parkland should have 
received 100 per cent of the dollars, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that Prince Albert Parkland is receiving 53 
lifts, Mr. Speaker, may not get the P.A. Parkland Health Region 
to the total number of lifts that they need, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
53 lifts that they will have that they didn’t have a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, or six years ago or 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we indicated, Mr. Speaker, is that, within the confines of 
the $10 million, that health regions provide what is their most 
urgent issues within long-term care, and that we would use that 
information, Mr. Speaker, on how those dollars would get to 
front-line staff and our residents, the improvements that it 
would make, and then help to inform government of future 
decisions, Mr. Speaker. So that is, Mr. Speaker, what we did 
through the $10 million as well as 3.8 million in ongoing 
funding. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4453 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is the health regions’ role to 
determine the urgent need, Mr. Speaker, and it’s this 
government’s role to decide where the dollars go. It is not the 
health regions’ role, Mr. Speaker, to sanitize and clean up, Mr. 
Speaker, the urgent need requests just to fit with this 
government’s communications exercise. 
 
The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. Five Hills Health Region 
urgently needs 15 bathtubs and 15 track lifts but the 
government forced them to take eight of those tubs and nine of 
those track lifts out of the request. Five Hills urgently needs 
nine new nurse call systems, but the government made them 
entirely remove that request. Sun Country was forced to remove 
three call systems and 36 lifts from their request. 
 
Cypress Health Region urgently needs over $900,000 in repairs 
but the government made them say that they only needed 
$300,000 in repairs. They also forced the Cypress Health 
Region, Mr. Speaker, to scale back their staffing request, 
cutting the number of LPNs [licensed practical nurse] by 80 per 
cent and the number of care aids by 50 per cent. 
 
My question to the Premier: why did his government fail to 
actually listen to the urgent needs in the health regions 
throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving 
me the opportunity to talk about what we are doing through the 
Urgent Issues Action Fund. Mr. Speaker, for example, Five 
Hills the Leader of the Opposition mentioned. After the first 60 
days of the fund, 11 tubs had been ordered. One has been 
installed and they’re developing a plan for the five track lifts 
that have been required, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Cypress, there are additional LPN and care aid positions, Mr. 
Speaker. The job descriptions have been finalized. The 
positions have been posted. I would be happy to keep the 
Leader of the Opposition up to date when in fact the region 
interviews people, when they actually do make some hires, Mr. 
Speaker. What we have provided, Mr. Speaker, unlike what the 
members of the opposition did when they were in government, 
we recognize the need within long-term care, within seniors’ 
care. 
 
We did allocate, in year dollars, $10 million, Mr. Speaker, and 
we will be making decisions based on how effective those 
dollars have been going forward, Mr. Speaker, unlike with the 
members opposite when they were in government — closed 
facilities, closed beds, and fired nurses and care aids across this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the questions have been why this 
government was meddling in the health regions, forcing them to 
water down the urgent needs that they have identified for 
seniors here in Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s especially frustrating about this, Mr. Speaker, is that at 
the same time as this government was forcing most health 

regions to scale back their requests, their urgent need requests 
for staffing and the basics and pieces of equipment, at the same 
time they were doing that, Mr. Speaker, the government was 
actually having discussions with another health region asking 
them to add funding to their request for another lean consultant. 
This government, Mr. Speaker, was telling health regions to cut 
back their requests for the basics, for staff, for lifts, for 
bathtubs, for repairs. There’s no money for that, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s poverty. But when it comes to adding another lean 
consultant, Mr. Speaker, there’s resources for that and they 
force the health region to request that. 
 
My question to the Premier: why on earth is his government 
prioritizing more consultants instead of actually fixing the 
basics for seniors here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government, as we’ve 
said publicly, have never shied away from, Mr. Speaker, we 
have become the first jurisdiction in Canada to apply a lean 
methodology across the entire health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
It has been responsible for significant savings, Mr. Speaker, 
significant efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue on 
that front, Mr. Speaker. Health regions have asked for 
additional support when it comes to engaging lean, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as providing training for front-line staff to 
become more familiar with lean, Mr. Speaker, as we develop it 
across the health regions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we had indicated to the health regions is that 
it wasn’t an unlimited dollar amount that was provided through 
the Urgent Issues Action Fund, that it was limited at $10.04 
million, Mr. Speaker. And we wanted to ensure a process where 
each health region would receive dollars roughly equivalent to 
the number of long-term care beds within their regions, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s exactly what we have done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Budgetary Plans and Education Funding 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most 
Saskatchewan families are already feeling squeezed because 
their bills keep going up and life keeps getting more and more 
expensive, so it’s no wonder why Saskatchewan families are 
concerned that the Premier says he might hike education 
property taxes on their families. And if you can imagine, the 
extra money will apparently be used for roads and overpasses, 
not even for education, Mr. Speaker. To the Premier: families 
are concerned. What’s the plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well I think the member opposite and 
many of the members opposite have been in this Assembly for a 
long time. They understand the plan. They understand the plan. 
The member opposite chirps from his seat, Mr. Speaker, but he 
knows full well that the budget is announced for March the 
19th. It will be delivered. And as the Premier has already said, it 
will be a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 



4454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, we fully recognize, we fully recognize that the 
member opposite wants to talk about all kinds of things and 
wants to get in some little information, Mr. Speaker, that he 
might have knowledge of, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell him that 
today is March 3rd. Budget day is March 19. And I look 
forward to the questions from today until that date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Families that 
are getting squeezed on front after front deserve greater 
certainty than that answer right there. We have significant needs 
in our education system that this government simply isn’t 
paying attention to. Classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced. Schools aren’t getting the much needed repairs 
they need. The government now can’t even build and own new 
schools, instead has an ill-advised scheme to rent private 
schools. So it’s no wonder why Saskatchewan people think the 
Premier’s new plan to hike education property taxes to pay for 
roads and overpasses is absolutely ridiculous. 
 
To the Premier: will he really be breaking his promise and 
raising the education property taxes for Saskatchewan families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about a few 
other numbers that the member obviously needs to know. Mr. 
Speaker, prior to the government, our government, making the 
changes to ensure that today we fund over $1.1 billion of the K 
to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system, when that NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government was in place, Mr. Speaker, they 
had tax revolts. They had tax revolts right across this province. 
People were unwilling to pay the high amount because they 
downloaded. They downloaded year after year after year onto 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made that change, and I’m going to very 
quickly say that all across the entire province — doesn’t matter 
whether it’s Regina or any small town — the mill rate on 
residential properties is 5.08, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, in many of the school divisions, prior to 2007 the mill 
rates were 21 and 22. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Budgetary Plans and Financial Reporting 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know that this 
government is the first government in Canadian history to fail 
an audit on its GRF [General Revenue Fund] books. Remember, 
Mr. Speaker, that they actually claimed that they ran a $60 
million surplus, only to be exposed by the Provincial Auditor 
that they had run a deficit of $600 million. So there’s no 
question that this government doesn’t know how to manage its 
provincial finances, Mr. Speaker. But Saskatchewan families 
are growing increasingly frustrated that they have to keep 
paying extra to make up for that government’s shortcomings. 
 
To the Premier: will he finally be straight today and commit to 
scrap his wrong-headed plan to hike education property taxes of 
Saskatchewan families, an unfair hike that families simply can’t 

afford? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I want to clarify a couple of things to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Number one, the model that we 
follow, the model that was introduced by the NDP in 2004, has 
been followed identically, Mr. Speaker. We do the General 
Revenue Fund, which is referred to often as our chequing 
account, our operating account, and we do the summaries, Mr. 
Speaker. The summaries are done at mid-year and they are done 
at year-end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at year-end we were very pleased to report that the 
summaries which we had forecasted at budget were going to 
have a surplus of $149 million, in fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
surplus is well over 400 million. So I don’t understand the 
member opposite. 
 
One day in this legislature he stands and he says you have to 
budget only on summaries. Well the summaries clearly indicate 
at mid-year that we were going to have a $400 million surplus, 
Mr. Speaker. Now mindful . . . You have to be aware of what 
your chequebook account is. That’s the General Revenue Fund, 
Mr. Speaker, and we indicated that we needed to use some of 
our savings account to ensure that we met the obligations for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, farmers in Saskatchewan are 
increasingly frustrated that the provincial and federal 
governments are not doing their part to solve the grain 
transportation crisis. And those farmers cannot understand why 
this Premier is going around saying that the federal Agriculture 
minister, Gerry Ritz, is doing a great job and providing strong 
leadership. Very few farmers who see their prices falling, their 
bins full of grain, and their bills piling up would share the 
Premier’s sentiment on that, especially since farmers are being 
told the carry-over probably won’t be resolved until well into 
2015, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: where’s the evidence that 
the federal Agriculture minister has been doing anything to 
actually help move this bumper crop to the market? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The issue of the grain transportation in 
Western Canada and for the province of Saskatchewan is by far 
and away the most important issue facing the province today. 
And I think it says much about the NDP and their view of 
agriculture and how out of touch they are that it took until now 
for there even to be a question in question period today. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to say that on May . . . Well the deputy 
leader is chirping from his seat about being late on the scene. 
That’s the question I’m going to answer. 
 
May 31st of last year, the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation, Agriculture officials, first meet with CP 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4455 

[Canadian Pacific] Rail to say, here’s our growth plan; here are 
our targets for harvest. How are you going to get ready for the 
transportation requirements? Subsequent meetings in June on 
the New West Partnership port capacity study with two other 
Western provinces. July 24, 2013, our Ministry of Agriculture 
officials meet on the subject again. It happened again in 
October. Mr. Speaker, I can tell this House, and the Ag critic 
should know this and the leader should know this as well, that 
on the 7th of November the Minister of Agriculture wrote to the 
Government of Canada, wrote to all the stakeholders to say, 
we’ve had a record crop; there are capacity issues; what are you 
prepared to do about it? Mr. Speaker, there is a long list here 
through November and October, culminating, Mr. Speaker, this 
last week in meetings with the Minister of Agriculture and 
Minister of Transport federally. 
 
We’re hopeful for urgent federal action. We ask the NDP to join 
us in a call for that action. That’s the short-term solution. The 
longer term solution may be looking north and south. The 
Minister of the Economy will be in Fort Worth, Texas this week 
to meet with Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway to talk 
about that, Mr. Speaker. This is the number one issue in the 
province. It’s the number one priority for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. We wish it were for the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
two things first off with that response. First of all, in this 
Assembly last year on March 18th, we were asking questions of 
the Minister of Agriculture about the Fair Rail Freight Service 
Act and why they weren’t doing anything to encourage a proper 
solution at that time. Nothing’s happened since. Further to that, 
the question was about why the Premier is supporting Minister 
Ritz, who has done nothing. We didn’t ask for a catalogue of 
what this minister has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers, the farmers are feeling the brunt of a 
grain transportation crisis that’s getting worse, and provincial 
and federal governments are refusing to do much of anything 
about it. So when that government spends its time praising the 
federal government, it doesn’t make an ounce of sense to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
When the NDP did propose real solutions to the grain 
transportation crisis, that Agriculture minister refused to listen 
and he actually questioned whether there are even answers to 
the crisis. To the minister: has he changed his mind? Does he 
now recognize that there are answers to help farmers get their 
grain to the market? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m supporting the federal 
minister, to quote the hon. member opposite, because he hasn’t 
done nothing. Mr. Speaker, we know that the federal 
government, like the provincial government, has been 
canvassing all of the options available. Mr. Speaker, there are a 
number of reasons that have caused this perfect storm in 
agriculture. There is a weather situation certainly that has 
affected the size, the length of trains, Mr. Speaker. There is the 
fact that railways have unfortunately been laying off personnel 

and decommissioning locomotive infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s also the record harvest obviously and more oil moving 
on rail because, Mr. Speaker, we have some in this country who 
still oppose pipelining the energy and the oil across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our conversations with the federal government, 
we have noted the Act she has referenced. They are aware of 
the fact that too much in current legislation in terms of service 
level agreements is voluntary. We’ve said to the federal 
government, these things need to be compulsory. We’ve said to 
the federal government, the option of mandating car fleet size 
has to be on the table as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that both the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Minister of Transport — and last week as 
well I discussed this with the Prime Minister — are aware of all 
of the options. This House can help advance the issue by calling 
on the federal government today, supporting their efforts for 
emergency legislation that would make the parts of this that are 
voluntary mandatory so the grain will move across this country 
to our customers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, of course we can agree there are a number of 
important things that have to take place, and the most important 
thing is to get the grain moving. And I think that’s something 
we are in agreement here in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are the tangible solutions that the NDP has 
put forward. First of all, we called for more pressure to be put 
on the rail companies since last year when the bill was in the 
House, Mr. Speaker, in the federal House. We have called for 
joint running rights. We have called for legislated performance 
standards, including enforceable penalties when railways don’t 
perform, and we are calling for fixes to the flawed Fair Rail 
Freight Service Act, Mr. Speaker. And our Agriculture minister 
has dismissed those ideas. He said, “The answers, if answers 
exist, are not that simple.” My question is to the minister. When 
will this government stop dismissing practical solutions and 
when will farmers see meaningful action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — This is a very serious problem for 
farmers in Saskatchewan and Western Canada and indeed for 
the economy of our province, and lots has been done. The 
Premier started to read a list of actions that this government has 
taken and, you know, as far Minister Ritz goes, I have been . . . 
I think producers know that when I don’t agree with Minister 
Ritz I say so, but I do believe that Minister Ritz is engaged in 
this file and I think that we’re going to see some action. 
 
We’ve asked the feds to increase their reporting requirements 
around actual car spots, loading at country elevators, delivery of 
cars to ports, and unloading of cars at ports from monthly to 
weekly. We want to see the Canadian Transportation Agency be 
able to independently investigate grain movement before formal 
complaints are made and we encourage the federal government 
to pass emergency legislation that will set standards for 
performance and put in place penalties, reciprocal penalties, 



4456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

between grain companies and rail . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The House knows 
full well that we’re going to have further opportunity to talk 
about some of these details. Our question for the people of 
Saskatchewan is this: why did this minister question whether 
answers . . . that there even are solutions for this problem? He 
said that publicly. And also, why did our Premier praise the 
current Minister of Agriculture for doing a great job, Mr. 
Speaker, when he has failed to serve the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well I have never said that there are no 
solutions to this problem. That’s incorrect. 
 
As far as the NDP’s sole idea, their only idea that they’ve 
advanced is joint running rights. Mr. Speaker, joint running 
rights provisions already exist under the Canadian 
transportation Act. It’s just a matter of the negotiations taking 
place and for the deals to be made. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact it’s just not that advantageous for either of the 
railways to complete these deals because that is not the 
problem. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is lack of locomotives and crews, 
and clearly there needs to be some proper penalties in place to 
compel the railways and the grain companies to provide proper 
service. And those are the problems, Mr. Speaker, not joint 
running rights as the NDP continue to insist. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I can tell the members are happy to be 
back in the Assembly and that they’re enthusiastic. And I would 
note that they’ve been exercising their vocal cords because 
they’re rested, but I hope that you don’t put too much of a strain 
on them during question period. Thank you. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
orders of the day, I wish to ask leave to move a motion 
regarding the grain transportation backlog. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move a 
motion regarding grain transportation backlog. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
leave, I move: 
 

That this Assembly supports the federal government 
introducing emergency legislation to address the grain 
transportation backlog. 

Mr. Speaker, members of this House will well know the serious 
situation that’s confronting Saskatchewan farmers today, that’s 
confronting an entire agricultural sector, and so therefore 
confronting the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some important facts that need to be laid 
on the table in terms of this debate. I think, as the nature and the 
scope of the problem has become more and more apparent over 
the last number of months, the other reality is that there are a 
number of issues at work here. There is not just one or even two 
or even three reasons why we are facing the situation that we 
are facing. And by the way, that situation can be described in a 
couple of ways that are statistical and others that are perhaps 
more graphic or more poignant for people that may or may not 
be aware so much about the issue in terms of agriculture. 
 
From a statistical standpoint, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to 
note there is at least 5 million tonnes of grain waiting to move 
from this province. From a statistical standpoint it might be 
interesting to note that off of the coast today, off of the coast at 
the Vancouver port, the port at Prince Rupert, there is up to 50 
ships, empty ships waiting to take our grain, our commodities to 
markets around the world. 
 
On a less statistical front, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note, it 
should be interesting for all of us to know that Japan has 
recently announced that when it comes to its wheat purchases, it 
will be moving from Canadian sources to American sources, 
Mr. Speaker. It should be interesting and compelling for all of 
us to remember that Algeria — for example, a very important 
customer for our wheat — has not yet been contacted by those 
who market the grain, by the companies, because the companies 
themselves are not sure they’ll be able to supply them in a 
timely way. 
 
It should be interesting to note that, according to officials, we 
might be 15 to 20 days away from processors of oats running 
out of oats. That should tell us a couple of things: one, the 
relative importance of Canada’s oat production again in terms 
of being a world food power; and also the fact that 15 to 20 
days is not very long from now. That part should underscore the 
urgency of the situation we face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell members of the House that on our fall 
Asian trade mission, we focused a lot on Saskatchewan’s ability 
to take advantage of the fact that those fast-growing economies 
in the ASEAN [Association of South-East Asian Nations] 
region in Asia, they want food security. And so we were talking 
fertilizer and there to support Canpotex and their customers 
they had for potash. 
 
We were also taking about agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And I will 
not soon forget a meeting we had with millers in Manila. 
Remember that this is in late September early October, well 
before the current crisis had developed into the full bloom we 
see now. But I remember hearing from one miller in particular, 
a large miller in the ASEAN region, telling us in that room 
along with members of STEP, Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, and the Saskatchewan delegation, that even then, 
prior to this crisis, they don’t bother calling Canada in 
December and January. They don’t even phone. They buy some 
wheat from us, but not . . . They don’t place any orders in those 
months because of the reliability question. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4457 

I had the occasion to come back and meet with the Prime 
Minister shortly thereafter and to debrief the Prime Minister on 
some of our views from that trip. And top of that list was the 
fact that our federal government needed to be concluding free 
trade agreements in the ASEAN region. And the very second 
thing I talked about was what was going on in terms of 
transportation, the need that we would have — because by then 
it was pretty clear we were going to have something close to a 
record harvest in Saskatchewan — the need, I said to the Prime 
Minister, that we would have a long-term capacity to meet the 
needs of customers around the world. And that formed, I think, 
the longest part of that particular meeting that I had with the 
Prime Minister, though there are always a number of important 
issues we at least certainly try to raise. 
 
[14:30] 
 
You know, we talked a little bit about one issue, and it’s only 
one and there’s a lot of debate about it. We talked about the 
revenue cap that exists on the railroad companies. It’s there 
likely as sort of a part of the implementation of the Crow rate, 
to keep freight rates down, and so the principle and premise is a 
solid one. But it might be having an unintended impact today, if 
in fact the revenue cap is causing railroad companies to 
reallocate cars away from agriculture. Because once they 
exceed the cap, they actually have to pay a penalty into 
agricultural research funds. They can’t actually claim that for 
the company. 
 
I listened to Minister Ritz on that subject earlier this week. And 
when I met with him this week I said, you know, with respect to 
that revenue cap, we support your remarks that it can’t be 
thrown out in its entirety. That’s not the right thing to do, but 
we may have to modernize it a little bit. There’s one particular 
issue that we need to focus on here, and maybe it’ll be raised by 
others in the debate. 
 
The other challenge we have is the fact that service level 
agreements, as prescribed by legislation that’s been referenced, 
is basically a voluntary proposition. And for those that are 
watching, those service level agreements are agreements 
between the railroad companies and a grain handler, and they 
are by and large voluntary. There are reciprocal penalties 
theoretically agreed to by each side, and if performance isn’t 
met — i.e., grain’s not moved — then, Mr. Speaker, the 
penalties are enforced. The problem is there is not yet in Canada 
today one single example of one of those agreements in place. 
Not one. 
 
And so we have said to the federal government, and not just 
recently, but we’ve been saying to the federal government that 
while blunter measures of the House of Commons ought to be a 
last resort, they will need to be an option. And one of the 
options could prescribe perhaps less voluntary agreements — 
forced agreements. Another legislative option from the federal 
government in emergency legislation might be to look at the 
fleet size, might be to look at actually the complement of cars. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that we ought to be loath to intervene, 
really to intervene directly in matters of the market. In the long 
term these things don’t bear out to be successful. However, 
there are certain exceptions. Here we have a duopoly, you 
know, in terms of free markets, not entirely that free, just given 

the number of entries involved and the fact that they’ve been 
granted this, basically this corporate dispensation from the 
government at one point or another in the history of our 
country. And so we need to send a message from the legislature 
today that we support what we know is already being 
considered by the federal government as an option. And I guess 
this goes a little bit to some of the questions we heard in 
question period today, and I would offer this to members. 
 
I think some of them would be aware of . . . There would be a 
few of them would be aware of the nature of government. 
Sometimes what you’re going to say at the uni-mic or in a 
scrum, Mr. Speaker, is a little bit different in terms of intensity, 
at least from what might be going on behind the scenes, because 
you’re trying to find the solution. You’re trying to encourage 
parties to get to a solution before you have to use the blunt 
instruments of legislation which are . . . They’re hard to change. 
Toothpaste is hard to get back in the tube if you don’t get it 
exactly right. 
 
And so it’s certainly our confidence, based on what we know to 
be the relationship, to be the interaction, that those very 
aggressive meetings have been taking place, that every option 
has been talked about quite candidly with all of the 
stakeholders. And, Mr. Speaker, that first and foremost, service 
level agreements — especially as urged by our own delegation 
led by the Minister of Agriculture and supported by the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, and the Minister of 
Economy — that we were urging these service level agreements 
to be executed. We just don’t have one yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so because of the urgency of this situation, we simply 
cannot wait. We are at the point of that last resort. We are at the 
point of saying to the national government of our country that 
they have the support of this legislature. They have the support 
of the government that represents 44 per cent of the arable acres 
in Canada, that has more at stake in terms of this issue than any 
other place in the Dominion of Canada. We’re saying to them 
they have the support of that place in the federation to do what 
is necessary — by law, by regulation, or by order in council — 
whatever they believe to be to have the full effect of sending a 
message that this grain must move, that whatever the resources 
are required by the rail companies, by the grain handling 
companies, those resources would be deployed in a timely way 
and that we would see the grain moving. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, as well. We were aware over 
the weekend there’s been a lot of talk about the railways. And 
so there should be. But there are other stakeholders in this 
debate that could also be affected by emergent federal 
legislation. The grain handlers, as well, fit into this category. 
 
We were hearing, anecdotally admittedly, over the weekend that 
there were cars that had moved by the railway companies to the 
West Coast full of grain from Western Canada that were sitting 
idly by and not being emptied because the grain handling folks 
out on the West Coast had a weekend. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately that’s not acceptable either. It’s not acceptable 
either, given the nature of this situation and just how important 
it is for us. The short-term solution, we believe, is prescribed in 
this support for the federal government to resort to these 
measures — legislative order in council or regulatory. 
 



4458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

But, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake, our efforts — and this has 
already been the efforts of the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation, witness the meeting we held back in May 31 
with officials with our growth plan and its targets in place; and 
also the priority of the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister 
of the Economy — is that we also had the long-term solution 
for this. Because while we got to that record crop we 
highlighted in our growth plan, about six years earlier than we 
had as an idea of when it might happen, Mr. Speaker, we got 
there. And we may not have a record crop next year or the year 
after — we may — but likely we will have a new norm in 
Saskatchewan, which are bigger and bigger crops.  
 
Combine that with the fact that there is more oil moving on rail. 
More oil moving on rail, by the way, because we can’t get it 
together in this country, that the most efficacious and safest way 
to move the oil is not on the rail but in a pipeline. Whether it’s 
carrying bitumens or oil across our country to the ocean, or 
whether it carries oil across the United States to the Gulf, we 
need all of the above. We need the west to east pipeline as well, 
so there’s less pressure on the transportation network caused by 
grain. So that’s part of the long-term solution. 
 
Another part of the long-term solution that we believe merits at 
least exploration — and I shared this with the Minister of 
Agriculture federally — is that we need to diversify our 
transportation options. Right now they’re basically limited, for 
the most part, east and west. Certainly there is a capacity on the 
Soo or other lines for the main companies to take products 
south, and there’s obviously a lot of trade that goes north and 
south between Canada and the United States. Principally 
though, grain is an east-west proposition. And we’ve even 
heard, as Saskatchewan mused about moving grain to the south, 
we’ve heard the rail companies say, well, we’ve got all of our 
resources focused on east-west. And we understand that. We 
support that, frankly, right now. But in the long term, in the 
long term, we need to encourage others, independent 
companies, maybe rail companies from other jurisdictions, 
other countries to look at an investment here. 
 
There’s some good news on this front, Mr. Speaker. At 
Northgate, Saskatchewan, there is an area you’ll know well. 
There is a logistics hub that’s being established by a private 
company called Ceres Global, an agricultural global. And they 
are in fact, as you know, laying track and building a railway for 
oil and grain straight south to connect with the BNSF. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, as well that Burlington Northern is actually 
investing upwards of around $20 million to connect back to that 
Northgate company, to that new rail company. We need to 
encourage them to expand capacity where they can and, frankly, 
we need to encourage other north-south expansions, knowing 
that east-west has got to be fixed in the long term. We need to 
diversify where we can. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to help shortline railroads in 
our province. We may have to offer some incentives as a 
government, maybe new growth tax incentives, perhaps on the 
locomotive diesel fuel tax. We’ve said publicly we’d be open to 
that. We’d be open to it if it afforded a long-term solution. 
 
I can report to the House, as I did in question period, that the 
Minister of the Economy will be headed to Fort Worth, Texas 
this week to meet with Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway 

Company. He will meet with the CEO [chief executive officer] 
and the chairman of the board, which would indicate to me 
there might be some interest on their part as well in at least 
discussing what’s possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need long-term solutions. This Assembly and 
all of its hon. members should be really . . . should be focused 
very much on this. It goes to the success of our economy, not 
just in agriculture but in potash and in oil and in manufactured 
goods, because of course we are in the middle of the country. 
We need to get our goods to the coast. We need to get our 
goods out of province and so that all of our producers can get a 
worthwhile return. 
 
In the meantime though, we need to take short-term action. And 
I do now believe, Mr. Speaker, because of the efforts of this 
government frankly — and yes the federal minister, and yes the 
grain handling companies and the railway companies that have 
engaged, have had the meetings that we’ve asked for — but I 
believe that all of the options short of government action, 
federal government action, have now been explored to no avail, 
unfortunately to no avail. So now again the leading agricultural 
province in Canada, whose exports broke its own record a year 
ago — year over year we’re breaking export records, never 
mind harvest records — now they need to hear from that 
province. They told me last week they want to hear. So did the 
Prime Minister. They’re even interested in some specific 
information we can offer, and we’ll most assuredly do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is why it is time for us to call on the 
federal government in this way: 
 

That this Assembly supports the federal government 
introducing emergency legislation to address the grain 
transportation backlog. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly supports the federal government 
introducing emergency legislation to address the grain 
transportation backlog. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure this 
afternoon to enter into this debate on grain transportation and a 
situation that is very serious and very concerning for the entire 
province and especially for producers here in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there are many producers who have 
done everything that they need to do in order to have a 
successful growing season, to get the crop off, and to have the 
crop in the bins, Mr. Speaker. But we know now that producers 
are faced with lower prices and are faced with a real problem in 
terms of getting their product to markets and being in a position 
to be paid and benefit from the good growing season and the 
good crop that they had. 
 
And the Premier was correct with respect to the good growing 
season that we had. And while we can’t predict what the 
weather is in any given year, we know, Mr. Speaker, that we 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4459 

have the great potential in this province to have good yields in 
years to come and that this is in fact an issue that is concerning 
not just this year but for the years to come. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, for producers who have bills to pay, 
that there is a great sense of urgency to this crisis in producers 
needing to be paid for the crop that they have. And while it’s 
absolutely concerning to producers, we know that there are 
huge implications for the entire province, for the businesses that 
operate in rural communities, and for the entire provincial 
economy with respect to the services and goods that producers 
put back into the economy and the taxes that they pay, Mr. 
Speaker, to the provincial coffers. 
 
So we know that there is great urgency on this issue. And this is 
something that we’ve been talking about for some time. And 
it’s with that sense of recognition of the urgency, Mr. Speaker, 
why we’re also concerned with the lateness of both the federal 
government and the provincial government in paying attention 
to the issue, to giving it the attention that it deserves and 
demands, and demonstrating any sort of willingness, Mr. 
Speaker, to look at solutions, yes, for the short term as the 
Premier spoke about, and for the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re pleased to see some action but we’re absolutely 
concerned with the duration of time that it has taken to get to 
this point. And I think, Mr. Speaker, in looking at the 
dismissive approach that we’ve seen from this government and 
the federal government, that they have indeed had their head in 
the sand for too long, Mr. Speaker, and in fact, have dismissed 
very constructive solutions and some concrete actions that were 
put on the table at an earlier date, which are now being part of 
the discussion, Mr. Speaker, but at the time were deemed to be 
simple-minded and not practical. 
 
It was actually back in January, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
brought forward some ideas that we heard from producers. 
Among those things that we highlighted that should be done, we 
called for more pressure to be put on rail companies. We called 
also, Mr. Speaker, for a legislative review of the Canada 
Transportation Act to be sped up to allow for swift and 
meaningful action. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We also called for joint running rights, Mr. Speaker — 
something that’s being discussed now — so that any rail 
company can operate on another rail company’s line in 
exchange for fair compensation. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
this would provide more competition and simply give producers 
more options for getting their grain to market. 
 
We also called for performance standards, including penalties 
for when rail companies do not perform. But when we brought 
those ideas forward, Mr. Speaker, the government dismissed 
them and it was actually the Agriculture minister, Mr. Speaker, 
who said, and it’s a quote, “The answers, if answers exist, are 
not that simple.” That’s when we talked about some of these 
concrete ideas that need to be discussed and which we’re 
talking about today. If answers exist, if answers exist — that’s 
what the Agriculture minister had to say. 
 
Now we’ve also heard more . . . More recently, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve heard from the Premier who’s been going around and 
saying that the federal minister has actually been doing a 
bang-up job in providing strong leadership on this issue for 
producers in Saskatchewan and for the entire province. Mr. 
Speaker, I have yet to meet or to hear from a producer who 
shares that sentiment. I do not know where that position would 
come from. 
 
And I heard the Premier allude to, in his remarks, the fact that, 
well sometimes what you say in a scrum is a bit different than 
what you might say in the Assembly or in a meeting. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a difference between perhaps being a bit silent 
on an issue and there’s a . . . between that and actually heaping 
praise on a federal minister that is recognized as completely 
dropping the ball and not looking out for producers’ interests 
and Saskatchewan’s interests. And I am still puzzled by the 
remarks that the Premier would make with respect to praising 
the federal agricultural minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers are frustrated with the federal 
agricultural minister for being asleep at the switch and for 
failing to take meaningful action to fix the backlog that we are 
seeing. Producers have bins full of grain and bills are piling up 
and they need action and they need solutions now to solve the 
grain transportation crisis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this motion and I think it’s 
about time in fact that the provincial government and the federal 
government actually begin to take this issue seriously. 
 
I support appropriate and effective legislative changes that will 
actually address the grain transportation crisis, fix the broken 
system, and help our agricultural producers in the near future. I 
support joint running rights. I support measures that will put 
pressure on the rail companies and to start serving agricultural 
producers in a much better way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a discussion about the decisions that 
rail companies have made, and I support performance standards, 
including penalties for when railways don’t perform. I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that government needs to stop treating the rail 
companies with kid gloves while those rail companies who are 
failing to get the job done for Saskatchewan producers have not 
demonstrated urgency or concern with the plight of 
Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And you know, going back again to the remarks of praising the 
federal agricultural minister, you know, it wasn’t long ago, a 
few days ago, that I heard the federal minister in an interview 
say that he was loath to regulate and to intervene. When we see 
that kind of approach, Mr. Speaker, it causes many flags to go 
up with respect to this government, this federal government’s 
ability to take this issue seriously and to take the right and 
corrective steps that are required. 
 
And it also puts up flags when we hear praise coming from this 
provincial government of the federal minister’s job of having 
been a good job and having done well for Saskatchewan people. 
That also puts up a lot of flags for me with respect to the 
approach. That’s why I say, Mr. Speaker, I support legislative 
changes, but they need to be appropriate and they need to be 
effective and they need to actually address the grain 
transportation crisis, fix the system, and bring help to producers 



4460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

here in Saskatchewan. Those are the types of changes that I 
would like to see and the types of changes I think that producers 
here in the province would also like to see. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, we have a system that has put railways 
and grain companies in total control and left producers 
completely at their mercy, with no real competition, with no 
alternatives, and no real legal recourse for when they’re not 
served properly. It’s all evidence, Mr. Speaker, that the system 
as it is right now is broken and it does in fact need to be fixed. 
The current approach cannot go on. So it’s absolutely time, Mr. 
Speaker, that the federal government took attention, paid 
attention and took action on this. It’s about time that the 
provincial government actually recognized that there are 
solutions, that answers do exist. But what’s required, Mr. 
Speaker, is the political will to actually make those changes 
happen. 
 
So I want the federal government to introduce legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, that is appropriate, that is effective, and will actually 
address the grain transportation crisis, and will actually help 
producers here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to say a few remarks on this motion. A few others 
from our side will enter in on the debate, Mr. Speaker, but thank 
you for the opportunity. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is clearly 
the most serious problem in agriculture in Saskatchewan these 
days and one of the dark clouds over our entire economy. This 
is a very important issue. We’ve done a tremendous amount of 
work on it as a government. And I believe through that work 
that myself, other ministers have done and certainly our 
Premier, I think that we have the attention of the federal 
government focused on the issue. And you know, the Leader of 
the Opposition is more, is more interested in bashing the federal 
Minister of Agriculture than he is in finding a solution to this 
problem. That’s a scary thing to me, Mr. Speaker, and I think it 
should be to all farmers in this province. 
 
We are focused on solutions. We have been very helpful in 
providing possible solutions to the federal government, and 
we’re encouraging them to follow through with those solutions, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s going to take legislative solutions to this 
problem. The railroads are not competitive companies. They’re 
duopolies at best and in many cases, in most circumstances, 
they really act as monopolies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition also mentioned that 
we are taking a dismissive approach to this very serious 
problem. Mr. Speaker, the Premier started in question period to 
read a list of actions that this government has undertaken so far 
on the problem, and I’m going to read the whole list. 
 
May 31st, Mr. Speaker, Ministry of Highways and Agriculture 
officials met with CP to outline the agricultural targets in the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth and how that would affect the 
need for improved rail service. June, began work on a New 
West Partnership port capacity study. July 24th, Ministry of 
Agriculture officials met with Mark Hemmes of Quorum 
consulting. Early October, the Minister of Highways and the 
deputy minister of Highways met with CP in Vancouver on 

grain transportation issues there. 
 
In October, the deputy minister of Highways toured the 
Vancouver port and met with Alliance Grain Terminal. October 
25th, Highways, Economy, and Agriculture met to talk about 
what was happening with the movement of commodities to port 
at that time. Highways quoted CN [Canadian National] and CP 
as saying they have lots of capacity and the constraint was at 
port. 
 
November 7th, the Minister of Agriculture sent letters to federal 
government, railroads, grain companies, and all other 
stakeholders regarding the record crop and the importance of an 
efficient transportation system. November, deputy minister of 
Highways met with federal deputy minister of Transportation to 
discuss grain transportation issues. November 21st, Ministry of 
Highways and Agriculture officials had a conference call with 
federal ADM [assistant deputy minister] to discuss grain 
transportation issues. November 25th, Minister Stewart, 
Minister of Agriculture, met with CP Rail. December 6th, 
senior Highways, Economy, and Agriculture officials met with 
CP Rail. 
 
January 2014, Ministry of Agriculture officials met with Prairie 
West Terminal. January 21st, senior Highways and Ag officials 
met with Port Metro Vancouver. January 29th, federal, 
provincial, territorial agricultural deputy ministers’ meeting 
which included discussion on grain transportation that 
Saskatchewan played a key role in. January 31st, a conference 
call with Pulse Canada and senior ministry officials regarding 
the Pulse Canada five-year transportation monitoring project 
being funded by the federal government. 
 
February 4th, Minister of Agriculture met with CN and CP 
senior officials again. February 12th, Premier appointed a 
delegation of ministers of Agriculture, Highways, and Economy 
and MLA for Rosthern-Shellbrook to lead the grain 
transportation file. February 13th, Minister of Agriculture and 
Minister of Highways officials held conference call with 
Saskatchewan producer groups. February 13th, delegation met 
with Viterra. February 14th, delegation met with Western Grain 
Elevator Association, including Viterra, Cargill, Richardson, 
P & H, and Louis Dreyfus Canada, in Winnipeg. February 20th, 
delegation met with CN Rail. February 21st, delegation met 
with CP Rail. February 27th, the Premier met with Minister 
Ritz and Minister Raitt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of this has happened, plus many more casual 
conversations that have happened between ministers and senior 
officials of grain and rail companies and Port Metro Vancouver, 
and still the Leader of the Opposition claims that we have a 
dismissive attitude about this very, very serious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember . . . You know, I’ve been around this 
business for a while, and these problems were occurring in the 
1970s. And I understand they occurred in the ’50s and the ’60s, 
and they occurred again in the ’90s. And they’re happening 
again now, and it’s not okay. We need permanent solutions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s what we’re working with the federal government to 
achieve finally, once and for all, permanent solutions so this 
will not recur every time there is a lot of grain to move to port. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4461 

Mr. Speaker, we are working with the federal government, and 
we’re asking the federal government to provide emergency 
legislation which will include levels of performance for the 
railways and grain companies and reciprocal penalties for lack 
of performance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve worked with the federal government to increase 
reporting requirements around actual car spots, loading at 
country elevators, delivery of cars to ports and actual car 
unloads at ports. And, Mr. Speaker, that has been met 
favourably. Mr. Speaker, it’s more constructive to be part of the 
solution than it is to just criticize the people that are trying to do 
that. And that so far is what we’ve heard from the NDP — that 
and a rehashed idea from the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, of joint 
running rights, a theme that comes up every decade or two. 
 
You know, I can visualize the Leader of the Opposition — 
since they have no agricultural or transportation expertise on 
that side of the floor, Mr. Speaker — I have this visual of the 
Leader of the Opposition going through a storage room 
somewhere in the bowels of this building, Mr. Speaker, looking 
through boxes of old documents to see if they can come up with 
an idea. And finally he’s blowing the dust off these boxes, and 
he sees one finally that has something to do with transportation. 
It says, dumb ideas we floated in the 1970s on transportation. 
So he goes, he digs through that box, Mr. Speaker, until he 
finds a document — no doubt signed by a former leader of the 
NDP party, Mr. Speaker, the previous one — and that’s all they 
could come up with. And that’s all they’ve done. 
 
They sit in the weeds and take potshots at both the federal 
minister and myself and the Premier, anybody who’s actually 
trying to solve this problem, Mr. Speaker, but they have no real 
solutions. That rehashed idea of joint running rights from the 
1970s isn’t going to fly. It’s not going to help and nobody’s 
going to do it. Nobody’s going to do it by compulsion. The 
ability is there for the railroads to do that right now. And if 
there was any advantage to them to do it, they would have done 
it decades ago. All it does, it’s a distraction from the real 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think our course is clear. We are working 
constructively with the federal government to achieve a 
permanent solution to this problem. And I expect to see 
evidence of that, very substantial evidence of that, before the 
end of this month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a . . . 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
clearly a first day back for the spring session here at the 
legislature, and this is an excellent topic and an important topic, 
I think, that we can get up and debate on today. And certainly as 
the minister has said, it’s one of the most important issues 
facing grain farmers in many, many years and one that needs 
immediate and urgent attention. 
 
I just think we want to go back a little bit though because why 
is it so emergent and urgent at this point in time, Mr. Speaker? 
The issue of the railways having a monopoly or duopoly in 

Canada is not new. This didn’t happen three months ago. What 
the minister said on January 29th was that “We’ve been dealing 
with this issue for a couple of months now.” Well this issue 
isn’t something — that’s the end of the quote — this issue is not 
something that came up a couple of months ago, Mr. Speaker. 
The power and the monopoly of the railways has been in place 
from the beginning of the history of this country. 
 
And I think if you read any sort of analysis by the experts on 
the role of the railways here in Saskatchewan and in Canada 
when it comes to moving our grain, it’s that they continue to 
hold this monopoly or duopoly, depending on how you want to 
characterize it. Any market expert will tell you that that’s not 
really creating a market in any way, shape, or form. And 
certainly that’s why we have federal laws dealing with that, and 
I’ll get into that in a couple minutes. 
 
What we have here, and I think we have to make no mistake, 
there’s two issues here. One is the very powerful railway lobby 
and a very powerful railway industry that is controlling the 
transportation of grain in Canada — very, very powerful lobby. 
And I’ve heard they have over 200 full-time paid lobbyists on 
the Hill in Ottawa working this issue, Mr. Speaker. So this is no 
small issue for the railway companies. They are having record 
profits as well. They’re doing very, very well, and yet we can’t 
move our grain. So those are some things that are very clear and 
evident to the public and to legislators as well, and we’re 
hearing that today. We’re hearing this government acknowledge 
that that is not acceptable, and my only fear is that it’s too little 
too late. 
 
Unfortunately this government still has to play nice with the 
current federal Minister of Agriculture, and we have a Premier 
here who . . . I want to quote from an editorial on February 28th 
from the Leader-Post where Murray Mandryk is commenting 
on Premier Wall’s recent comments about Minister Ritz in the 
newspaper. And what Murray Mandryk said is: 
 

Take Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall, who — 
notwithstanding his elevated status as Stephen Harper’s 
replacement-in-waiting — felt the need to stroke the ego of 
Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz by uttering the nonsensical 
observation that he was doing fine work on the 
transportation file. 

 
And then he went on to discuss a Twitter that the Premier put 
on his Twitter account, announcing to the world: “Another good 
meeting with Minister Ritz on grain transportation. Thanks for 
your leadership.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think clearly this is not the appropriate approach 
to take with Minister Ritz because we have an Agriculture 
minister who has declared that he was loath to regulate. And if 
you have an Agriculture minister at the head of this country’s 
agricultural ministry saying he’s loath to regulate, that’s exactly 
the problem that we have. And obviously the paid lobbyists for 
the railway industry are doing a good job because they’ve 
convinced our federal minister that he’s loath to regulate, and 
that’s simply not acceptable. 
 
Now the grain transportation Act or the Canadian 
Transportation Act was under review not two months ago, Mr. 
Speaker. But several years ago it went under an extensive 



4462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

review. And during the process of that review, this current 
government came up with a bill last year, Bill C-52, and that’s 
the Fair Rail Freight Service Act, Mr. Speaker. And that Act 
was supposed to fix the inequality that we see with this 
monopoly that currently exists with the railways in Canada 
moving our grain. It didn’t work. 
 
And in fact last year when it was in second reading, our NDP 
federally introduced a number of amendments to make this Act 
work. The grain shippers, who also had an opportunity to 
present in committee, tried very, very hard to introduce some 
reasonable amendments that would make this proposed 
legislation provide some of the balance that we need between 
the railways and the users of that mono-utility, Mr. Speaker. 
And all of those amendments were rejected, all of those 
amendments. 
 
And for the minister to suggest that we haven’t been 
commenting on that is completely unfair because I specifically 
questioned him about it last year in March, Mr. Speaker. And 
perhaps I need to reread some of the questions I put to him so 
that I can refresh his memory, and that we did in fact express 
concerns about the Fair Rail Freight Service Act. 
 
So for example, one of the questions that I asked, Mr. Speaker, 
was where the government stood on the bill and whether it 
supported the concerns of the shippers. And that was the first 
question on March 18th, and the minister said: 
 

. . . you know, these days we haven’t heard a lot of 
feedback from producers . . . But we are interested and 
working with the federal government to get the best deal 
that we can for Western Canadian producers.  
 

So that was his response to the question then. I also asked about 
the amendments. I indicated, and I’ll quote myself, Mr. 
Speaker. I said: 
 

The shippers have proposed amendments to fix several of 
the problems in this bill. What is the Minister of 
Agriculture and Government of Saskatchewan doing to 
persuade the federal government to support these 
amendments and take the proposed captivity test out of the 
proposed legislation? 

 
And the minister said, thank you. And he said, our officials 
have been in contact with the federal government. And then he 
went on to say, we think that the bill is generally an 
improvement over what has existed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the minister was not actively seeking 
the types of changes that the Premier is now advocating and that 
he’s now advocating. They’ve lost an entire year. And in fact 
they should have been on that even before then, before Bill 
C-52 was even introduced into the federal legislature. So I went 
on to ask a number of other questions for him. 
 
At that time, I indicated that the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities was concerned about fairness and the 
arbitration costs on the way the bill was drafted. I went on to 
say the bill needs to have better protections for shippers against 
the duopoly. And then I asked him, what will the Sask Party 
government be doing to correct the shortcomings of the bill a 

year ago — a year ago March 18th, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s response at that time, he said, I want 
to assure the member that our government and officials are 
doing all we can to influence Ottawa, to bring forward the best 
possible legislation in the interests of our producers. 
 
And they didn’t do anything, Mr. Speaker, until just today. We 
finally hear the Premier saying that this government, even 
though Minister Ritz is loath to regulate, that that is really the 
absolute solution that’s been required. It’s a solution that’s been 
called upon now by the NDP for several years. And I think it’s 
shameful that this government isn’t willing to acknowledge that 
and to sort of move forward and get the kind of regulatory 
changes that are needed so that farmers and producers in 
Saskatchewan aren’t held captive and indeed aren’t being 
robbed of, in some cases, estimates up to $8 billion of farm 
revenue that’s being taken out of farmers’ pockets this year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just want to go into a little bit more detail about some of these 
issues. One of the things I heard, Mr. Speaker, was that . . . 
Here’s an interesting statistic. In the fall of 1994, Canada 
exported 8.7 million tonnes of grain. Twenty years later, we 
exported 7.4 million tonnes of grain. So we have actually 
exported less grain this year than we did in 1994. The question 
is, what happened? And I think what the analysis is proving out 
is that as farmers, producers, the taxpayers, and grain shipping 
companies have introduced extreme efficiencies into grain 
transportation — longer trains, better throughputs — all of 
those things have really improved over the years.  
 
Where have these efficiencies fallen, Mr. Speaker? They have 
fallen into the pockets of the shareholders of the two railway 
monopolies in Canada. They’re not going to producers and 
they’re not going to shippers. And you know, at this point I’m 
focusing mostly on the impact on the producers. 
 
Right now we know that the shortfall is 55,000 cars. This is 
grain that has been ordered and the railways have promised to 
deliver. This is not grain that’s sitting in the bin and not even 
purchased yet, Mr. Speaker. They’re 55,000 cars behind on the 
contracts that have been entered into; 5 million tonnes of grain 
that orders are in for that have not been filled. 
 
We see, in the fall, the railways were moving about 10,000 cars. 
They’re now grinding down to 5,000 cars — half of that input 
because of weather issues. And certainly that’s something that 
happens in Canada. But what you see is the efficiencies that 
have been built in are actually causing problems for the railway 
now because they can’t move the long rails. They need more 
locomotives. 
 
Well what do we find out? That in 2012 we know that one of 
the railway companies, I believe it was CP, actually cut 400 
locomotives from their fleet in order to . . . Here we are. And 
CP announced in 2012 it decreased its workforce by 4,500 
people. They cut 4,500 jobs. That’s one railway. They reduced 
the railcars in its fleet. They took out 11,000 railcars in one 
year, Mr. Speaker, and they also pulled 400 locomotives in 
2012. So of course they can’t move the grain. They’re 
benefiting their shareholders, but they’re certainly not dealing 
with the surge capacity that they need to get this crop to the 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4463 

market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s being asked for? First of all we need more capacity. 
That can be regulated. We need a recovery plan for the 
carry-out that we’re dealing with. This carry-out is going to be a 
huge impact, and certainly other people have spoken about it, 
but we’re looking at possibly going right into 2015 unless, 
again, if there is legislation passed.  
 
You know, it just . . . It kind of strikes me odd because I just 
read, I think yesterday that Tim Hortons is building 500 new 
Tim Hortons in Canada this year because they can and because 
there’s an impetus to do that. So in this case, where there’s a 
will, there’s a way. For the railway, there’s no will and so 
there’s no way. And that’s the biggest problem we’re seeing 
with this type of monopoly in a grain transportation system. 
 
We’re going to hear a lot in the next few days about the grain 
revenue entitlement. And some people are referring to that as a 
cap, the grain revenue cap, and it’s a part of the system that was 
put in place when the lobbyists and the railway finally 
convinced the federal government to get rid of the Crow rate, 
which was supposed to be forever, if people recall. But 
anyways the Crow rate was dismantled and this grain revenue 
entitlement was put in place. 
 
And what I’m told, Mr. Speaker, is that we need to be very, 
very careful about what we ask for because we might get it. 
And the experts’ view is that if we remove the grain revenue 
entitlement, it would be a big mistake. Even adjusting it is 
dangerous, Mr. Speaker, because it’s an inflationary control 
mechanism. And what it does is it ensures that any escalation in 
freight rates associated with moving the grain is consistent with 
the rate of inflation. So it’s just an inflationary control 
mechanism. 
 
And in fact what I’ve heard is that the railways are actually 
using this to benefit and make more money. And one of the 
examples that was given was that they’re able to adjust the price 
of gas that they use at a 2000 level. And so they can actually 
gain more because the price of gas has exceeded the inflationary 
rate, so that they can actually save money through using this 
grain revenue entitlement. 
 
The other thing I think that’s very, very important for people in 
this legislature to take note of, if we’re going to start advocating 
for the elimination of the entitlement, is that it doesn’t work. If 
you think that removing the grain revenue entitlement is going 
to increase the delivery of grain, it simply isn’t going to work. 
And here’s an example: there’s no evidence that shows that 
shippers would get better service if it was eliminated. In fact 
there’s existing evidence that poor service and insufficient 
capacity would remain. And for example, Mr. Speaker, those 
55,000 cars that are behind right now, about half of them are in 
non-regulated corridors. Those non-regulated corridors are not 
subject to the revenue cap and yet they’re still not able to move 
the grain through the non-regulated corridors. So there’s no 
reason to think that if we remove the entitlement that it would 
give any positive benefit on getting our grain to the market. 
 
There’s a whole host of things that are at issue here, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don’t want to go on too much longer, although 
I’m tempted. But I think there’s some things that need to be 

placed upon the railways. And as the Premier and the minister 
are suggesting, it has to be regulated. First of all, there’s no 
consequences on the railway for providing an unsuitable car. 
Right now, if a shipper rejects the car, penalty $250 a day. If the 
railway provides an unsuitable car, no penalty. Supply and 
acceptance of railcars. Right now a shipper, if they’re not able 
to take delivery, if they order cars but for whatever reason they 
can’t take them, they’re charged up to a $250 fee per car. What 
happens if the railway fails to supply railcars? Nothing. 
Timeliness of service. If the shipper doesn’t load or unload the 
railcars in time, they’re charged $87 per car per day. What 
happens to the railway if they fail to deliver cars at a time set by 
the railway? Nothing. 
 
So again, over and over we see that the railways have 
absolutely no penalties, and we have to question why. And we 
have to question why we have a federal Agriculture minister 
who says he’s loath to regulate when we can see over and over 
these examples of where the railways have convinced the 
legislators that they should have it their way. 
 
[15:15] 
 
One of the things that we’ve been talking about is this 
monopoly of railways. And certainly the Premier and the 
minister have acknowledged that. If you look at the 
Competition Act in Canada right now, you can see how 
monopolies are dealt with under the Competition Act. So 
generally if a business has a market share of less than 35 per 
cent, there won’t be concerns about competition. If you have a 
market share of more than 35 per cent, there will be an 
examination of the issue, and the government will look into it. 
And if you have a market share over 65 per cent, there will 
immediately be examination of that competition rule, of that 
monopoly. 
 
Okay. So we said 65 per cent, the federal law kicks in. Guess 
what? CN and CP have 94 per cent of the market, but they’re 
not subject to the Competition Act in Canada. They’re exempt. 
So there again you have an example of this particular industry 
convincing the regulators that they should have special rules. 
And I know the history of the railways in Canada is deep and 
certainly long history, but over and over they have convinced 
the legislators that they need special treatment. 
 
Bill C-52 or the Fair Rail Freight Service Act, introduced last 
February I think, or it went through the House in March of last 
year or early last year anyways, basically, Mr. Speaker, it was 
flawed from the start. And certainly, as I indicated earlier, there 
was a number of calls for amendments to make it worse . . . 
make it better. But that didn’t happen. What was missed was 
that the whole idea of creating balance between railways and 
shippers was premised on the basis that there was a balance to 
begin with, but there wasn’t. There was no balance in place at 
first. And there was a number of other issues that were 
problematic with the bill. 
 
The arbitration provisions did not apply to the penalties. And 
you’ve heard the minister and the Premier speak about, why 
aren’t there rail service agreements? There’s a good reason 
why. There’s no shipper in Canada wants to enter into a rail 
service agreement right now with the railway because there’s no 
way to enforce the penalties. So what the shippers are saying is, 



4464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

we could spend hundreds and thousands of dollars drafting the 
best agreement, service agreement, that we could come up with, 
but we cannot get an arbitrator to rule on the penalty clauses. 
And therefore the railways continue to hold the hammer. So 
why would you, as a shipping company, spend hundreds of 
thousands of dollars drafting an agreement and negotiating it 
when it’s unenforceable? It just doesn’t make sense. 
 
The shippers pointed that out at the time when the bill was 
introduced last year, when it went through the committees and 
they asked for amendments, and Mr. Ritz’s response and the 
Minister of Transport’s response was a flat out no. They were 
loath to regulate. And so I’m hoping that this Premier and that 
this minister have the power to get him to reverse his point of 
view on this, Minister Ritz and the entire cabinet of the federal 
government, because this is, as the Premier pointed out, this is 
an incredibly, incredibly important issue. 
 
We need penalties for poor service. We need a fast-track 
arbitration process. These are substantive legislative changes 
that should have been made years ago, but it’s not too late, and 
if we’re dealing it as an emergency, which it now is, then they 
should be put in right away. There’s no reason to delay that. 
 
A number of other things that the shippers are calling for, and 
producers . . . And you know, the minister and the Premier have 
listed long lists of meetings they’ve had. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
been meeting too. And we’ve been meeting with producers and 
we’ve been meeting with farmers and we’re hearing the same 
concerns from the farmers that the Premier’s hearing from the 
heads of the companies and the officials that he’s meeting with. 
So this is a universal issue. It’s across all layers of the grain 
transportation and the agriculture industry here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things you’ll hear the railways say — and this really, 
really drives me crazy, Mr. Speaker — is they say you don’t 
build a church for Easter Sunday. So what that means is, the 
analogy is that you can’t put all the surge capacity in place for 
peak periods. Of course our grain, we want to move it in the 
fall. That’s the peak period for us, and we want our railways to 
be able to deliver the grain during that period. 
 
But what the speaker who made this comment likened it to was 
to your power utility. If you have a power utility like 
SaskPower that decides they don’t want surge capacity in place 
when it gets really cold, well then they would just turn off the 
heat. And for a utility, Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable. Same 
as Canada Post. We know that at Christmas time they have a lot 
more mail to deliver. Do you think they can say, oh we’ll have a 
carry-over and you’ll get your Christmas mail in September, 
Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, that just is not acceptable. 
 
What’s most concerning, I think, from a government 
perspective — it should be — is the loss of up to $8 billion in 
grain farmers’ pockets for the upcoming year. How can that be 
acceptable? We hear today the Minister of Finance talking 
about putting $1 billion into infrastructure. We’re looking at 
possibly $8 billion in one year out of farmers’ pockets because 
of the extra costs, because of the loss in prices. And yes, as all 
this is going on, Mr. Speaker, of course we know that the price 
of grain continues to fall. And farmers now can’t even get 
contracts. There’s no shipping company that will even take a 

contract because those 55,000 cars are non-delivering the 
contracts that the railways promised they could deliver in this 
last six months. So it just keeps going. 
 
And in fact one of the analogies that I heard recently was that 
this is like if you shut down . . . At an airport you’ve shut down 
one of the runways. All of a sudden there’s congestion and then 
there’s chaos. So you have people trying to book other flights 
and they’re trying to move into a different airline. And so all 
that busyness that is caused by the chaos is compounding the 
issue and it’s becoming, as we all know, a very crisis kind of 
situation. 
 
So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my 
colleagues are interested to weigh in on this issue, but right now 
I can tell you this: our team is prepared to support this motion 
and we’re going to fight for the problems of our producers 
alongside this government because we agree of the importance 
of the issue. We’re very disappointed that it was allowed to go 
this far, and it should have been dealt with much sooner. But we 
want action, Mr. Speaker, and we do. We want it now. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I as well would like 
to just lend one more voice to the seriousness of this issue for 
our agricultural producers in this province and really to the 
economy of our province if you look at how involved 
agriculture is in the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to talk with, you know, 
all stakeholders throughout the industry but in particular talked 
with many producers over the course of the last number of 
weeks and months. And, Mr. Speaker, just again the importance 
of this issue to our producers is first and foremost and therefore 
first and foremost to the importance of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to have a few comments on how we 
. . . where we are. And really what we are in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is we have a large amount of exports, whether those 
exports are potash, whether those exports are lumber with the 
increasing lumber industry coming back on stream in the North, 
Mr. Speaker. We have containers in and out of the province as 
well as oil leaving the province, Mr. Speaker, as well as our 
agricultural products. Many of these products are leaving by 
rail, Mr. Speaker. Some of them do have some other 
opportunities to leave and other methods and safe methods such 
as pipelines, Mr. Speaker. And we encourage that discussion on 
the promotion of a number of pipelines out of Western Canada 
as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the long and the short in where we are today 
is that we are about 50 or 55,000 cars behind on our grain 
exports to the coast, Mr. Speaker, and this is most notable when 
you just look at where the grain is, Mr. Speaker. And first of all, 
our producers have most definitely done their job, as they 
produced a record crop in Saskatchewan, but not only in 
Saskatchewan, in Western Canada. Our crop in Saskatchewan 
was 38 million metric tons this year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 48 per 
cent above the 10-year average and 27 per cent above our 
previous record last year, Mr. Speaker. Western Canada, our 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4465 

production is about 75 million tonnes, Saskatchewan being a 
significant portion of that, Mr. Speaker. And combined with 
that, as of last fall we had about a 6 or 7 million tonne 
carry-over from last year. 
 
And when you look at that crop, just as of a few weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker, we have about 95 per cent of our Prairie inland 
terminal space is full. Our elevators in essence are really 
plugged. And, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the port capacity, 
we’re at about 57 per cent; 55, 57 per cent of that capacity is 
full. So really the problem lies between those two points, 
between the Prairies . . . And that doesn’t include all of the 
grain that’s still left on farm. That’s just in our inland terminals. 
The problem lies between our delivery points in the Prairies and 
our ports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The result of that are numerous. You know, demurrage on 
ships; there’s ships waiting in the ports, Mr. Speaker. But really 
the results that our producers see are the lack of delivery 
options that they have right now on products that they’ve had 
contracted for delivery last November, last December. As well 
as, Mr. Speaker, with the lack of those delivery options we’re 
also seeing an ever-increasing basis on our products that are 
delivered. And, Mr. Speaker, this is reflective of the lower price 
that producers are seeing, as actually the world price is still 
there, but with the increasing basis, the market signal is that the 
price is lower to our producers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just go to the recommendations that 
we released earlier this week, and really you can separate the 
issue or the challenge into two challenges. One is more 
immediate, and that’s this year’s crop and we need to get that 
moving, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a couple of things that need 
to happen in very short order, and the first is we need more 
railcars going to our port facilities, Mr. Speaker, whether it be 
Vancouver, whether it be Prince Rupert, whether it be our south 
markets and, eventually as the frost comes out, our north 
markets and our eastern market. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
desperately need more transport on it. We need more railcars. 
We need more grain moving to the port. 
 
And in light of that, in the next number of weeks and months, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to watch our basis and have our basis 
start to decrease because as producers are selling and 
contracting grain into this market, this year’s grain and next 
year’s grain, Mr. Speaker, that basis, when it’s wide like that, 
it’s when our producers realize their loss. So it’s very 
important, Mr. Speaker, that in the next number of weeks that 
our rail cars increase their traffic; and two, that we’re able to 
push this basis down, Mr. Speaker. That is the immediate pinch 
points that we have in the system. 
 
And I can quite say that I’m to some degree encouraged with 
some of the discussions we’ve had over the past number of 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to seeing some reprieve 
as we move forward here. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when you look at pinch points in the system, 
and one of the pinch points quite obviously is our rail capacity, 
in particular in the cold weather, but another pinch point, Mr. 
Speaker, that we also need to keep our eye on is our port 
capacity and our ability to unload at port terminals, Mr. 
Speaker. All of these things affect what level we can get up to 

with our deliveries to the coast. And then, Mr. Speaker, rail is 
one and port capacity is another. So also in our press release 
here last week, we did call for 24-hour unloading capacity at the 
ports, which I think if we do get up into a significant increased 
number of rail cars unloading at the port, it will be important 
that we’re able to unload them there. 
 
Another item that we’ve called for, and actually an important 
item, is some transparency in the system. And we’ve supported 
the federal government on the moves that they’ve made towards 
some transparency in the system as well as we’ve asked, Mr. 
Speaker, to even further that to weekly transparency so that you 
can follow the transportation through the system — cars spotted 
in the Prairies, cars loaded on the Prairies, cars delivered to port 
as well as cars unloaded on the port, Mr. Speaker. What that 
does on a weekly basis is it allows anyone — whether it’s a 
producer, whether it’s a member of the government, whether 
it’s a rail line or a rail company, a grain company or a rail 
company, pardon me — to have a look and ensure that the 
system is fluid and that it’s moving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to talk a little bit again about some of the 
pinch points in the system. Like I said, this last year Western 
Canada had a record crop, about 75 million tonnes with a 6 or 7 
million tonne carry-over. Mr. Speaker, if we’re able to get up 
into the . . . increase our number of cars, there’s been different 
reports come out, but one of the reports had mentioned if we get 
up into the 10,000 car range a week for the next . . . until 
harvest, that we’re still looking at carrying over maybe 20, 25 
million metric tonnes in Western Canada. But if you put that on 
top of an already average year — let’s say that we have this 
next year of 60, 65 million tonnes of production — we’re right 
back this fall in the situation that we were last fall. So, Mr. 
Speaker, this is an urgent issue for our producers, but it also has 
some lingering effects. And as our Minister of Agriculture said, 
and others in this House, we need to work on the urgent issue, 
but we also need to work on a long-term correction to this so 
that it absolutely does not happen again. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you . . . And again just back to our press 
release. Some of the recommendations that we had, four of 
them are long-term around service level agreements. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve recommended that the grain companies and the 
rail companies look at these service level agreements and have 
them with reciprocity and with penalties going both ways, Mr. 
Speaker. And what that will do is it will create some 
accountability between those two parties. Whether that comes 
by legislation or by a corporate contractual agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, we will support whatever it is, whatever methods can 
speed that up and get that into place as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of that then, Mr. Speaker, is for 
the grain companies then to look at their contracts with 
producers and again have some reciprocity and penalties in 
there. And, Mr. Speaker, what this will create is it will create 
some accountability, some accountability, Mr. Speaker, from 
the farm gate to the port on our grain deliveries. Right now 
what’s happening is our producers are . . . There’s one pool of 
money, and it’s from our producers’ product, Mr. Speaker, and 
our producers are paying. They’re paying for this, Mr. Speaker, 
and we definitely need to have some accountability that starts at 



4466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

their farm gate, follows itself through the system right to the 
port wherever that may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again with our long-term recommendations, we again ask for 
more transparency on the cars and the loads. And as our 
Premier had alluded to this morning, Mr. Speaker, we need to 
look at other options. Right now we have the predominant 
amount of our grain is on an east-west delivery cycle. Mr. 
Speaker, all options need to be on the table. If there’s any other 
opportunities — not that one answer will solve everything — 
but any other opportunities that are out there and are available, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to look at them to take some of this 
new-norm production that we have in our prairies to move some 
of that to whatever markets we can around the world. 
 
I’d like to just talk a little bit about the last week and a half. I 
had the opportunity to get back into my constituency and talk 
with some different producers and get to some provincial 
hockey games and some curling bonspiels and just discuss with 
guys. And one local challenge that I believe is in that 
north-of-Saskatoon area is there is quite an oat market that has 
developed in that north-of-Saskatoon area. And a lot of those 
oats, Mr. Speaker, are heading for the US. They’re heading to 
US millers. And numerous guys I’ve talked to have numerous 
carloads of producer cars, producer cars that were contracted for 
November and have not yet been loaded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talked to one fellow with 24 cars contracted, another guy with 
24 carloads contracted, another guy with 28 carloads contracted, 
as well as I did talk to an oat buyer. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
hand-to-mouth system that our oat millers in the US are 
working on — and our producers have the product, the good 
Canadian product, and they just are unable to get it there — is 
very real. It’s very real. The millers are on virtually a day’s 
worth of supply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a testament to that, one producer I did talk to had 28 
cars booked with an oat miller, and they’re sending trucks to get 
them. They’re getting trucks to four hours north of Regina, a 
community up there, 100 trucks to pick up 28 carloads of oats, 
Mr. Speaker, and they are trucking it to Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 
Mr. Speaker, I think the cost of trucking those oats that distance 
speaks to the urgency to get our product to its export positions 
or to a position where it can be milled or wherever that sale 
point may be. 
 
Again talking with local producers, you know, we discussed 
different challenges that are out there. And of course the first 
one is, you know, many of them have November, December 
contracts for all sorts of grain — I mentioned oats — but many 
of those have not been delivered on. And there are other 
options. I mentioned that they’re trucking the oats to Iowa, but 
there’s other guys that are looking at other options. But a lot of 
that grain, Mr. Speaker, just simply has not been delivered yet 
and is creating some cash crunch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The lack of delivery again is increasing the basis which is 
creating trouble for uncontracted grain this year, but it’s also 
creating some troubles as producers look to contract next year. 
The basis is wide going into next fall. And as guys start to sell 
next year’s crop, Mr. Speaker, they in many cases are getting 
down to cost-of-production values on their crop. 
 

So this is a significant issue for our Saskatchewan producers, 
and it’s one that this Minister of Agriculture, this Premier, and 
other ministers are standing up for Saskatchewan producers and 
working with whatever stakeholders that we can, whether it be 
railways, working with grain companies, Mr. Speaker, working 
with the federal government who actually is in charge of 
changing legislation on this, Mr. Speaker. There’s discussions 
going on with the federal government, but most of all, most of 
all, Mr. Speaker, listening to our producers and working with 
them and taking their advice on how we move forward on this 
issue in the short term to get rid of this year’s crop, to get into it 
so that we’re in a marketable position and get our basis down so 
we can market next year’s crop, but in the long term so that we 
can create some accountability from the farm gate to the port so 
that we don’t run into this situation again, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re going to keep working on that. 
 
I’m encouraged to hear that members of the opposition are also 
going to support this motion today. And I’d like to indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, that I will be supporting this motion today on behalf of 
the producers across the province and in Western Canada. So 
thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter the discussion here today and provide some supportive 
words towards the motion that’s been brought forward here 
today and certainly do support effective and appropriate 
legislative measures in an immediate fashion to resolve the 
grain transportation crisis that’s such an issue for so many 
across our province and for our economy frankly as a whole, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have to recognize is that the current environment in 
Saskatchewan was one that we had this record crop for which 
there was a great pride of this province. As weeks and months 
advanced throughout the late summer months, it was with great 
pride that we realized as a province and that producers knew 
that they had one of the finest crops in their history. That crop 
turned out to be the record crop for this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and was a point of pride for government and the province as a 
whole. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the reality now for producers 
is that record crop is sitting in bins all across Saskatchewan, 
hasn’t been marketed, hasn’t been moved to port, and that 
producers are left in the lurch. Producers are left with bills to 
pay. Producers are left with loans that are due. And of course 
they’re setting up and organizing for another growing season, 
leaving them in a very precarious, very vulnerable environment. 
 
It’s without doubt that the producers of Saskatchewan deserve 
better than they’ve received to date from rail companies and 
from both governments — the provincial government and the 
federal government. They deserve action to get their product to 
market, and that’s what we need to be pushing both levels of 
government to ensure can occur. 
 
The sad reality though, Mr. Speaker, is that as producers have 
been left without an ability to move their grain to market, 
they’ve experienced a collapse in the commodity markets. And 
even in resolving the immediate grain crisis as we need to and 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4467 

taking the steps for the long term as we must, Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t resolve the challenge facing producers that, resulting 
from this record crop for which they can be rightfully proud of, 
now are never going to be paid the adequate dollars that they 
should be paid. So there’s all sorts of pressures that the 
producers are facing across Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course we know that resolving the inadequate rail 
performance in Saskatchewan is important not just for those 
producers all across this province — and it’s critical for them, 
Mr. Speaker — it’s important to our economy as a whole. 
We’re a proud export-driven economy, Mr. Speaker, with 
pursuit as a government and with support on most fronts to 
increase those exports but without an adequate plan to make 
sure that rails will perform, make sure that producers can get 
their product to get to market or other exports for that matter as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now a lot of what we’re experiencing this year was rather 
foreseeable. And that’s why it’s a concern to us that we’re 
entering in at this late date here in March of this year, spring, 
Mr. Speaker, because what we knew is that when that crop was 
in its late season last summer, this was a tremendous crop. In 
fact there were all sorts of news releases from government — 
rightfully so — celebrating that. But there were no meaningful 
actions from that government, that Agriculture minister, that 
Premier, to make sure the planning was in place to move that 
crop to market. And it shouldn’t have been as a surprise. It 
should’ve been no surprise. 
 
Dating back a number of years, I believe back to about 2008, 
the current federal government put together a panel to review 
rail transportation with an aim to, I believe, with an aim to 
improve transportation logistics. And I believe that panel, that 
group took some time with their work. They did some good 
work though. And when those recommendations came forward 
in 2010, and they came forward again in years after that, there 
was no action from the federal government to address the 
concerns that they were bringing forward. And you know, it 
needs to be said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, setting aside the marketing debate over the 
Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, but setting aside the 
marketing debate about the Canadian Wheat Board, there’s little 
debate within the agricultural community about the important 
role that it played within transportation logistics, the movement 
of grain, the organization of these processes in an orderly way 
that served producers and giving them some important clout in 
the market when they needed it most. 
 
You know, I remember. As those debates move forward, those 
discussions move forward, and as the federal and provincial 
governments moved unilaterally to dismantle the Wheat Board, 
I sat in many halls all across this province, Mr. Speaker, 
listening to producers who were saying that, setting aside the 
marketing role of the Wheat Board, what’s going to fill the gap 
on the side of transportation logistics? Who’s going to be 
fulfilling the roles for ensuring that the grain, the product, can 
get to market? 
 
And this was something that was brought forward directly to 
the federal government — brought forward directly to the 
provincial government if they cared to have listened, Mr. 

Speaker. And they had a responsibility in dismantling a process 
that had, on the side of transportation, served producers well. 
They had a responsibility to fill the gap and to ensure that there 
were some structures in place, some actions taken to make sure 
that the rail system would perform with the lost role of the 
Wheat Board in transportation and the lost clout that was so 
important. 
 
So the current reality is we have a record crop that’s sitting in 
bins all across the province and I understand as many as 50 
ships sitting in the Burrard Inlet right now waiting for grain. 
The problem is the grain’s not getting there, and of course every 
day that they sit there, they’re charging demurrage back to 
Saskatchewan shippers, producers. That comes directly out of 
the bottom line of any farm operation in this province, directly 
out of the bottom line of producers. 
 
We have the current environment that’s been left unchanged by 
the federal government and this provincial government of a 
duopoly that simply hasn’t been performing. And this isn’t new, 
Mr. Speaker. Producers and shippers have been speaking to this 
matter for many, many years, many years, calling for action, 
calling for an improved environment. And right now in this 
duopoly of two big rail companies that have full control over all 
of the movement of grain in essence on those two major rail 
lines here in Canada. 
 
And producers, farmers across Saskatchewan are held captive 
by this environment, Mr. Speaker, with no transit alternatives 
and the impact of course felt by them, felt by the fact that their 
record crop is sitting in bins not able to get to market, felt by the 
fact that when that grain may start to move, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re going to be getting a significant percentage less because 
of the commodity price collapse that producers have 
experienced, and producers that are in fact incurring the 
expenses of those ships sitting in port, not receiving grain. 
 
It’s quite simply a failure to perform as a rail system, and the 
rail companies certainly need to be held to account on this front, 
something that this government and the federal government 
have seemed very unwilling, very reluctant to do, Mr. Speaker, 
seeming that they’re far more comfortable treating those two 
big rail companies with kid gloves, if you will, Mr. Speaker, 
siding with big rail instead of siding with the producers and 
standing up for the producers of this province who deserve 
action. 
 
[15:45] 
 
You know, if you just look at some of the collapse in 
commodity prices and the impact that that’s going to have on 
operations across Saskatchewan, on businesses across 
Saskatchewan, we have wheat that just that past fall was selling 
at $7 a bushel that’s now selling at $4.80. You have canola that 
was selling at $12 a bushel that’s now selling for $8.50. Those 
are real dollars that are taken out of Saskatchewan’s economy 
and taken out of producers’ operations all across our province. 
 
So it’s fair to say that action’s needed today. It’s fair to say that 
we’ll support a motion that will call for effective and 
appropriate legislation to resolve this crisis. But the reality is 
that both the provincial government and the federal government 
have been asleep at the switch on this one, Mr. Speaker, and 



4468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

have been unwilling to act in the interests of producers, all too 
willing to side with the big rail companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s just, you know, review just the circumstance of one of 
those rail companies who hold producers captive, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know, I heard the Premier pointing at the ports, you 
know, and the fact that workers have weekends. Now the reality 
is that I don’t think they’re actually getting grain right now. 
That’s the big part of the challenge. 
 
And you know, I find it interesting that, I find it interesting that 
there’s no mention of the fact that one of those big rail 
companies and CP I believe in 2012, you know, cut a massive 
amount, a massive amount of capacity at a time where that 
capacity’s needed right now. And I believe they actually at that 
point in time, they cut — let me check here — 4,500 jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, 4,500 jobs, Mr. Speaker. They also cut 11,000 rail 
companies or rail cars — sorry, Mr. Speaker — 11,000 rail cars 
and over 400 locomotives. That’s what CP was doing in 2012, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d urge the Premier not to get distracted about the cause for 
the lack of capacity in the system right now. And as we’ve been 
urging him for months, Mr. Speaker — and it seems as though 
there’s a willingness finally to take this issue seriously — is that 
there’s actions that are going to be required that, you know, that 
maybe the rail companies he likes to side with simply won’t 
like, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? Saskatchewan 
producers, we’ll side with Saskatchewan producers any day of 
the week, and I guess the Premier can decide where he fits 
within that debate. 
 
You know, we also want to be cautious as we go through this 
process. We want to go through . . . be cautious here. I hear 
from the Premier here today a willingness to scrap the revenue 
cap, which provides just a little bit of protection to producers 
about the price that they can be charged to move their grain. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s wise for us to be 
supporting the federal government and this government to be 
removing some of the protection that’s in place for producers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Actually what I think we should be doing is I think we should 
be strengthening the protection for producers across the 
province. And I think, you know, I think I would caution the 
Premier with his openness to a call that will further reduce 
protection of producers at a time where they need some support, 
at a time where they don’t have the clout that they deserve and 
even to, you know, to I guess challenge the notion the Premier’s 
putting forward that somehow he wants to remove the revenue 
caps from protection on the price of moving grain for producers 
at this point in time. 
 
I’ll challenge that, is that I believe of the 55,000 cars that are 
waiting right now, that at least half of those or around half of 
those, Mr. Speaker, are running on corridors that are not 
regulated, corridors that aren’t subject to the revenue cap is my 
understanding, Mr. Speaker. So you know, I think that that very 
piece in itself challenges the notion that somehow the revenue 
cap is the piece that is holding back, you know, the transport of 
grain for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
So I don’t support the elimination of, I don’t support the 

elimination of the revenue cap. And I urge the Premier to be 
reconsidering his push on that front, because again this is 
something that simply weakens protections for producers at a 
time where they’ve already had clout dismantled by that 
government and the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we go back and look at this bit of I guess history on this 
front, as I say, this was very foreseeable. Producers have been 
speaking for years about the failure of the rail companies to 
perform, the rail system to perform. People like our Agriculture 
critic have spent extensive time questioning that Agriculture 
minister and pushing him to take serious the need to make 
improvements to the rail system, speaking about federal 
amendments that were in place that would have actually 
allowed some enforceability for service agreements that 
currently are in an environment that I understand that are 
toothless, that simply can’t be enforced. And that was done well 
before this crisis of grain transportation. That’s last year 
sometime. 
 
And as I say, over the course of the past few years I’ve been — 
and I know many of our members, and I would hope 
government would have heard some of this — I’ve been in 
town hall after town hall and churches and community centres 
where I’ve heard from producers the concern over who was 
going to be there to organize the orderly distribution of 
transportation of grain after the dismantling of the Wheat 
Board. And again setting aside the marketing debate on the 
Wheat Board, this government failed to listen to Saskatchewan 
producers who were clear to this government, who were clear in 
community meetings that there was an important role to be 
fulfilled in making sure there was orderly transportation of 
grain. 
 
Now we support . . . As I say here today, we have a crisis in this 
province that needs to be resolved. Our producers deserve 
nothing less. We’ve been calling for actions, Mr. Speaker. I can 
go back to January of this year where we were urging 
government to take this issue seriously — brushed off by that 
Agriculture minister, brushed off by the Premier who entered 
the debate late, Mr. Speaker, the discussion late, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And actually at the time in January, that Agriculture minister 
actually said he wasn’t even sure if there was any answers that 
he, you know, could provide or if solutions even exist. His 
quote was, if answers exist. You know, it’s not really the can-do 
spirit, can-do attitude of Saskatchewan people who deserve 
something better from their Agriculture minister and that 
government at a time when they needed it most. 
 
But we will support measures to get this grain to market, to get 
this record crop to port. And certainly we’d appreciate 
consideration within that. What we’ve been hearing from 
Saskatchewan producers, aspects such as the concept of open 
access or joint running rights, ensuring that there’s a level of 
competition right now in . . . entering in some competition to a 
duopoly that has full control, making sure there’s some 
alternatives that are in place for producers is something that 
they simply don’t have right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s wrong with ensuring that there’s 
opportunities for other rail companies and for shortlines to gain 
access to those rail lines and to be a part of the solution? We’ve 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4469 

got those 13 shortline rail companies here in Saskatchewan that 
could be a part of the solution, Mr. Speaker, and we should be 
considering that front. 
 
Of course, something we’ve been calling for since January, 
something that was brushed off by the Premier and that 
Agriculture minister, was performance standards to be 
established, but for them also to be enforceable. And this is 
something that of course there were amendments federally over 
a year ago that would have ensured just that. Now we hear that 
the Premier and the Agriculture minister support performance 
standards and service agreements, which is good. 
 
But we had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, in the review of the 
Act and with amendments of the Act, that were failed to be 
supported by this government and failed to be supported by the 
Harper Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. So that opportunity’s been 
there. 
 
Now that being said, we should be acting on this. And we 
should make sure that there’s performance standards. We 
should make sure that agreements are able to be entered into, 
but most importantly that they’re enforceable, that they’re 
enforceable so that producers don’t get the raw side of this. 
 
Right now the way it works, the rail companies, there’s all sorts 
of penalties that can be applied back to shippers, but there’s no 
reciprocity to that and there’s no penalties that return the other 
way. And we believe that when penalties are applied from 
performance standards that those penalties, those fines should 
actually be paid directly back to the shippers. Because they’re 
the ones that are bearing the brunt because of the failure to 
perform of rail companies and the decisions and the failure to 
perform of that government and the federal Conservative 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that there is important considerations around fleet 
size. I talked about the gutted capacity of the rail companies and 
there certainly could be a role for legislation to be speaking to 
the number of rail cars, the number of locomotives. There’s all 
sorts of options to achieve that through locomotive leasing and 
otherwise, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the kind of measures as well 
that we’d be calling for. As I say, there’s been amendments to 
the Fair Rail Freight Service Act that have been put forward in 
the past that haven’t been supported by Conservatives that 
could have been awfully helpful, Mr. Speaker, to ensure we 
never got producers in this province into the mess it is with this 
grain transportation crisis that this province is experiencing. 
 
And in the meantime, there has to be some considerations. I 
didn’t hear one word about the borrowing pressures on 
producers, the financing pressures on producers who are 
planning for the next growing season and in many ways who 
are in a spot that are not going to be able to be responding to the 
timelines of their borrowing requirements. And certainly there’s 
a role for banks and credit unions on this front, but there is also 
an important role for federal and provincial governments. And I 
think of the federal government specifically where I know they 
have a short-term borrowing program. I believe it extends up to 
$400,000 dollars and, you know, that’s something that the 
federal government has control over here right now. 
 
The federal government needs to be making sure they’re 

reviewing the terms of that short-term borrowing agreement to 
make sure that producers are enabled to prepare the inputs 
needed for the next growing season. And you know, when you 
look at this, this is as a result of actions of government, actions 
of rail companies that we’re into this mess. Why should 
producers be left out to pay the tab or to take the hit for 
decisions that weren’t theirs, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I know that one of the considerations on the borrowing 
piece from the federal government, I believe that $400,000 that 
gets advanced, the 100,000 of that is interest free. And then the 
next, I believe the next portion up to 400,000 has an interest 
rate to it. And the producers themselves, you know, it’s 
disappointing for them and I’m not sure very fair, Mr. Speaker, 
that they’re left paying interest on that portion from the federal 
government, a federal government, Mr. Speaker, who has 
played a direct part in creating the grain transportation crisis or, 
at the very least, certainly not resolving the grain transportation 
crisis. 
 
So as we look at all these measures, we need to make sure that 
the federal government is looking at its federal agriculture 
programs and its borrowing programs, and making sure they’re 
making accommodations back to Saskatchewan producers that 
will allow seed to go into the ground here this spring and to 
make sure we have a productive growing season and not to be 
left leaving producers to be paying the tab, left out in the cold 
because of decisions and inactions of the provincial 
government, the federal government, and rail companies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there’s a lot of action to be taken, which is why we support 
here today, and we stand with government to support, albeit a 
rather open-ended motion, but we do support appropriate and 
effective legislative measures to ensure we can get our grain to 
market. 
 
But that doesn’t include, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, as was put 
on the table here today by the Premier, to be scrapping 
protections like the revenue cap that have been in place for 
producers. And it doesn’t and it shouldn’t allow a federal 
government to interpret that open-ended nature of the support 
here today, to mean any sort of measure they need to take. What 
we need to do is look at the common sense solutions put 
forward by producers, some of the ones that we’ve discussed 
here today, some of what we’ve put on the table, and we need to 
work together to make sure we can get the grain to market, here 
in this province and right across our country. 
 
So as I say, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be supporting the motion and 
we’ll be looking for action. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I enter this very 
important debate . . . and it is a very important debate. This is a 
debate that affects thousands and thousands of producers. It 
affects their livelihoods, Mr. Speaker. It affects their future and 
it affects the future of this province. 
 
I listened to the speech just before me and I was a little bit 
disappointed in the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. He 



4470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

seemed to be going towards a bit of partisan . . . And I think this 
is something that we should be working together, not to keep 
going down the partisan route. So with the speaker that spoke 
before me, I would say I was disappointed, and I think the 
producers of this province would be a bit too. They would like 
this legislature to be working together to come up with 
solutions and be sending a solid message instead of trying to 
make this a little bit of a partisan avenue. 
 
Now you know, I’ve been in this legislature a long time, and I 
know which side stands up for agriculture. But I’ll just go back 
just to our side. On May 31st of 2013 the Ministry of Highways 
and Agriculture officials met with CP to outline the agriculture 
targets and Saskatchewan’s plan for growth. They already knew 
that there’s going to have to be changes in how grain is going to 
be marketed and moved out of this province. In June of 2013, 
we’d been working on the New West Partnership port capacity 
study. Also July 24th, the Ministry of Agriculture officials have 
met with Mark Hemmes of Quorum. The Minister and deputy 
minister of Highways have also met with CP in Vancouver in 
early October. We’ve been discussing this in caucus all summer 
and our officials and our ministers have been working. 
 
[16:00] 
 
We know this is a problem. It’s an ongoing problem. I farmed 
all my life, and so coming from my constituency, this isn’t the 
first problem we’ve had with the movement of grain. And as the 
farming practices are changing — and I’ve seen them change — 
every year we’re going to be, we should be, and are growing 
more grain. If you just check the past 20 years, we’re going to 
be growing more grain as farming practices are changing. 
That’s a new normal norm and we know we need to address 
that problem. 
 
I know the members . . . I’ve also heard, it’s been brought to my 
attention about the Wheat Board. You know, the Wheat Board 
never worked on the transportation end of it. I can remember 
that they put two bushels out an acre. That’s what you could 
take off the combine when I a kid. Then I think it went to three 
bushels and then it went up to maybe a call. But I can remember 
a 25 per cent call most years and not getting another call till 
March. So the first six months I had 25 per cent is all I could 
haul, and that was only then less than 50 per cent of what they’d 
give me of the price. And that’s what farmers had to live on for 
six or seven months. 
 
So saying the Wheat Board being gone, no, that was never the 
problem with the transportation system. This system has been to 
capacity for a number of years. I mean, naturally there’s more 
production. There’s more oil. This province is growing. This 
West is growing. So naturally there’s going to be more rail 
movement. 
 
I have a couple of mainlines that go through my constituency. I 
mean, I see oil cars moving on it constantly. I see cars coming 
in, like vehicles, trucks, cars, lumber moving out. If you go up 
on that Raymore line, you go on that Semans line, you go up 
around Watrous, I mean, in fact I usually . . . I’m getting calls 
from constituents who have to sit and wait for 20 minutes while 
a train goes by. And it’s like every 20 minutes there’s a train 
going down the main line hauling goods. This is the norm for 
Saskatchewan. 

And this is why we have to address this problem. This is 
something we’re working to the long-range future. One of them 
is south. We ship lots of things south to the States. You know, 
oil is one of them. You know, so there’s no reason why grain 
can’t move that way. And this isn’t the first time that it’s been 
brought up in the south. I can remember when the ports used to 
go on strike. We’d get a good crop, getting decent prices. What 
would happen? There’d be a strike at the port. And we’re sitting 
there and sitting there and there’s no movement of grain. No 
movement. Ships sitting there, you know. And there was always 
talk of, well, maybe we could ship through the States, go 
around the ports, you know. 
 
So this is an ongoing issue, and I think this is an issue that we 
recognize is very important. And we have a team and we have a 
government here that has to work, and we have to work with the 
federal government because this is going to be a problem that’s 
ongoing as we grow. 
 
You know, I can discuss many of the constituents that I talk 
about, the farmers. You know, I just had a guy phone me. He 
had a durum call for December. They were going to take it in 
February; now they’ve kicked it back to April. Well he says, 
you know, April the road bans are on. He says, fields are wet. 
It’s in bags. He says, I’ll never get my semis in. I mean the bags 
are on a hill, but where he had to put the bags, you’ve got to 
drive through a couple of low spots. So he says, now I’m faced 
with the prospect. He says, I have moved some canola. Do I 
load up these bags? Do I bring them home now so that I can 
haul them in April and not be pulling semis stuck out of fields? 
I don’t know if anybody’s ever had a semi stuck, loaded with 
grain. It’s not a lot of fun. So that’s an extra cost, that’s an extra 
cost the farmers are looking at, at all the time that needs to be 
addressed on here. 
 
And I think the railroads aren’t addressing this problem. I mean, 
I think they’ve ignored it for a number of years. And I think 
what we’re doing and what the federal government is doing to 
work on an emergency program now, but to work on a 
long-range program because that is what’s needed. We need to 
sit down with the grain companies, with the rail companies and 
say, listen, this grain has to go to port, and it has to go on time 
because it costs our producers money. They’ve lost, you know, 
you talk about the bases right now. I mean, the price is still 
decent on the coast, but our farmers are losing anywhere from 
$1 or more a bushel. That’s gone. That should be there. That 
should be in their pocket. They should be able to spend that 
because of the movement, non-movement of grain. And that is a 
very serious issue. 
 
And this is going on, like as we go into 2015, they say it’s 
going to be backed up. Well we grow another good crop, we’ve 
already . . . prospects are good. We have a very good snow 
cover out our way, as through most of our province. We had 
rain last fall. Most of the producers are expecting to grow at 
least a normal to above average crop again, and their bins are 
full. And also they’re facing the financial crunch of it also. But 
never mind that this could be an ongoing problem. 
 
So you know, I’ve had a lot of calls and so have many of the 
MLAs here. And they know that this is going to have to be 
addressed, as we move forward, with solutions. And this has to 
be a non-partisan, non-partisan issue. This is where all levels of 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4471 

government have to work together to make sure that this goes 
on, and we can’t be nitpicking about little partisan issues. And I 
think our Premier’s been very fair in that, that he’s been saying 
that this is non-partisan. We have to work with any party that is 
willing to. And I acknowledge the opposition for supporting 
this motion. I acknowledge that. That’s good. We have to work 
together because this is one of the most important issues that’s 
probably going to be facing rural Saskatchewan this spring and 
this summer and also as we carry on to the fall and the winter. 
 
You know, as producers we’ve learned where we have to 
contract grain in advance. I mean I can remember when you just 
loaded up the one-ton and you went in, usually that afternoon, 
usually had to shovel it to fill it. Them days are long gone, and 
the companies have moved in that direction where they actually 
are moving towards they want you to contract two months, 
three months in advance. And I don’t have a problem with that. 
Most farmers don’t. It gives them security of what’s going to be 
ahead, how they can do their planning to buy fertilizer, their 
seed, or what the money’s coming in. But when they contract 
two months in advance and them two months come up and they 
can’t move it, then they’re a little upset. And I don’t blame 
them. 
 
You know, there is lots of grain that was contracted in 
November and October. And farmers will contract it early 
because they’ll think maybe they might think a 10-cent loss or 
15-cent loss on price to move it early, because to move grain in 
December and January in this country costs you money if it hits 
30 below. We’ve had some really long, cold, hard winters. And 
if you’re trying to run diesels and start augers and push snow, 
that costs you money. 
 
Well right now many producers are doing that. Right now 
they’re trying to move their grain in January and February in 
the coldest, most miserable months when they contracted it for 
October, November delivery. And that’s why they’re very upset 
about it, and I don’t blame them. I’m upset myself as a 
producer. I don’t like to haul grain in January or February. It 
costs you money. It costs you more money to move grain when 
it’s colder than it does in the summer or in the fall. 
 
And now as we go to spring you run into road bans. You run 
into wet roads. You run into where you can’t get to your bins on 
account of very wet conditions. So those are the reasons that 
farmers will contract on a certain place or a certain area and 
plan. Or if you get custom work done, that way you can work to 
hire to bring in the semis to line up. Okay they’ll say, the first 
week in November we’re moving 10,000 bushels. Line that up 
with the trucking company. But right now it’s like you go call 
by call. 
 
I can remember on our line in Davidson every Monday is when 
the two trains come. We’ve got two terminals and you go there 
Monday morning. Did the train come? No, no. Why not? They 
didn’t have an answer, the grain companies. You know, the rail 
companies just phone and said no, it’s not coming. Obviously 
shortage of cars, shortage of power, which they call . . . That’s a 
new thing, That’s how they call about their units; they call them 
power now. When I was a kid, you know, you actually called it 
an engine. But they talk power now. 
 
You know, and so, you know, I’ve talked to . . . I actually know 

one guy that’s an engineer, and he just says, yes. He says, we’re 
short of power. That’s the term he used. We don’t have enough 
engines out there, he says. We’re not . . . And he says, we’re 
moving all kinds of commodities, just not grain. And I think 
they’re ignoring grain a little bit. And I think they need to be 
reminded of that. And I think, and which we’re working, 
knowing that this has to be a priority for them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s an issue that is not going to be solved very 
quickly because you’re talking about monopolies. I noticed the 
members opposite talked about monopolies quite a bit. Yet I’m 
glad to see that they’re not in that favour of them because 
apparently when the Wheat Board was there, they were quite in 
favour of monopoly. So hopefully they’ve moved away from 
that. 
 
But anyways, this is a problem that is going to be ongoing, and 
it needs to be addressed as we move forward. And there is 
various ways of doing it. We have the delegation. We have our 
ministers that are working towards that. The knowing that there 
is different avenues; it’s just not a one simple solution. I think it 
has to be good in conjunction of various things to get this grain 
moving, and to make sure that it’s moving. And it’s something 
that we have to work with the federal government because this 
is across Canada. The ports, whether it’s in Vancouver or 
they’re moving to the Great Lakes or if we move south to the 
States, I mean those are issues that are going to be dealt with a 
lot at the federal end, you know. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know our time is getting short, but 
I’m glad to get up to voice my concerns of my producers in my 
area, plus of Saskatchewan producers that this is a very 
important issue. And I think, knowing it from an MLA and the 
calls we’re getting to the office, and I know when you’re out 
and about, this is one of the most important issues right now 
that are facing the producers and the towns and cities and the 
villages across this province. 
 
So I support the motion as it moves forward, and that we have 
to work together to solve this issue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a 
motion by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly supports the federal government 
introducing emergency legislation to address the grain 
transportation backlog. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:12 until 16:15.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 55] 
 
Wall Morgan Stewart 
Draude Duncan Krawetz 



4472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 
Cheveldayoff Harpauer Toth 
Doherty Norris Reiter 
McMillan Heppner Harrison 
Wyant Tell Weekes 
Elhard Hart Bradshaw 
Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 
Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 
Wilson Marchuk Ross 
Kirsch Michelson Doke 
Cox Merriman Jurgens 
Steinley Hickie Lawrence 
Tochor Moe Parent 
Phillips Docherty Broten 
Forbes Wotherspoon Vermette 
Belanger Chartier McCall 
Sproule   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 55; those 
opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2013 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Mental Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, the intent of the 
amendments are to improve timely access to mental health 
services for vulnerable people, support integration of mental 
health and addictions services and information sharing, and 
resolve governance and administration issues affecting the 
ministry and health regions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, changes in the amendment Act include repealing 
those sections of the Act dealing with confidentiality and 
release of information and substituting The Health Information 
Protection Act, allowing for better collaboration among areas of 
health services in other ministries while still protecting personal 
health information; reducing the criteria for community 
treatment orders which allow for involuntary treatment in the 
community and increasing the period of time, the time period, 
of CTOs [community treatment order] to reduce barriers to 
treatment for very vulnerable clients; transferring the 
responsibility for licensing mental health approved homes from 
the ministry to the regional health authorities to align closer to 
day-to-day practice using the facility designation regulations 
under The Regional Health Services Act instead of The Mental 
Health Services Act to designate facilities; transferring the 
power to appoint regional directors of mental health and chief 

psychiatrists from the ministry to regional health authorities to 
align with day-to-day practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government strives to improve the quality of 
life for all Saskatchewan people. The Ministry of Health is 
responsible for providing services to promote, preserve, and 
restore the mental health of Saskatchewan people. As this 
Assembly is aware, we are developing an inter-ministerial 
mental health and addictions action plan to better meet the 
mental health and addictions needs of the people we serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Act is 27 years old, and many sections 
of the Act have not kept up with modern practice. The current 
Act reflects a time when central government provided mental 
health services that are now more community based and 
provided by regional health authorities. Amending The Mental 
Health Services Act will allow the ministry to improve access 
for vulnerable persons in need of timely mental health services, 
address operational issues for regional health authorities, and 
minimize the risks to the ministry involved in delegation 
functions that are more appropriately handled by the health 
authorities. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Mental Health Services Act, 2013. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 
2013 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to give a few brief comments on this particular 
bill, The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 127 is a very important bill because a lot of 
people are paying attention to this particular bill as it has a 
dramatic effect on those that are seeking services when you talk 
about mental health overall. From our perspective, certainly as a 
party that is wanting to see many more improved services, we 
view this bill as something that is very, very important to us and 
to many of our people that speak to us about their challenges. 
And any way and shape and form that we’re able to modernize 
some of the Acts that this government operates under, it is 
something that we will certainly undertake to do. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as we look through the bill itself there are 
many more of us in the caucus here, the NDP caucus, that will 
have different comments and different situations and certainly a 
different perspective on what the importance of this bill is and 
how we’re able to make it a stronger and better bill as we 
undertake to make it the law. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the key things that we look at when 
we study the bills as being presented by the government is that, 
did they do proper consultation? Did they listen to the groups 
and organizations that are out there, that are striving to provide 
better services for their family members or for themselves or 
somebody close to them in their community or in their home? 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the key things that we want to 
undertake as an opposition, is that there is an opportunity to 
make this a better, stronger bill by consultation and going to 
talk to some of these organizations and some of these people 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4473 

that are impacted by this service. I think it’s really important 
that we hear from them as well and that we take the time as an 
opposition, as we hope the government will do, to not only hear 
the consultation but to abide by the recommendations as a result 
of those consultations. So I think it’s really, really important 
that they be transparent, that they be accountable, and that they 
earn the trust of the people that they’re trying to provide 
services as defined under this particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, very quickly we see that they’re shifting 
powers from the ministry to the regional health authorities 
which are able to give licences to approved homes. They’re 
allowing residents, psychiatrists who are MDs [Doctor of 
Medicine] already, to admit patients and that could help 
improve the system. And of course they’re modernizing the 
language from mental health centres instead of in-patient 
facilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand from some of the consultations 
and groups and organizations and people that they’ve spoken to, 
that these are some of the ideas and concepts and issues that 
many of the impacted communities wanted to bring forward. 
And I think it’s really important that we applaud their 
participation and we acknowledge the challenges that they have 
presented and we certainly, as our leader has indicated time and 
time again, from our perspective as an opposition if there’s 
something that is being done properly with the proper 
consultations, with the proper outcome, then that is something 
that we as a caucus would support and that’s one of the 
important messages that we want to give to many organizations 
that are out there that want to see improved services, especially 
in areas of mental health. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of issues that we want to pay 
attention to. There are a lot of different groups and 
organizations that we want to speak to. We want to make sure 
we monitor the government’s progress on this bill. And the 
fundamental thing that I’ll point out in my last few comments 
here is that if we’re going to modernize the bill, if we’re going 
to make sure that the bill is effective, Mr. Speaker, then this 
government has to give it more than lip service. They’ve got to 
put the proper resources, the proper team, the proper system in 
place so these families that took the time to give them advice 
can know and can appreciate that those services are there. 
 
If this government can do that, Mr. Speaker, and as our leader 
said, we in the opposition are able to support initiatives of this 
sort, of this importance, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the key 
messages that I want to give to the people that may be listening 
and may be tracking this bill from the opposition’s perspective 
as to what our input is, and certainly what our position is when 
it comes to Bill 127. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of issues are coming forward on this bill. 
We know in northern Saskatchewan that there are a significant 
challenge when it comes to mental health. We know that in 
many sectors of our provinces there are challenges when it 
comes to mental health. Many families, many centres, many 
communities, many cities have these challenges. So we’ve got 
to make sure we do this right, that if there’s an opportunity to 
not only empower regional health authorities to address this, 
you’ve got to give them the right resources to become effective. 
And if they don’t give them the right supports, Mr. Speaker, 

then once again we’re back to the same old Sask Party song and 
dance where they’ve consulted with people, they’ve moved this 
thing forward, but there’s nothing to back up the actions 
required in any of these bills. And that’s one of the things that 
we in the opposition are always worried about and that we 
always pay attention. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, it is an initial few comments that I have. 
I know my colleagues have a lot of other comments they want 
to add on this particular bill, so I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
Amendment Act, 2013 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 128, The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013. I will be 
moving second reading of that bill later in my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that we have an appropriate and 
effective way of dealing with essential services in our province. 
They’re necessary to have that type of legislation so that in the 
event of a strike or a labour disruption that we ensure snow 
removal on our highways and that people can still receive 
treatment in our emergency rooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not want to leave Saskatchewan in the 
position we see Nova Scotia in right now, having weekend 
sittings of the legislature in order to pass essential services 
legislation to ensure that home care services are still being 
provided, as home support workers went on strike Friday 
morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most other jurisdictions have got essential services 
legislation, and we want to bring our province in line with the 
other jurisdictions in the country. It is important that we have a 
framework in place that allows essential services agreements to 
be reached and that legislation does not have to be passed on an 
ad hoc basis to ensure that essential services are not disrupted. 
 
The new provisions in the employment Act are designed to 
ensure the continued health and safety of the public while 
providing unions and employers with the job action tools they 
need to resolve issues and ultimately reach collective 
agreements. 
 
Firstly, negotiating agreements prior to the expiry of the 
agreement can be costly and unnecessary if parties are able to 
conclude an agreement rather than just dealing with the 
essential services agreement. So we have decided that essential 
services agreements will only be negotiated if an impasse in 
bargaining a collective agreement and mediation is 



4474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

unsuccessful. 
 
Second, we expanded the definition of public employer to 
include all employers that provide an essential public service. 
This was as a result of consultations which identified that some 
private sector employers provide public services that are 
essential. For example, emergency services in Saskatoon are 
privately operated compared to Regina where the services are 
provided directly by the health region. 
 
Third, the new provisions will enable disputes to be heard by an 
arbitrator, arbitration board, or the Labour Relations Board. The 
hearing will commence within seven days of appointment or 
application, and a decision is to be rendered within 14 days 
from the conclusion of the hearing. The decision is binding on 
all parties and comes into effect 48 hours from being served. 
 
The fourth provision enables the union to challenge all aspects 
of the employer’s essential service notice. The employer is 
required to identify the essential service, classifications of 
employees, number of positions, and the location where the 
employee is to work. 
 
The final provision, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the most significant 
one, provides a process to resolve a collective agreement where 
a strike or lockout is ultimately ineffective, Mr. Speaker. Where 
ability to strike is being taken away, it is imperative that there 
be an alternative method of resolving the collective agreement 
put into place. Mr. Speaker, either party can apply to the Labour 
Relations Board for a determination as to whether the essential 
services agreement renders a strike or lockout ineffective. If 
determined ineffective, the parties must submit to binding 
arbitration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these changes are the result of extensive 
consultation that occurred in 2012 and 2013 with public sector 
employees and unions. Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move 
second reading of Bill 128, The Saskatchewan Employment 
Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 
2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to offer the initial comments 
that we have on this particular bill, Bill 128. And I want to say 
at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that this is one fundamental point 
that every government ought to listen to. And that is, you must 
make the effort and you must take the time to listen to the 
working people of Saskatchewan, because this is some of the 
things that they’ve been telling you from day one. They’ve been 
telling you from day one that it’s important to involve them. 
They’ve been telling you from day one it’s important to respect 
them. 
 
And number two, number three, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 
listen to them because they are an essential part of government 
and delivery of services to the people of Saskatchewan and they 
appreciate and they respect that responsibility. And that’s what 

they requested from this government and they never got it from 
day one. They got an arbitrary government that went to war 
with working people. And that is something that, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister brought up earlier that was costly and unnecessary, 
costly and unnecessary to every single party, including the 
government, the working people, and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Had you listened to the working people today, you wouldn’t be 
going to the Supreme Court of Canada to get a ruling on how to 
treat your employees proper, Mr. Speaker. That is something 
that ought to be said time and time again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I will tell that minister and the Government of 
Saskatchewan that it is very important. The number one rule is 
that you listen to the people of Saskatchewan, especially the 
working people, Mr. Speaker. They are the front and centre of 
the delivery of service of the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
this minister and that government chose to disrespect them and 
not listen to them. And that is a costly and unnecessary exercise 
that this government has gone to and has put many people 
through, Mr. Speaker, for no reason except because they believe 
that going to war with the working people is something that 
they want to do. That is part of their mantra, Mr. Speaker. That 
is part of who they are. And we say, shame on them, Mr. 
Speaker. Shame on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, already we see an amendment to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act rammed through last year. Last 
year that minister and that government rammed through certain 
sections, Mr. Speaker. And why did they do that? What was the 
rush? What was the rush, Mr. Speaker? What was the rush? It’s 
a fundamental question that we have on this side, and many 
working men and women asked, what was the rush? Why 
couldn’t you sit down and deal with the working people who 
are an essential part of providing that service, the front-line 
workers who are very essential to provide that service on behalf 
of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And at the time they’re asked the questions: what was the rush? 
Why are you ramming things through without sitting down with 
the working men and women of this province in a very 
respectful, positive environment, Mr. Speaker? And this 
government chose not to do that, Mr. Speaker. They chose not 
to do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important, what’s important 
is the Sask Party track record when dealing with working men 
and women in this province is a terrible one, Mr. Speaker. It is 
wrong-headed, it is mean-spirited, and it’s totally costly and, as 
they say, unnecessary. 
 
Now we have to go to a national court process, a national court 
process to figure out how best to treat employees. So when a 
minister gets up and uses the buzz words of respect and uses the 
words of it’s important to sit down with them, it’s important to 
appreciate them, those all ring completely hollow with the 
working men and women because they know what they 
practise. What they practise, Mr. Speaker, is not what they 
preach. 
 
That’s exactly the problem. They say one thing on one front and 
do the exact opposite on the other front. And we’ve seen this act 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4475 

before, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen this act before, and I think the 
men and women of Saskatchewan, especially the working men 
and women of Saskatchewan, are getting sick and tired of that 
gong show, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you want their participation, the fundamental point is you 
must respect them, and the fundamental point is you must listen 
to what they have to say. You’ve got to respect what they have 
to say, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t do that. Full stop. Period. 
The Saskatchewan Party government did not listen to the 
working men and women who sat down, and they had every bit 
of opportunity to hear what they had to say and they chose not 
to listen. That is one of the fundamental problems that we see 
with this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we look at some of the process that they’ve undertook, 
where they said, we’re going to do this and we’re ramming it 
through. We’re ramming it through. Come hell or high water, 
we’re going to ram this through. Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s 
important is that they did not take the time to again consult. 
They had a number of opportunities and a number of occasions 
to sit down, to sit down and chat, and chat. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here we are in 2014, we’re back to the 
drawing board. Now had they used the fundamental principle of 
fairness, and had they been pragmatic in their approach as 
government, not bringing their philosophy into government, had 
they understood that this would have been a costly, long, 
drawn-out process to our court system, Mr. Speaker; had they 
understood that from day one, and had they taken the time to 
listen to what our working men and women had told them, we 
would not be in this position today, a full six, seven years after 
they’ve formed government, where we are back to the drawing 
board, where we’re trying to figure out this Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 128, certainly from our perspective, still 
has a lot of work to it. But the fundamental point that we would 
make on this: they should have listened to the working men and 
women from day one — day one — and we wouldn’t be in this 
situation now, Mr. Speaker, would not be in this situation to this 
day. 
 
Now what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that I do a lot of 
visiting in a lot of hostels, different folks that have gone to 
some of the hostels in our cities and certainly all throughout the 
province. And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of these 
people that work in the health care field, you see them every 
day as you go visiting. And you see the maintenance folks. You 
see the professional people. You see all the folks out there that 
are working as a team. And I can tell you, our hospital and 
health care system is run as proficiently and as professionally as 
you can get it, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a lot of good, dedicated 
workers there. 
 
Now we argue there’s not enough of them because this 
government’s been cutting health care on a regular basis, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is the same minister that has a right wing 
agenda from our perspective, trying to privatize not only our 
schools but our health care system. That’s next on his radar. So 
how do we expect as a caucus and how do they expect as 
working men and women to trust that minister and that 
government on the labour front? They simply do not trust them. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we walk into health facilities, we see 
the dedication of our workers. And I’ll tell the people of 
Saskatchewan this: there’s a lot of really hard-working civil 
servants that work in the health care field that do good, 
excellent work. And they do it with great pride. They do it with 
great pride. They do it with great professionalism, Mr. Speaker, 
and they do it as a unit and as a team. And what we have to 
understand in Saskatchewan is if people are working together as 
a unit, as a team, they take good care in how they do their job. 
They represent the Government of Saskatchewan well. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they do this because that is their job. 
 
And what do we do as a government? What they do as 
government, they turn around and they disrespect their team. 
They disrespect their input, and they don’t take the time to 
listen to them. How does that make them feel, Mr. Speaker? 
That makes them feel not . . . It certainly it wouldn’t make me 
feel valued if I kept on bringing some of these issues forward, 
especially if there’s no grounds to have disrespect except for 
one fundamental flaw that that government has — that they like 
go to war with working men and women. That’s what they want 
to do. They want to do away with the collective bargaining 
power that many of our health sector unions and other unions 
have in this province. 
 
And I say, shame. Why waste that time? Why waste that time 
doing that? Because you philosophically don’t believe in unions 
when the fact of the matter is the people of Saskatchewan I 
think totally support the collective effort of workers doing their 
job in a really sound, professional manner and working as a 
team. 
 
What’s wrong with that theory, Mr. Speaker? Nothing is wrong 
with that theory except across the way the Saskatchewan Party 
don’t like unions. They want to kill them off. We know that on 
this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And when they bring 
Acts of this sort forward, our caucus and our members are 
going to pay very close attention to what they’re doing. We’re 
not going to let anything slide under the radar. And despite the 
rhetoric, on this side of the Assembly we’re used to the rhetoric. 
Some of the rhetoric they say, oh there’s more work, there’s 
more work to be done. We’re working on that. 
 
Not once, Mr. Speaker, have they accepted responsibility for 
their ineptness in terms of a government. Is there such a word as 
ineptness? But if they are able to for once, Mr. Speaker, stand 
up and take responsibility and take leadership and stop trying to 
pass the blame. Stop trying to pass the buck, Mr. Speaker. And 
it gets so bad where they don’t want to take responsibility for 
their role as government because we don’t think they have the 
ability to govern correctly nor have they got the confidence or 
the experience. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s costly and it’s 
unnecessary because we’ve got the Supreme Court of Canada 
figuring out how to properly treat your employees and not the 
government across the way, Mr. Speaker. And that’s how sad 
this whole process has become. 
 
Now from on this side of the Assembly, we are going to fight 
for the working men and women, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 
defend the professionalism of all our health care unions and all 
the people that work many hours in all kinds of weather 
conditions. And on many, many levels, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
there for the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And we 



4476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

recognize them, and we on this side of the Assembly have 
absolutely no qualms about sitting down with them and making 
a deal to make sure that that service is not interrupted, that that 
service that they provide is respected and that we don’t simply 
say that in the Assembly and do something totally different 
outside of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not a respectful relationship. And we on this side of the 
Assembly call it what it is. And the simple fact is that they were 
never serious of working with the health unions. And their plan 
quite frankly is to continue fighting against them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s costly and that’s unnecessary, and that’s the 
message that we have on this side of the House to that team 
over there that is bent on trying to do away with the working 
men and women of our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on every front, on every front, we do not, do 
not look anywhere else for answers except for that government. 
They try and take us back and give us a history lesson. The 
bottom line is that government is in charge. They’ve got 49 
members. They cannot shirk away from their responsibility. 
You make certain decisions. You better live up to them. 
 
And we in opposition are going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that you will notice that that government never 
assumed responsibility for something that they’d done terribly 
wrong or something that they could not fix. And a good 
example of that today was on the debate on agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. We seen how they now say, oh it’s the federal 
government’s responsibility. You guys knew this problem was 
coming forward and you didn’t do anything about it. You didn’t 
do anything about it. And if I was a farmer, I’d be really upset 
with these guys because they had record revenue and they 
didn’t address the issue. 
 
Now let’s talk about the unions in this particular bill, as they 
had the opportunity from day one to sit down with our union 
leaders and our professional workers dedicated to their job to 
figure out how we would move this issue forward, this Bill 128, 
and they chose not to. They chose not to. So here we are, seven 
years later and we’re saying to them, why didn’t you listen from 
day one? Your actions were costly and they’re unnecessary 
because you’re bound by your silly philosophy that you have to 
go to war with working men and women of this province. And 
we say, shame on you. Shame on you for wasting time, wasting 
money, and wasting opportunity. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons, that’s one of the reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the Assembly when they talk about 
unions and how all of a sudden they have this new-found 
concern and care for unions, we on this side of the House laugh 
our heads off because we know all it is is words from that 
minister and from that government. And those words do not 
match in any way, shape, or form to their actions to go to war 
with the men and women of this province. 
 
Why waste that opportunity to build a long-lasting relationship 
with our working men and women? It’s because they’re bound 
by their philosophy to go to war. And we say that’s a waste of 
time and that’s a waste of resources. That’s a waste of 
professional service that many of these workers have given 
Saskatchewan. For years they have dedicated themselves. Why 
waste that goodwill from them, Mr. Speaker, simply because 

they’re bound by their philosophy? 
 
[16:45] 
 
So on this side of the House we have a lot more attention that 
we’re going to pay to this particular bill. I know many of my 
colleagues, in particular my member from Saskatoon Centre, 
has followed the bill process for the last seven years. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the NDP caucus are 
going to look squarely at the Sask Party government. You’re 
government. You’re making decisions. We are tired of your 
excuses. We are tired of you shirking away from your 
responsibility. We’re going to call you on some of the activity 
you’ve undertaken, some of the mistakes you’ve made, some of 
the negligence that you have shown to many different groups, 
and the harm you’re causing to Saskatchewan overall. 
 
Our job is to focus on that government and what they’re doing 
wrong and how they should clean up their mess. And as our 
leader says, if they’re doing something right, we’ll support 
them. But, Mr. Speaker, so far they’ve done everything wrong. 
They’ve done absolutely everything wrong despite . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . And they laugh, Mr. Speaker. They 
think it’s funny over there. They laugh. They laugh when 
people get laid off or when essential services gets interrupted. 
They think it’s a big joke over there, Mr. Speaker.  
 
They had record revenues. They had a booming economy, a 
growing population, and they messed up every other aspect they 
possibly can, despite getting those assets and those 
opportunities from the previous government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I say today that the number one fundamental flaw that 
they had on this particular bill or any union discussion is they 
should have listened to the people and respected the people that 
they’re dealing with, and they never did. And here we are seven 
years later — costly, unnecessary process because they’re 
bound by their philosophy to go to war with these men and 
woman that serve our province and serve our people very well. 
 
We have a lot more concerns that we’re going to express on this 
bill, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure I’m going to be given the 
opportunity to say more, and I will take the opportunity to say 
more. But at this note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 128. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment 
Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government 
Administration Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Executive Government Administration Act. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4477 

Mr. Speaker, along with its companion bill, The Executive 
Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013, this bill consolidates the provisions of The Government 
Organization Act with the executive council provisions of The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. It also 
incorporates the provisions of The Tabling of Documents Act, 
1991 and The Federal-Provincial Agreements Act. 
 
The new legislation will remove any confusion about the 
organization of ministries and the assignment of ministerial 
responsibilities. The following changes are being made to these 
Acts from the current legislation. 
 
First, legislative secretaries will not need to be reappointed 
every year. That was a requirement that simply added 
unnecessary paperwork. As well, regulations establishing 
ministries will not be subject to review by the legislature. This 
exemption is not often granted, but because it’s the prerogative 
of the Premier to determine the organization of government, it 
is appropriate in this case. 
 
Another change is that the appointment of advisory committees 
to ministers will require cabinet approval in all cases. Presently 
this approval is required if the advisory committee’s 
appointment is for more than one year. This will provide more 
accountability and oversight. 
 
Federal-provincial agreements will not require cabinet approval 
unless they require an expenditure by the government of more 
than $50,000. This is consistent with agreements under section 
18 of the new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all department Acts, such as The Department of 
Justice Act, are being amended to remove the word department 
from their title, change all references from department to 
ministry or minister, and remove references to things like 
annual reports, seals, and staff. 
 
As well, redundant grant-making and agreement-making 
powers are removed as they will appear in The Executive 
Government Administration Act. Exceptional grant-making and 
agreement-making powers will remain in their respective Acts. 
The Financial Administration Act is being amended to eliminate 
the Investment Board and provide the treasury board can have 
non-ministerial members. This is consistent with all other 
cabinet committees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Executive 
Government Administration Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 129, The Executive Government Administration Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 
the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I’m very pleased to be able to be stand today on behalf of 
the opposition to give our initial comments on this particular 
Act, Bill 129, an Act that talks about the administration of 
executive government of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, just 
for clarification, and I would certainly encourage folks to 
correct me if I’m wrong, the executive government of 
Saskatchewan is what we would probably call the Premier’s 

office, in the sense that he would be the central figure, and I 
think in a lot of the executive government of Saskatchewan 
language. And I think when you start talking about conferring 
more power to the Premier’s office, it begins to really ask a 
number of questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And obviously from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, again, trust 
is a really, really . . . It’s a real challenge for us in the 
opposition when we see some of the activities of this particular 
government and we begin to ask ourselves, well what is this bill 
about? 
 
Bill 129 is really talking about a very complex bill, and it’s 
going to replace a number of Acts governing executive 
government responsibilities. And a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan would like to know, I think, is how many 
responsibilities does Executive Council have or the Premier’s 
office and the cabinet have when it talks about executive 
government choices? What exactly are those responsibilities, 
Mr. Speaker? Is it to set power rates? Is it to determine the 
number of MLAs? Like who does all the decision making 
around executive government? 
 
And that’s one of the important things that we have to do in 
opposition is to try and shift through all the wording, to try and 
shift through all the layers of bills that are coming forward to us 
and to try and figure out what is this government up to on Bill 
129.? What exactly are they trying to achieve here? And, Mr. 
Speaker, from our initial blush and looking at this particular 
bill, it is a very complex bill. And they’re going to replace, as I 
mentioned earlier, a number of Acts governing executive 
government responsibility. We want to know, we want to know 
all the implications. What exactly is the Premier conferring 
upon his office and Executive Council, which is called the 
cabinet? What exactly is he trying to do here? 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what are the implications for the 
departments? Are we saying now that the ministers across the 
way are now just figureheads, that everything is going to go 
through the Premier’s office and all the decisions are going to 
be made by him and three or four other people? And the other 
thing, Mr. Speaker, is that, how come there are so many 
changes made simultaneously? What is that all about? There are 
changes from the different Acts, Mr. Speaker, that have 
implications on how different departments will operate. We 
want to know what those implications are, what those changes 
are. Has anything been left out, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What is the quest for power under this particular Act that this 
Premier is trying to seek, Mr. Speaker? What consultations has 
the Act undertaken? And to the stakeholders, have they been 
involved at all, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what this particular Act 
is going to actually do? So again you look at the net effect is 
that there’s a very wide net of laws that are impacted and 
affected by this bill. We want to know in the opposition what 
exactly are those impacts. What changes are going to occur and 
what new powers may be granted to Executive Council and at 
the Premier’s office as a result of this Bill 129? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would hope, I would hope that if you look 
at the importance of consultation on some of the major changes, 
that this bill implies that there be some good consultation, not 
only with the cabinet, but with the people of Saskatchewan so 



4478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

they know exactly what the bill is impacting. 
 
So I think it’s important from our perspective. Again I will 
point out Bill 129 that talks about the administration of the 
executive government of Saskatchewan, which is the Premier’s 
office and cabinet, I’m assuming, that this bill is going to 
replace a number of Acts and it’s going to replace a number of 
different players that have different powers and different roles. 
So we want to know what exactly is this bill going to implicate, 
what exactly this bill is going to affect, and, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a lot of questions on exactly what this bill is trying to 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we always pride ourselves as an opposition to talk 
about being very transparent with the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I think it’s incumbent upon this government to first of all 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan what executive 
government is all about. Is it the Premier’s office and cabinet? 
And what does the bill imply? What is the bill going to impact? 
How are other departments within the government, how are 
they going to be impacted? These are some of the things that we 
immediately . . . Our alarm bells go off when we see bills of this 
sort that are not really inclusive of the people of Saskatchewan. 
They’re kind of sketchy, Mr. Speaker, and they certainly 
bounce over some of the major, major challenges. 
 
So we want to make sure and we want to take the time to go 
through this bill, word by word, and see exactly what the plan is 
that that government has under Bill 129 that confers special 
powers or greater powers to the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think we want to be able to take the time to do that. And 
we all know in Saskatchewan that when we looked at some of 
the Acts, some of the Acts that the province has, and this is 
what’s really important, some of the acts will use the phrase . . . 
I will give you an example: the word shall. In some of the Acts 
the word shall would appear in a number of the Acts that talked 
about certain powers. And then there’s another part of the Act 
that will put, may. So there is a difference between the word 
may and the word shall, because the word may gives somebody 
the opportunity to decide and the word shall is you have no 
choice but to do the particular directive under that Act. 
 
So we want to be able to see whether there is a number of 
wording changes in there that actually gives the Premier’s 
office more power, give the people of Saskatchewan less 
scrutiny, and really, Mr. Speaker, is not an effective way to be 
accountable, transparent, and respectful to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s why Bill 129, we are going to pay 
very, very close attention to this one because, Mr. Speaker, we 
have alarm bells going off left, right, and centre here in terms of 
what they’re trying to do here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we would hope, we would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that if this bill were to impact, say, for example, 
discussions with the federal government on the grain 
transportation challenge that we have in this province, when 
you have empty ships waiting for our grain in BC, off the coast 
of BC, when we have a customer saying, we’re not going to get 
Canadian wheat anymore; we’re going to go to the States now 
. . . Mr. Speaker, once you lose a customer, it’s going to be very 
hard to get him back. 
 

So the people of Saskatchewan are sitting here and from my 
vantage point in northern Saskatchewan I’m saying, well I hope 
this Bill 129 would give the Premier the directive to go and talk 
to the federal government and tell them, you don’t have a 
choice. The option here is not you may find a solution, the 
choice is you shall find a solution and you need to find that 
solution now. And that’s what’s the important part of the 
wording, Mr. Speaker, in some of these bills. And quite frankly 
I think that the Saskatchewan Party dropped the ball on this one 
and the producers of this province are going to make them pay, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask that the member return to the bill 
at hand, not to a motion previously decided in this House. I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And that 
goes to the powers of the Premier’s office which directly relates 
to Bill 129, when they talk about respecting the administration 
of the executive government of Saskatchewan. My point being 
is what particular powers does this Act confer upon the 
Premier’s office to be able to be an effective leader for our 
province? And this is where the questions are as to whether they 
would have been able to respond to the agricultural crisis that 
we have in the province. And that’s the connect that I would 
make, Mr. Premier. 
 
So I think the most important thing again goes back to, what 
exactly are they trying to do with this particular bill? What is 
their agenda? What are the powers they’re trying to take away 
from some of the other cabinet folks that are around the room? 
What are some of the things that they want to do without public 
scrutiny? What are some of the things that they’re omitting? 
What are some of the things that they’re forgetting about? How 
about their consultation? The list goes on and on and on in 
terms of the questions on this particular bill, and we are going 
to take the time as the opposition to reach out to stakeholders, to 
look from within, from our own research team, to see what 
exactly this government’s up to when it comes to Bill 129, Mr. 
Speaker. And rest assured, we will take that time. 
 
Now I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the bill itself has a 
number of subsections and again, you look at the wording. It is 
quite frankly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4447 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4447 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4448 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4449 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4449 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4449 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Support for People of the Ukraine 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4449 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
 38th Annual Telemiracle 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
 Saskatchewan Breaks Record for Agricultural Exports 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4451 
 Huskies Win Canada West Women’s Hockey 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4451 
 Saskatchewan Athletes Compete at Sochi Olympics 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4451 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Financial Support for Care Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4451 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4452 
 Budgetary Plans and Education Funding 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4453 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4453 
 Budgetary Plans and Financial Reporting 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4454 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4454 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4454 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4454 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4455 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Grain Transportation 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4456 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4458 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4460 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4461 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4464 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4466 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 
 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4473 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4474 



 

 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4476 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4477 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


