
























































Hansard: December 03, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 23A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6225 
 December 3, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to table the 2014 report volume 2 of 
the Provincial Auditor as provided for in section 14.1 of The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to welcome, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, the Privacy and Information Commissioner, 
Mr. Ron Kruzeniski. And his spouse and staff are here today for 
a reception that will take place at 2:30 p.m. in room 218, and 
everyone is invited. I would welcome everyone to welcome 
Ron to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Minister for Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’m 
pleased to introduce a number of guests seated in your gallery. 
They are representatives of our outstanding education system 
and have joined us today for the introduction of The Registered 
Teachers Act. 
 
With us today we have Connie Bailey, president, Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association; Darren McKee, executive director, 
SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association]; Gwen 
Dueck, executive director of Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation; Fay Elke, senior administrative staff, STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. And I probably should 
have said this one first: Randy Cline, vice-president of STF and, 
I believe, acting president of STF at the present time; Mike 
Walter, president, League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents of Saskatchewan or more 
commonly known as LEADS; Dr. Bill Cooke, executive 
director of LEADS; and also Gerry Hurton, executive director, 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
I want to thank all of them for coming today and taking time out 
of their busy schedules to join us, but most of all for having the 
leadership and vision to come together and ensure that we are 
doing everything we can to protect our most valuable resource, 
our students. I want to ask all members to join me in welcoming 
these guests to their legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to join with the Education minister and 
welcome these leaders in education, or the educational partners, 
to their legislature here today. It’s a pleasure to have them in 
their Assembly. It’s a pleasure to appreciate and recognize their 
leadership that they provide to education in our province day in, 
day out, year-round, Mr. Speaker, as well. 
 
But it’s nice to have President Connie Bailey, and Darren 

McKee with the school boards here today. It’s a pleasure to 
have Mike Walter and Dr. Cooke from LEADS. Mr. Walter is 
also the deputy director here in Regina, leading Regina Public. 
And here with the STF, it’s a pleasure to have Gwen Dueck; 
Acting President, Randy Cline; and Fay Elke here today. 
 
So as I said, it’s a pleasure to join with the Education minister 
here today. I believe there’s also some fine ministry officials 
that are here today. We know that this sector works best when it 
works in partnership and collaboration. And when you speak of 
the SSBA, LEADS, and the STF, along with government, that’s 
exactly what it should be, a partnership. And when it’s 
exercised as just that, better outcomes are a result. So it’s a 
pleasure to welcome these leaders to their Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce some community 
leaders within the northwest community of Regina. Through 
our job, we get to meet a lot of community leaders at 
organizations that do a lot of great work throughout Regina. 
And I would like to introduce Pastor Jerven Weekes from the 
Rosewood Park Alliance Church, along with his hard-working 
staff, Sarah, Jacob, Jaci, Leone, Jolene, and Joel. Give a wave 
to us. 
 
I have had the fortunate opportunity to meet Jerven after I was 
elected, and he gave some great mentorship to me. And I came 
to call him a good friend; I trust his advice, and it’s very great. 
We get together and have a breakfast every now and then, and 
his mentorship means a lot to me. So I just want to introduce 
him to all members of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce some individuals who 
have travelled here today, Mr. Speaker, from the communities 
of Craik, from Central Butte, and from the surrounding areas. 
And seated, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery are the following 
individuals: Webster Lee, John Ackland, Shelley Rogers, 
Mayor Rick Rogers of Craik, JoAnne Yates, Sarah Wells, 
David Ashdown, Reeve Hilton Spencer of the RM [rural 
municipality] of Craik, Raymond Carrick, Richard Murray, and 
Dr. Elie Karam. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
these individuals to the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce four special individuals, constituents of mine from 
Yorkton. The first is no stranger, my constituency assistant and 
foundation back in Yorkton, Ms. Lauretta Ritchie-McInnes. I’ll 
ask Lauretta to wave. And she’s very active in the constituency 
as well as serving the community in a bunch of different needs 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 



6226 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

With her are three members of the Lortie family from Yorkton: 
Pierre, the father, along with Isaac and Benjamin are with her 
today. Isaac is a grade 6 student at M.C. Knoll School in 
Yorkton. His strongest subject is physical activity. He plays 
hockey and tennis, but I know that he has a special capacity for 
chess also, Mr. Speaker, and a great amount of mental stamina. 
I’m sure that his intellect will serve him well in that activity as 
well. 
 
Pierre is the dad of Isaac and Ben and Sofia, who is at home 
with her mom, Narom, today. Pierre’s background: he’s a 
Canadian military Armed Forces, retired; a degree in 
electronics. In fact one of the satellite projects that he’s worked 
on is still up there orbiting the Earth, Mr. Speaker. He made a 
career change recently. He is now serving with the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in Yorkton, his first posting 
since depot. His family has moved to Yorkton just over four 
years ago. Pierre’s wife Narom couldn’t be here today. A very 
interesting story meeting her, she’s a Cambodian refugee. They 
met in Canada and have been married and started their family. 
 
The main reason that they all travelled here today was for 
Benjamin. He is a superior tennis player and a chess player, 
achieved many goals, and I’ll be highlighting him in member 
statements later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask everybody to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased to introduce to the Assembly and ask all the 
members of the Assembly to welcome some very special 
guests. We have some engaged citizens. We have some 
community leaders. We have some business people. They have 
questions and concerns around the Regina bypass decisions of 
this government. And this is a very big and very important 
project; it’s critical that we get it right. And these citizens are 
here to ask questions and, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 
answers are provided. And I ask all members of the Assembly 
to welcome these very special guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Ms. Speaker, I would like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the guests who are here 
today. We understand the Regina bypass is a huge project, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have, as a government, endeavoured to make 
the right decisions and look forward to the completion of the 
bypass. But I do want to welcome the guests that are here today 
as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, Matthew 
McStravick. Matthew is a young man; he’s in grade 9 in 
Winston Knoll High School in the constituency of Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. He’s a member of the SRC [student 
representative council]. 
 

Now Matthew, for his birthday this year, asked his dad to take 
him to city council. So he has attended every city council 
meeting since July the 28th, which was his birthday. So I would 
imagine we should all get used to seeing Matthew because if 
he’s interested in city council, I’m sure he’s going to be very 
interested in the goings-on in the Legislative Assembly today.  
 
So thank you very much, Matthew, for coming out today. And I 
had a nice opportunity to meet with him, talk to him about his 
interests. He’s interested in both provincial, federal, and 
international politics. So this is a young leader that we should 
all be watching. Thank you very much for coming today, 
Matthew. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my great 
pleasure to introduce a wonderful group of students and 
educators from Grant Road School right here in Regina. 
 
Today in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, we are joined by 24 
grade 5 and 6 students. Give us a wave, you guys. Great to see 
you. They are accompanied by Daina Seymour, classroom 
teacher; Janet Davies, educational assistant; Shannon Leib, 
school learning resource teacher; and Danika Wolfe, who’s the 
intern. 
 
Let’s welcome all of them to their Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to take a minute to give a shout-out to one of my former 
colleagues, Mr. Gerry Craswell, who I went to university with 
30 years ago when we graduated. 
 
So he stuck with a teaching career. He’s almost ready to retire. I 
bailed on that, so I’m going to be working a lot longer than him. 
But he used to be known as The Cras. He taught in my 
hometown of Lafleche. He’s now working with the Ed ministry. 
So just say hello to Gerry. Everybody, please welcome him to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in 
your gallery, through you and to you, is a constituent of mine, 
Mr. David Bowman. If you could give us a wave. And seated 
with him, his wife, Arlyne Bowman. 
 
I’ve known David for a number of years now, and always 
interested in some of the talks. Also today happens to be 
Arlyne’s birthday, and so if we could all have a little clap and a 
happy birthday at the same time, we’d all appreciate it. But if 
we could welcome them to their Assembly today. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6227 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government.  
 
We know that in September this year, this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control of and then rent the units at full market price. When 
asked to explain how the government could allow the developer 
to back out of a fixed-price contract without any penalties, the 
Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re assuming 
that there’s these desperate homeless people,” showing how 
disconnected this government is from the realities within our 
communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: cause the government to 
recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 
in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 
now allowing private developers with whom the 
government has close relationships to default on 
fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the danger created by that government on Dewdney Avenue 
with the inundation of heavy-haul truck traffic. Certainly they 
note the importance of timely completion of the west bypass, 
but there’s immediate and urgent actions required to ensure 
safety on Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents in 
Regina and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women, and children who face 
abusive situations. Their problem is getting worse because of 

the rising level of poverty and skyrocketing costs to 
homeowners. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place to present a petition on the Prince 
Albert bridge, and the petition is to build a second bridge for 
Prince Albert as opposed to renting. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert will receive a commitment from 
senior governments. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Saskatoon, but we’ve got pages and pages of 
petitions signed from all throughout the province, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that many aspects of 
long-term care are deteriorating under this government, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for 
safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents. They 
point out that the government is failing to fix the basics in 
long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent requests 
from long-term care facilities for increased and needed staffing 
levels. The petitioners talk about the government removing the 
regulations requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, 
resulting in neglect. 
 
They point out that chronic understaffing in long-term care 
facilities results in unacceptable conditions, including 
unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in 
physical violence amongst residents. And they point out that 
fixing the basics and achieving real improvements in long-term 
care services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 
front-line health care workers, residents, and their families as 
opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 



6228 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

following action: to cause the government to commit to the 
creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team and to reintroduce actual numbers of 
staff to match the level of care needs and the number of 
residents under their care in long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Swift Current, at 
Gull Lake, Herbert, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of better health care in 
Saskatchewan. In the prayer that reads as follows, the 
petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to recognize health care is getting 
worse under its watch and to begin fixing the basics by 
listening to health care workers, patients, and their 
families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 
and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 
spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Canora, 
Lloydminster, and Carrot River. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from people of Saskatchewan who are opposed to 
correctional service job privatization. People are concerned that 
the government wants to privatize food services in the 
corrections and young offender facilities. They are concerned 
that the government isn’t listening to these workers about the 
concerns they have about the impact of the loss of jobs, both 
how it affects the correction system and the community. So the 
prayer reads that: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel its privatization in the corrections and young 
offenders facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. The individuals who signed this petition want to bring 
to our attention the following: the government knew about 
major safety concerns related to its smart meter project; the 
government ignored those safety concerns and plowed ahead 
with its program; and the safety of Saskatchewan families was 
put at significant risk. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 
to act on readily available information about the safety 
concerns with its smart meter program, including through 
the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 
concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 
safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals 
from Cupar, Dilke, Lumsden, Wishart, Wynyard, Regina, 
Melville, Shaunavon, Saskatoon, Outlook, Hudson Bay, and 
Indian Head. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Black Lake Students Recognized for Math Excellence 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place today to recognize a remarkable accomplishment of 
some grade 7 students from my constituency. Ms. Clarke’s 
grade 7 math class at Father Porte Memorial Dene School was 
recently recognized as one of the top classes in Canada for 
math. 
 
Now that would be an amazing accomplishment for any 
community, Mr. Speaker, but the fact that the students in this 
remote northern community have been able to rise to the top of 
the nation is a story that deserves recognition. The students 
were able to rise to the top because of Ms. Clarke’s innovative 
teaching techniques. She has successfully integrated 
cutting-edge technology, using iPads and computers, to make 
learning easy and fun. 
 
I am so proud of the teaching staff, of the students, and am so 
proud to be the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
this wonderful, hard-working team and community. The 
students and staff at Father Porte have worked very hard to win 
this award, and I’m looking forward to travelling to Black Lake 
tomorrow to meet these important community members in 
person. 
 
Many students in the North struggle with math and sciences, but 
this group of students from Black Lake demonstrates that great 
things are possible for students in any community. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating these Black Lake 
students, their teacher, and their principal, Steven Thatcher, on 
this remarkable accomplishment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
in the House today to proclaim today as International Day of 
Persons with Disabilities. Mr. Speaker, this day has been 
observed since 1981 and was later proclaimed by the United 
Nations General Assembly in 1992. 
 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6229 

It aims to provide an understanding of disability issues and rally 
support for the dignity, rights, and well-being of people with 
disabilities. This year’s theme is Sustainable Development: The 
Promise of Technology. Technology is an important 
communication and safety tool for people who experience a 
range of disabilities, providing many opportunities to express 
themselves and increase their independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, technology continues to play an important role in 
connecting all of us together to share experiences and interact in 
ways we never thought possible. Developments in video 
conferencing; text-to-voice translation; accessibility functions 
on computers, tablets, and smart phones are just a few 
examples. 
 
Our government is committed to making Saskatchewan the best 
place to live in Canada for people with disabilities, and we are 
continuing to work on improving their lives and developing a 
province-wide disability strategy that will be released in the 
spring of 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is strong. We need to ensure that 
everyone is able to share in the opportunities created by this 
strength. I ask all members to join me in celebrating the 
International Day of Persons with Disabilities. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise too in the Assembly to 
recognize that today is the United Nations International Day of 
Persons with Disabilities. The purpose of today is to promote 
the dignity, rights, and well-being of those in our communities 
who are living with disabilities. Currently there are over 1 
billion people living in the world with some form of disability. 
We know persons with disabilities not only face physical 
barriers, but also social, economic, and attitudinal barriers. 
 
At the national level we salute this week the unanimous 
agreement of the House of Commons to commit to support the 
needs of those who are victims of thalidomide, and now we 
look forward to the release of our own provincial strategy on 
how we can best support those living with disabilities. In both 
cases the real challenge will be actual supports, including 
financial resources from governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve noted that many groups are looking for 
better housing and better educational opportunities. One group 
that continues to face barriers in our province is the deaf and 
hard of hearing community. I continually hear that from the 
advocates of the deaf community. They need stronger supports 
in our schools, including supporting American Sign Language 
as a language of instruction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing today 
as the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, and that 
our work to ensure that our province is the best place for all 
citizens must be a real priority. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 

Yorkton Athlete Excels at Tennis 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
already introduced you to the Lortie family, specifically 
Benjamin, and would like to now highlight a few of Benjamin’s 
many accomplishments. Benjamin is 12 years old and has been 
living in Yorkton since 2011. At age 10 he began to invest 
himself in tennis. 
 
Ben and his coach, Blaine Stoll, went to the Saskatchewan 
Summer Games in 2012 and earned a gold medal in mixed 
double for Parkland team. At the time he was only 10 years old 
and competing against 11- to 14-year-old division. 
 
Since 2012 Ben has been a member of the Saskatchewan 
provincial tennis squad. Tennis has given Ben the opportunity 
to travel to Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, and Ontario, as well as 
compete in a number of tournaments all over our province. As 
of today, Ben is ranked 26th in tennis in Canada for his age 
category. He will be going to Miami, Florida later this month to 
participate in the Orange Bowl International Tennis 
Tournament. 
 
On top of tennis, Ben is an avid chess player and has already 
represented Saskatchewan three times at the highest national 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Ben 
Lortie for all of his hard work and dedication. May we wish him 
further success as he continues to represent Saskatchewan’s 
athletic strength in Canada and throughout the world. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. University exams 
are just around the corner and post-secondary studies are soon 
ending for the Christmas holidays. This past fall, the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship awarded nearly $6 
million in scholarships to 12,000 students attending 
post-secondary education across our province. 
 
Since being introduced in 2012, this program aims to make 
post-secondary education more accessible and affordable for 
Saskatchewan students. This scholarship is available to all 
recently graduated grade 12 students as well as students who 
completed adult basic education or their GED [general 
equivalency diploma] after January 1st, 2012. Students can 
qualify for $500 per school year up to a maximum of $2,000. 
Since 2012 nearly 26,000 scholarships worth $13 million have 
been awarded. Programs such as the Advantage Scholarship 
provide just one more reason for our students to stay in their 
home province after their graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 this government has invested $5.5 
billion in post-secondary institutions and students. This 
government values education, and we are seeing the benefits of 
our investments by high-quality graduates who are coming out 
of these institutions. Programs such as the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship as well as the graduate retention 



6230 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

program are investments in our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating this year’s recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship, and we wish all post-secondary 
students the very best in their future endeavours. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 

New Educational Facility Opens in Humboldt 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently 
had the pleasure of attending the grand opening of the 
Humboldt Public School and Child Care Centre. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to say that our government contributed $13.8 
million and partnered with the Horizon School Division to help 
with the completion of a major addition and renovation to the 
school. 
 
The renovated school combines a portion of the former 
Humboldt Collegiate Institute, which we built new a few years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, with the Humboldt elementary school. The 
new renovations and additions include a gym with a new stage 
complete with sound and lighting system, seven additional 
classrooms which will include new industrial arts, home 
economics, and science labs, art and music rooms. The facility 
also includes a new library resource centre, a therapy gym, a 
Snoezelen room, and a 51-space licensed daycare centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few years we’ve seen remarkable 
growth across the province and in our schools. Our government 
is committed to supporting that growth by ensuring that our 
students have a safe and comfortable learning environment. 
That is why we’ve committed approximately 700 million 
towards 47 major school projects and numerous smaller 
projects since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know our children in this province are our 
most precious resource. I ask all our members to join with me in 
congratulating the city of Humboldt and the Horizon School 
Division for the grand opening of the Humboldt Public School 
and Child Care Centre. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Weyburn Native Wins Most Outstanding Lineman Award 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise to recognize Brett Jones, the starting centre for the 
Calgary Stampeders, on another outstanding season. Mr. 
Speaker, last Thursday he won the CFL’s [Canadian Football 
League] Most Outstanding Lineman Award in only his second 
season in the league. And on Sunday, as we all know, he helped 
the Stampeders to a Grey Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brett is no stranger to success. He played high 
school football at the Weyburn Comprehensive and won 3A 
division city championships in both 2007 and 2008. He then 
went on to an all-star career with the Regina Rams, where he 
was two-time CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] all-star and 

was Canada West top student athlete in both 2011 and 2012. 
 
But even with this success, he wasn’t even sure he was going to 
play professional football. Brett actually applied for medical 
school before being drafted by the Stampeders in the second 
round. Thankfully for the Stampeders, he ended up playing 
football where he was the most outstanding rookie last season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that Brett is the second 
consecutive product of the city of Weyburn to win the CFL’s 
Most Outstanding Lineman award, as last year Brendon LaBatte 
won the award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly there’s something in the water at the 
Weyburn Comprehensive, and as you can tell, it clearly wasn’t 
in the water when I was a student there. But, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask all members to join with me in congratulating Brett on 
another successful season. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Health Care and Physician Services 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined today 
by a delegation from Craik and Central Butte and area, 
including Reeve Hilton Spencer, Mayor Rick Rogers, Dr. Elie 
Karam, and several others. They’ve travelled here today 
because they’re upset with this government for scaling back 
health care services in Craik. They’ve tried to meet with the 
Health minister and the Rural Health minister, but they were 
told, Mr. Speaker, that both ministers were too busy. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Will he agree to 
meet with these individuals today to hear their concerns 
first-hand, and then at least instruct one of his two ministers to 
follow up on their concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll certainly want to check 
with the two ministers, the Minister of Health and the Minister 
for Rural and Remote Health with respect to a response they 
might have given to an invitation to meet with the folks 
because, Mr. Speaker, I know both of them have readily 
accepted all invitations to meet with communities about health 
care issues and health care concerns. And that’s what we would 
want them to do, as a government. Mr. Speaker, these are the 
people that we serve in this legislature, including those that 
have concerns about decisions being taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of some of the specific concerns around 
doctor coverage with respect to this particular area. I can get 
into the details of the answer. The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is 
that as a result of a candidate ready to begin her practice in 
Heartland in mid- to late-January who will join a Dr. Lang in 
Davidson, Mr. Speaker, we think we’re going to achieve that 
third, that third doctor coverage that’s required to continue the 
services as we would want them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note in a letter from Five Hills Health Region dated 6 
November 2014, there is a quote with respect to the summary of 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6231 

this additional, this doctor that will practise and the service that 
will be provided that says: 
 

Along with the service agreement between the two health 
regions, this funding arrangement will enable stable 
physician coverage in Craik as well as stable on-call 
coverage for the hospital in Davidson. 

 
It also goes on to say, “We do not anticipate this resulting in 
any change of service within Craik.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’ll be issues with respect with Central Butte 
we can chat about. I know ministers will want to meet with the 
delegation immediately after question period. But we are 
responding, is my understanding, through the region in terms of 
providing doctor coverage. And if there’s more that can be 
done, I’m sure we’d be interested in hearing directly from the 
guests that have joined us in the gallery. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is questioning what 
the delegation are saying about what has happened, the Premier 
should meet with them this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
they would very much welcome the opportunity to share 
first-hand to the Premier what they’re experiencing. They don’t 
come to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, because they are happy 
and satisfied. They come because they have real concerns, 
concerns that should be listened to. 
 
The previous doctor in Craik, who moved to Moose Jaw, had 
about 5,000 patients. Dr. Karam, a Canadian-trained physician 
wants to keep working and practising in Craik and provide 
services to these patients. But the government wants to prevent 
Dr. Karam from doing so because it wants to centralize doctors 
in a different community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the delegation today, we’re joined by John 
Ackland; he’s with us. John had a severe heart attack. John told 
me, Mr. Speaker, that his life was saved because of the services 
provided in Craik and the health care that was provided by Dr. 
Karam. 
 
My question is to the Premier: will he commit today to ensure 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone is heckling about this, Mr. Speaker, when 
people from a rural community come with concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. My question to the Premier: will he commit today to 
ensure that Dr. Karam can keep practising and keep saving lives 
in Craik? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the minister that was 
just referenced by the Leader of the Opposition was 
commenting on the monumental work that’s had to take place 
in this province to rebuild health care in rural Saskatchewan 
after that party closed 52 hospitals across this province. So 
we’ll say it. We’ll put it on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote, with respect to this issue, I will 
respond and quote directly from a letter. This is certainly the 
understanding we have. And if more can be done, if more can 

be done, we’d certainly want to hear directly from the visitors 
to the Assembly. And I quote, this is the letter from Five Hills 
Health Region from November 6th: 
 

As we’ve discussed in the past, our direction is to ensure 
the stability of physician services to the Davidson/Craik 
corridor, both for routine scheduled visits and also for 
on-call coverage. In order to provide the level of service 
consistently, a group of three physicians is required. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

We understand that Heartland has a SIPPA candidate. 
[That’s the new process we’ve gone through to expand the 
number of rural doctors we have.] The SIPPA candidate 
will be ready to begin her practice by mid to late January 
to join Dr. Lang in Davidson. 

 
Accordingly a contract extension was offered to Dr. 
Karam on October 29, 2014 which would take him 
through to January 31, 2015. At that time funding for the 
physician in Craik will be combined with those provided 
for Davidson. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so that’s where we are to date with respect to the 
specific question of the doctor. There will be additional 
coverage. We can meet with the community and find out what 
more can be done. 
 
But I would point out, we are training more doctors now in this 
province. We are recruiting from more places around the world. 
There are 400 more doctors practising than when those folks 
were in the government. We know there is work to do. We’re 
always willing to listen to communities that have concerns, and 
we welcome the chance to do that today in the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the doctor is here today. The 
mayor of Craik is here today. The reeve of the RM is here 
today, Mr. Speaker, because this Sask Party government wants 
to pull services out of Craik. 
 
That’s why they’ve travelled to the legislature because — get 
this, Mr. Speaker — the government wants to take away the 
stabilization and observation unit and put in a bunch of offices. 
And the Premier talks about the plan that’s been cooked up by 
the health region, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s clearly not working for 
the good people of Craik. 
 
The health region actually had contractors who have already 
been in the health care centre drawing lines on the floor while 
the offices are going and start tearing down the walls because 
they want to take out the observation unit. And get this — the 
town had to enforce a bylaw, Mr. Speaker. They went in and 
kicked out the contractors because the health region and this 
government didn’t even have the right permits in place as they 
tried to carve up the observation unit, Mr. Speaker. The 
government, Five Hills Health Region, should be embarrassed 
about that, but they should be mostly embarrassed about taking 
important services out of Craik and area. And that’s why they 
are here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6232 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

The community has a Canadian-trained physician who wants to 
practise. Community members want the services that they’ve 
always had. When I spoke with them, Mr. Speaker, they said, 
we don’t want anything that we haven’t had before. What we 
want are the services that we’ve had in Craik for a hundred 
years, Mr. Speaker. And if this Premier wants to talk about 
things that happened when I was 13 years old, well he can go 
down that path. But right now, Mr. Speaker, we have people 
from Craik who are upset about the health care in their 
community. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he have the courage to meet 
with them today right after question period? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer to the 
question is yes. And so will ministers of Health meet with the 
officials that are here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that there has been a 
change. There was a significant change in health care coverage 
for Craik specifically, long before the concern around doctor 
coverage happened. My understanding, Mr. Speaker, was the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government that ended 24-7 
emergency services in communities . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . No, no. No. And it’s why . . . well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
want to hear the facts. 
 
The fact of the matter is that we as a government have been 
working hard to try to rebuild rural health care. The fact of the 
matter is that since we were elected, we’ve hired more doctors 
for rural Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is that 144 of 151 
SIPPA doctors are now practising in rural communities, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact of the matter is there are more nurses 
practising in rural communities than there were. The fact of the 
matter is that beds for long-term care are opening in rural 
Saskatchewan where they used to close. The fact of the matter 
is that what we are rebuilding from is the legacy from members 
opposite, including at Craik where they ended emergency 
services. 
 
Yes, we’ll meet with the community, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we’re 
going to continue to ensure the Five Hills Health Region is 
working with them. They’ve lined up another doctor, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to what’ll happen in January. And if 
there’s something else we can do in terms of flexibility, or ask 
the region to do, we would be more than happy to do it. The 
member for the area has been making this a priority with the 
ministers and with my office, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 
continue to make it a priority. I’d be happy to meet with them 
after question period. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Health Quality Council 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier’s idea of improving 
health care services in Craik is taking away the observation unit 
and bringing in more offices, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t add up for 
the people of Craik, and I’m glad that the Premier has agreed to 
meet with them, Mr. Speaker, because they deserve better 
answers than what they just heard. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the provincial auditor released her report. 
And she says that the Health Quality Council does not know 
whether the use of lean is creating sustainable change or 
whether it’s making health care better. It’s not collecting the 
right data and it’s not reporting the right information, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, the only thing that it has coordinated well, Mr. 
Speaker, is the cheerleading, and we have seen that time and 
time again. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. What is going to 
change as a result of the scathing criticism from the auditor? 
Will he finally allow the Health Quality Council to report the 
objective truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
appreciate the work that was done by the Provincial Auditor. 
The Health Quality Council has accepted all of the 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can inform the House that the Health Quality 
Council will be implementing a risk management framework. A 
timeline and a set of work plans have also been developed to 
assist with monitoring and managing risks and gaps. Regions 
are working with the Health Quality Council to better assess 
those gaps and issues. As well, the Health Quality Council, in 
partnership with other health organizations, will be redesigning 
the strategic and operational walls to align with monitoring and 
reporting to strategic priority areas. 
 
As well, since last summer I can report that the Health Quality 
Council — which I believe does address one of the concerns 
that was raised by the auditor — is working in partnership with 
the health system organizations to work down on the backlog of 
RPIW [rapid process improvement workshop] audit reports. So 
all health organizations have been asked to upload those audit 
reports to the Health Quality Council, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I can confirm that the Health Quality Council agrees with 
the auditor’s recommendations and will be implementing all of 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see from this 
government, we see from this minister is always dismissing, 
always minimizing concerns when they’re brought forward. 
The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, found that the Health 
Quality Council is simply providing information about the 
number of events and the projected gains from those events. 
They are not providing objective information about outcomes 
and whether those outcomes, Mr. Speaker, are actually 
sustained. And we know why they’re not doing that, Mr. 
Speaker, because this government is obsessed and consumed 
about the optics around lean, and that’s why it’s directed the 
Health Quality Council to take on a role that is not an objective 
one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s report talks about how they created a 
rapid response team. And we’ve talked about the lean go-teams, 
Mr. Speaker, before. They talked about their need to deal with 
“negative media attention.” We see the meddling, Mr. Speaker, 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6233 

by this government in Health Quality Council affairs. They’re 
not providing the objective information that would actually 
improve the health care system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s a quote from the auditor: “At the time of our audit, HQC 
did not know whether the use of Lean has created sustainable 
change or is making health care better.” 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. When can we 
stop, the cheerleading to stop around lean and John Black and 
Associates? When can we expect and when will we have 
objective analysis and objective truth from Health Quality 
Council? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s report does indicate 
that — and I would refer to the member to page 3 — that the 
Health Quality Council mission is to accelerate quality 
improvement and quality of health care throughout 
Saskatchewan. And it says, and I quote, “Since its inception, 
Health Quality Council has been involved in quality 
improvement in the health sector.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a change in terms of the mandate of the 
Health Quality Council. But I can report, as I indicated in my 
first answer, that the Health Quality Council is in agreement 
with the auditor’s recommendations, and it is developing a plan 
to implement all of the auditor’s recommendations, Mr. 
Speaker. Health regions know that according to . . . as the plan 
is laid out, that they have to report audited information on lean 
events over a certain number of time frames, such as 60, 90, and 
120 days, for example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That report, that information isn’t always updated to the Health 
Quality Council on a timely basis. Health Quality Council and 
the health organizations agree to get through that backlog. They 
agree with all of the recommendations and will be 
implementing all of them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 
The Lean Initiative and Contract With Consultant 

 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve been busy because this 
government has directed them to have the lean go-team and deal 
with media and negative press, as opposed to actually dealing 
with what matters in our health care system. 
 
It’s not just the Health Quality Council that isn’t providing 
objective information. We’ve also seen it from the Health 
minister, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the minister refused to answer 
written questions about financial savings achieved through lean. 
Either he doesn’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker, or he doesn’t 
want to share the information with Saskatchewan taxpayers and 
the public. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The auditor is critical of the Health Quality Council for failing 
to track and report the right information and she’s also, Mr. 
Speaker, critical of this government’s $40 million American 

lean consultant. The auditor says that ending the relationship 
with John Black will mean that things will improve. 
 
Well here’s an action, Mr. Speaker, that this government could 
take from the auditor’s recommendations. Why doesn’t it just 
fire John Black and rid this province of John Black and his 
toxic version of lean once and for all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve indicated, we will be ending our contractual relationship 
June of 2015 with JBA [John Black and Associates], Mr. 
Speaker. But I will go on further to report when it comes to the 
auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The auditor has recommended that the Health Quality Council 
give written reports to the Ministry of Health on results, Mr. 
Speaker. Health Quality Council currently does produce 
monthly reports that are shared with the ministry, and in early 
2015, the Health Quality Council is planning to work with 
health organizations and the ministry to determine appropriate 
reporting format, schedule, and audits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the Health Quality Council is 
recommended by the auditor to report to the public on the 
outcomes, Mr. Speaker, something that I think the Leader of the 
Opposition would call cheerleading. But, Mr. Speaker, that is 
one of the recommendations of the auditor that certainly is 
accepted by the Health Quality Council. In fact, they’ve put 
together a website, betterhealthcare.ca, as a launch point for 
public access so that the public does have this information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But as I said before, the Health Quality Council accepts all the 
recommendations and will implement them all. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor said this morning that 
the consultant has way too much control. And the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, should pay attention to this. This matters, what’s going 
on in our province. And it fits with everything we’ve heard, Mr. 
Speaker, about this government’s approach to John Black. We 
know this government placed John Black at the top of the org 
chart, so it’s no surprise that the auditor would say that this 
consultant has way too much control. 
 
Senior health administrators, Mr. Speaker, have said that John 
Black lacks respect, that he tattles, that he undermines, that he 
gossips, takes people on if they even dare to question his 
authority. The auditor says that things with lean will improve if 
John Black is gone. 
 
To the Premier: even . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And they 
can heckle about stuttering, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pretty normal 
thing. Even the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, has said that John 
Black doesn’t tailor lean for Saskatchewan’s needs. My 
question to the Premier: why keep John Black around to 
summer? Everyone agrees that he’s toxic, that things will 
improve when he’s gone. Will the Premier have the courage to 
stand up and fire John Black? 
 



6234 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have indicated to the public, as well to JBA, that 
we’re going to be exiting the contract earlier than was originally 
planned, Mr. Speaker. But in order to further implement lean 
throughout the entire health care system, Mr. Speaker, we knew 
that it was going to take a number of years. 
 
We’re also looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to the transition for 
when the health system will take over this work on its own, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing that, Mr. Speaker, other organizations that 
have looked at this type of lean transformation have engaged 
outside consultants, have built up capacity, Mr. Speaker, as 
we’re doing now, both in the Health Quality Council as well as 
in our health regions and our cancer agency and in the Ministry 
of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know though that there have been good results 
in terms of the efficiencies within the system but also, Mr. 
Speaker, the quality improvement work. We know that there’s 
more work on that front to be done, but we think that this 
provides one of the tools, as does increasing staff levels, Mr. 
Speaker, as does renewing facilities, Mr. Speaker. It’s just one 
tool, but it is one that we find is effective in health care. and 
we’re going to continue forward with it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Distribution of Medication in Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We’ve heard many concerns throughout this 
session about care plans for residents in care facilities not being 
properly followed or updated. And now the Provincial Auditor 
is raising major concerns as well. The auditor says that this 
government is putting seniors in care facilities at risk of drug 
complications, overmedication, and fatalities because it’s not 
properly managing medication plans. To the minister: will this 
government change anything as a result of the auditor’s findings 
or will it continue to minimize these very serious concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we do not minimize these types of concerns, 
Mr. Speaker. As the Provincial Auditor has pointed out in her 
report, that we do have program guidelines for special care 
homes. They do include policies for regional health authorities 
for the provision of long-term care services, including 
medication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that Heartland Regional Health 
Authority is committed to addressing the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations. They take this very seriously. They have put 
in place a regional steering committee that will be working on 
this issue that will include physicians, pharmacists, nursing 
staff, region leadership, as well as engaging clients and families 
to inform the work. The project plan will determine how to 
improve their processes so that they are in compliance with the 
guidelines that are required of them as a health region and as 
facilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as well I can indicate that as of April 2013, quarter 
medication reviews became a requirement of the special care 
home guidelines. We expect that all of our regions would 
follow them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — In the auditor’s review, every single resident 
they looked at was receiving one or more potentially 
inappropriate medications. Two-thirds of the residents they 
looked at were receiving three or more potentially inappropriate 
medications, and every single resident with dementia was on 
antipsychotic drugs to sedate them. 
 
This is all hugely concerning, but it should not be a surprise to 
this government. After all, this government’s own statistics 
show that one-third of residents in care facilities are on 
antipsychotic medications without having a diagnosis and 
without having psychosis. 
 
To the minister: when will this government get serious about 
delivering only safe and necessary medications to seniors in 
care facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we require that regional health authorities monitor 
seven quality indicators and report that back to the Ministry of 
Health, Mr. Speaker. That is the most of any other province, 
Mr. Speaker, that does have a requirement for reporting back to 
their ministry or department, Mr. Speaker. One of the seven 
measures is antipsychotic use without a diagnosis of psychosis, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also require that when a health region or 
facility reports a number that is greater than the provincial 
average, that they do put in place and report back on a 
mitigation strategy to reduce that number, Mr. Speaker, of their 
residents that are being prescribed medication without a 
diagnosis. Mr. Speaker, that is something that has been put in 
place by the Ministry of Health for over a year now, Mr. 
Speaker. But again in this serious situation, this health region, 
they do accept the recommendations of the auditor and will be 
putting in processes to make improvements on this very serious 
issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Route of the Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 
are a lot of people who are concerned about some of the 
decisions by this government that it has made in regard to the 
bypass. There are concerns about the location, the safety, and 
the functionality of the chosen route. There’s no question that 
this city needs a bypass and it needs one quickly, but it’s 
important to get it right. We need a Regina bypass, not a 
bottleneck. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Highways: will she agree to 
meet with these concerned citizens who are here today to hear 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6235 

their concerns first-hand? Will she do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Regina bypass is the biggest infrastructure project that this 
province has undertaken. As the member opposite said, it is 
necessary. And, Mr. Speaker, for a project this size, we 
understand that not everybody’s going to be happy with the 
chosen route, but we believe that we’ve chosen the best route 
possible. And all the interchanges are based on the highest 
safety standards in the country, Mr. Speaker, and we trust the 
engineers to make the right decisions. 
 
As to his request with meeting with the organizers of the group 
that’s here today, Mr. Speaker, I have met with them earlier this 
summer. The previous Highways minister has met with them as 
well. But I’m happy to meet with them again after question 
period today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Government Use of Consultants 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has 
exposed that the Premier’s claim to be reducing the size of 
government, has exposed this as a sham, as a charade. At the 
same time as the Premier’s been cutting jobs in the public 
service, he’s been ramping up spending on the use of expensive 
consultants. Since 2008 this government has increased spending 
on consultants to the tune of a whopping 228 per cent. To the 
Premier: how can he possibly justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan continues to 
work within a balanced budget. That is our goal. It has been our 
goal. It has been my goal as Finance minister, and we’re going 
to be continuing to do that. 
 
We implemented a reduction of staff across all of government. 
We had a goal of 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and that 
achievement is there. So we’re continuing to work in providing 
the services. We want to make sure that we spend dollars 
wisely, that we’re going to be efficient, and that’s the reason 
why we have taken the path that we have. So, Mr. Speaker, as 
far as, you know, government moving forward, we want to 
work within the system that we have, which is of course a 
financial system that meets the needs of the province but still 
retains something that the NDP were not really sure about, and 
that’s living within your means. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s nothing short of a 
joke from the Finance minister today who’s ramped up 
spending by 228 per cent on these outrageous contracts. The 
auditor says that the government isn’t even writing down the 
reason for using a consultant when they decide to do so, and 
over 90 per cent of the contracts don’t even provide for 
monitoring or evaluation of the contracts. This is absolutely 
outrageous. This government has increased the spending on 

contracts by 228 per cent. They’re not keeping track of why it’s 
hiring consultants. It’s not monitoring the consultants, and it’s 
not even evaluating the consultants.  
 
To the Premier: how is this possibly good use of public dollars? 
What’s going to change as a result of this report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Finance is correct. The size of government, in terms 
of FTEs [full-time equivalent] is 15 per cent smaller than it was 
four years ago. Mr. Speaker, moreover, what we’ve seen in 
infrastructure, in the investment in infrastructure in this 
province, is record infrastructure — record highways budgets, 
record build-out in provincial infrastructure. The largest one 
was just noted on the floor of the House. This work takes 
consultants. Rather than build up a permanent bureaucracy, Mr. 
Speaker, we used consultants to get this done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members are chirping from their seat, but 
they’ll want to hear this in terms of the finances of the province. 
Seven straight balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker; they’ll want to 
hear that. Not just Standard & Poor’s, but also Moody’s has 
given this province a AAA credit rating. That’s the first time in 
the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s the alternative sitting over there? The Leader of the 
Opposition wrote the campaign platform last time. What would 
it have cost to the people of Saskatchewan? A $5 billion hole in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker, back to the tax-and-spend NDP. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not going back there. We’ll stay with balanced 
budgets. We’ll stay with AAA credit ratings. We’ll stay with 
the leading economy in the nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 174, 
The Registered Teachers Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 
reading of Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

 



6236 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments 
Acts, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a long history of being a world 
leader in promoting and protecting human rights. The 
province’s first comprehensive human rights legislation, the 
Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, traces back to 1947. Its 
introduction made our province the first jurisdiction in North 
America to pass a general human rights Act and provided such 
fundamental freedoms as freedom of religion, freedom of 
speech, freedom of association, freedom from arbitrary 
imprisonment, and the right to vote. 
 
As the society has advanced, so too has our perception and 
understanding of human rights. Over time we have seen 
numerous enhancements to our human rights legislation, such 
as prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of sex, 
disability, sexual orientation, or family status. These 
enhancements reflect the changing needs and values of our 
society and are embodied in the current Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code. 

The code reflects our province’s highest aspirations for a fair 
and prosperous democracy, existing to achieve two purposes: to 
promote recognition of the inherent dignity and equal 
inalienable rights of all members of the human family, and to 
further public policy in Saskatchewan that every person is free 
and equal in dignity and rights and to discourage and eliminate 
discrimination. 
 
Although it has remained largely intact since its introduction in 
1979, from time to time legislatures have found it necessary to 
update the code to ensure it continues to remain relevant in a 
changing province and a changing legal environment. This bill 
will make further enhancements to the code and ensure that 
Saskatchewan remains a leader in promoting and protecting 
human rights. 
 
The first important change proposed in this bill is to add gender 
identity as an express prohibited ground under the code. I’ve 
previously stated in this House, Mr. Speaker, that transgender 
individuals in Saskatchewan are already protected from 
discrimination under the prohibited grounds of sex and sexual 
orientation. This continues to be the case. Transgender 
individuals who face discrimination are currently able to bring 
complaints forward to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission, and the handling of a recent complaint has 
confirmed that. 
 
The rights of transgender individuals receive strong protection 
under the existing code. The proposed amendments regarding 
the express inclusion of gender identity will not change the 
existing status of those protections. Rather, following a request 
from the Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission, these protections against discrimination are 
being made explicit. This change will confirm existing equality 
rights for transgender individuals and help bring greater 
awareness of these rights to society as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will also update the code’s provisions 
respecting rental housing. The code prevents landlords from 
choosing tenants based on the prohibited grounds. However, a 
limited exemption allows landlords to select tenants based on 
sex or sexual orientation where the rental property is a suite or 
duplex unit that’s connected to the home of the landlord or the 
landlord’s family. This bill will amend these provisions by 
repealing the exemption based on sexual orientation and 
updating the exemption based on sex to apply only where the 
landlord or landlord’s family share a common entrance with the 
tenant. 
 
These changes achieve a balance between protecting 
prospective tenants from discrimination and respecting the 
privacy and security concerns of landlords who live in close 
proximity to tenants. The code contains an additional exemption 
for landlords who share kitchen and bathroom facilities with 
tenants, as commonly found in roommate or boarder 
arrangements, and this bill will not impact that existing 
exemption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the code contains a provision that provides that no 
ground of discrimination shall be interpreted as extending to 
any conduct that is prohibited by the Criminal Code. The 
provisions of The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code do not 
supersede provisions of the Criminal Code. Further, 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6237 

Saskatchewan’s code does not permit or protect criminal 
conduct. As a result, we are recommending that this provision 
be repealed. 
 
A number of additional administrative amendments that have 
been requested by the Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission are also proposed. For example, the 
amendments will remove wording from the code’s hate speech 
provision that was struck down by the Supreme Court of 
Canada. This change will not have a substantive impact on the 
code as the hate speech provision is already interpreted in 
accordance with the Supreme Court’s ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the request of the Chief Commissioner, the bill 
will also remove provisions that allow the commissioner to 
apply for search warrants and update provisions that allow the 
commission to apply for court orders to produce information 
when conducting investigations. Generally the commission 
seeks the consent of parties to search premises or obtain 
information. Where a party is uncooperative, the bill will allow 
the commission to apply to the Court of Queen’s Bench for an 
order requiring the party to produce information or respond to 
other inquiries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a related amendment, the bill will make it an 
offence for a person to interfere with the commission in an 
investigation or its administration of the code. Although the 
code currently prohibits individuals from interfering with the 
commission, in this matter there are no provisions to enforce 
that rule. 
 
The code contains a provision that allows the court to award 
compensation to an injured person where that person has 
suffered with respect to feeling dignity or self-respect or where 
the party who has contravened the code has done so in a wilful 
or reckless manner. This form of compensation is in addition to 
other losses suffered, such as lost wages. The bill will increase 
compensation that the court can order with respect to dignity 
and wilful reckless behaviour from 10,000 to $20,000. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will increase the 
maximum fines courts can order against individuals or 
corporations who have committed an offence under the code to 
$10,000 in the case of a first offence and $25,000 for each 
subsequent offence. The current limits have been in place since 
the code was first introduced in 1979. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I conclude, let me repeat the words that I have 
said in this Chamber previously. In Saskatchewan our law 
recognizes the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable rights 
of all members of the human family. We do this as a province 
because the causes for which we stand, of justice, of freedom, 
and of fairness, cannot flourish where discrimination is given 
rein to coexist. 
 
This bill will maintain our position as a leader in protecting 
human rights and ensure that Saskatchewan remains a safe and 
welcoming province for all. With that, Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 171, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very proud today to be able to stand in my place and represent 
the official opposition’s first look at the changes that are 
included in Bill 171. And certainly from the caucus and from 
the number of people that have worked very, very hard on some 
of the improvements that were called for and some of the 
recognition of some of the challenges that some Saskatchewan 
people face, I sincerely want to commend and to recognize my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, who’s done a lot 
of great work on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it really hearkens the year of 1947 when we all know the 
history of the Human Rights Code, when the premier of the day 
at that time, Premier Douglas, introduced the Human Rights 
Code to ensure that people in Saskatchewan are treated fairly 
and equally and that absolutely everyone has the opportunity to 
live life as they wish and that they’re able to contribute to the 
greater good of Saskatchewan in many, many ways, Mr. 
Speaker. And that Human Rights Code back in 1947 hearkened 
some of the changes that are necessary in this modern day and 
age, and some of the champions that are necessary as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again that my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre has done a great amount of work on this 
particular process and was engaged and certainly represented, I 
think, a lot of people’s views on this matter. And I really want 
to commend him, along with the minister, in terms of working 
towards this particular bill, Bill 171. 
 
There’s no question that the bill itself has a lot of components 
that we want to take time to understand better. Obviously that’s 
part of the process here. I think sections 3, 7, 8, and 14 add 
gender identity to the Human Rights Code, Mr. Speaker. And it 
really begins to beg the question of exactly how important it is 
to recognize each other’s rights, to have the ability to enjoy 
each other’s company as human beings, and to treat each other 
as fairly as possible. That is the basic tenet of the Human Rights 
Code, Mr. Speaker, of 1947. 
 
I think that there is so many ways and means that Saskatchewan 
has grown over the years from the first initial introduction of 
the Human Rights Code, Mr. Speaker, and now 2014, a number 
of years later, we’re continuing to make improvements and 
we’re continuing to make substantial gains. And I think it’s a 
great credit to our former Premier Douglas in the sense of his 
initial work and certainly the challenge that he had at the time 
to bring forward such a remarkable opportunity for 
Saskatchewan to celebrate what we call human rights, Mr. 
Speaker. And that code was introduced by none other than the 
NDP’s very own Premier Douglas. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again we look at the bill itself. There are a 
number of areas that we want to highlight. Obviously it talks a 
bit about some of the constraints around section 4 which 
narrows the rules around taking roommates, so that you can 
discriminate based on your roommate’s gender but not on their 
sexual orientation. We think that that’s a pretty straightforward 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And sections 10 and 11 make tougher penalties for violation of 



6238 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

human rights, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the important phrase that 
I wanted to focus on, violation of human rights, Mr. Speaker. 
And as was indicated through a number of speeches and 
positions over time, and continuing on with the vision of our 
former premier, Premier Douglas, in the sense of making sure 
that this government . . . The NDP supports this bill. And we’re 
pleased to see the government, after much pressure and much 
encouragement by champions within our caucus, to make sure 
that we’re able to see this day in a sense that some of the 
wording that has been put in place is now being changed and 
that there’s a greater respect around the notion and the wording 
of human rights. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s also important is you look at 
some of the information that, you know, that we want to share 
is that there’s obviously . . . While we’re encouraging and 
celebrating the achievement of human rights, it’s also important 
to be on guard for those that wish to destroy those rights or to 
challenge those rights or to degenerate those rights in any way, 
shape, or form. So I think there has to be punishment attached 
to that because obviously it’s something that you want to 
discourage: that it’s not just a statement; that there is really, 
truly, that there is an opportunity for those that are subjected to 
this kind of activity; that there is recourse; that there is 
protection for them. 
 
And I think some of the notions as we look at the bill itself 
overall, of raising fines from 10,000 to $20,000, those fines 
really act as a deterrent, Mr. Speaker. And then you look at 
some of the other fine structure. I understand from the bill itself 
that you’re looking at $10,000 for the first offence, and if you 
continue this kind of activity, then obviously there’s an increase 
of 25,000 for a second offence and subsequent offences after 
that. So it does become a huge challenge for those that wish to 
express their difference in a negative way that infringes on 
people’s human rights, Mr. Speaker. And we think that those 
kind of fines and system that’s in place are adequate and 
certainly are a good step forward. 
 
As what’s also important, Mr. Speaker, is that there is 
provisions in there that would discourage people interfering 
with investigations of a human rights complaint against some of 
the individuals that are identified under this human rights 
charter, Mr. Speaker. That’s obviously important. We don’t 
want to see any kind of investigations — criminal or human 
rights charges — to be impeded or to be interfered with in any 
way, shape, or form. So it’s really important that that also be 
part of the penalty system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also noticed that the Human Rights Code has 
been amended in a sense of the hate speech provisions to 
remove wording that the Supreme Court of Canada has struck 
down. So in certain instances, Mr. Speaker, the actual wording 
itself is updated. It uses modern language, Mr. Speaker. It uses 
legal language and it certainly has a good legal framework in 
which they can operate, especially in light of the fact that the 
Supreme Court of Canada has removed certain provisions, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to human rights overall, and certainly this 
matter, to be more specific. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I really want to point out that the Human 
Rights Code of 1947, when I asked a question of, where did this 
all begin, where did all this process start . . . When it came in, 

Saskatchewan itself knew that there was a lot of difference, Mr. 
Speaker, between a lot of different people, a lot of different 
regions, a lot of different communities. And that difference, Mr. 
Speaker, was something that we know does not bring the 
communities nor the people together in a common front. 
 
And we often hear everything . . . From the provincial motto 
where it says, “from many peoples, strength,” Mr. Speaker, I 
think certainly you look at the Human Rights Code itself. It is 
something that we aspire to do to the Human Rights Code is to 
draw from many peoples’ strength. And from all those people in 
all their walks of lives, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we 
recognize them and their value as human beings and that we 
continue to, we continue to engage them, and we continue to 
respect them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And we continue making human rights affordable to them in the 
sense of knowing that they don’t stand alone and that they’re 
not alone, Mr. Speaker, and that there are some serious 
penalties for those who wish to do them harm by either words 
or, Mr. Speaker, in the worst case scenario, assaults and threats, 
Mr. Speaker. So certainly in the year 2014 in Saskatchewan it’s 
important that we celebrate human rights as such an important 
achievement for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We often hear through the mainstream media some of the 
challenges that some of the bigger, larger countries have. We 
often hear of some of the trade missions to some of the 
countries that do have some serious violations, you know, on 
the human rights front, Mr. Speaker. And yet people continually 
bring those matters forward to the appropriate leaders of our 
country. And, Mr. Speaker, it is often really important that, 
when I watch TV, when we see the heads of state or the heads 
of our provinces discussing business with certain companies or 
certain countries and the notion of human rights comes into the 
picture, I think it’s really, really important that as a civilized 
country, as a modern, civilized country, that we look at human 
rights as something that’s really important and basic to every 
day and everything we do as a people. We think that’s the first 
and foremost thing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the human rights, the values of 
human rights transcend law. It transcends the ability for a 
modern society to thrive and to exist. So, Mr. Speaker, it is 
something that I think that we celebrate on the international 
stage when we have large economic discussions that the notion 
of human rights begin to enter the picture. It begins to enter the 
discussions. The media pose these questions to a number of 
leaders that may be in front of them. 
 
So human rights has always been front and centre stage. And, 
Mr. Speaker, once again we’re seeing the accomplishment 
today by champions within our caucus and people like the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, who I know has worked very 
hard on not only this particular aspect of human rights but a 
wide variety of human rights, everything from poverty to 
housing to proper health care and also, Mr. Speaker, recognition 
of those that suffer in our communities through discrimination 
and unfair treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important as we look to the bill itself that I know 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6239 

that all our colleagues and many of our colleagues will have a 
lot more discussion on this particular bill. I am looking forward 
to the response to the bill from the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, as I believe he has a great amount of courage to be able 
to undertake some of these efforts. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
he’s got a lot of confidence, and he’s feeling really good about a 
lot of things these days, and I think this is one of the particular 
aspects that has really buoyed his spirit as a human being. 
 
And I think I’m looking forward to that particular speech 
because I think we’re going to hear a dynamite response from 
him, and we’re going to see a great, a great speech from a 
gentleman that has worked very hard on the issue of making 
sure everyone and those involved with any community are 
respected as human beings. And that’s a very, very important 
tenet to being part of a civilized society. 
 
So I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that everything from the 
defined structure to the discussions to how we go about moving 
forward on this bill, how we celebrate our differences but not 
allow it to begin to fester and to foster hate amongst different 
groups, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now expanded that information. 
We’ve expanded the knowledge. We’ve expanded the process 
overall. 
 
And the most important thing is to recognize that absolutely 
every human being is worth our effort to try and help and 
support, and worth our every effort to try and strengthen, Mr. 
Speaker, and that from our perspective, every human being has 
something to offer and is of value, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 
whole process that we want to celebrate as a result of Bill 171. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I want to offer my congratulations to my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre. I want to 
congratulate the Minister of Justice for bringing this bill 
forward. I look forward to the responses from a wide variety of 
people, Mr. Speaker, and I especially look forward to the 
response from the member from Saskatoon Centre because I 
think it’s going to be a dynamite response. 
 
And I also want to pay tribute, I want to pay tribute to those that 
frontiered this particular effort. And I go back to the early years 
when our former premier, Premier Douglas, introduced the 
Human Rights Code of 1947, Mr. Speaker. We think that that 
hearkened a new journey for Saskatchewan. And while from 
time to time you get governments that don’t recognize the value 
of enshrining human rights in their psyche, in their thinking 
every single day, Mr. Speaker, there are moments in this 
Assembly where we should recognize the effort that it took to 
bring forward some of these changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I mentioned, I am certainly pleased to be able to stand 
with my colleague from Saskatoon Centre and to commend the 
minister for his courage bringing forward some of these 
changes, Mr. Speaker, and to point out that this is indeed a first 
step towards a long journey in celebrating what we think is 
basic in all of our lives is respecting human rights. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move at this point that we would adjourn 
debate on Bill 171. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 171, the human rights code 
amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise to move second reading of The Naturopathic 
Medicine Act, which will replace The Naturopathy Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, naturopathic medicine has been an established 
health profession in our province for decades. It is a form of 
primary health care that is tailored to the patient and emphasizes 
prevention and self-care. The current Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was passed in the 1950s and governs the self-regulation of 
naturopathic doctors and has not been updated since its 
inception I believe in 1955. 
 
The new Act will modernize this legislation. It will ensure the 
regulations governing naturopathic doctors will meet patients’ 
needs and that these naturopathic doctors are able to work to 
their full scope of practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act will provide title protection for 
naturopathic doctors. It will establish the authority for the 
regulatory body to set qualifying examinations and eligibility 
requirements for applicants. It will allow the appointment of 
public representatives to the regulatory body. It will align with 
the requirements of the Agreement on Internal Trade and the 
New West Partnership Trade Agreement. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new Act will also change the 
name of the Saskatchewan Association of Naturopathic 
Practitioners council to the College of Naturopathic Doctors of 
Saskatchewan. This change is to clarify the organization’s role 
as the regulatory body whose first duty is to protect the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes mean that the regulatory body will 
have the power to stop individuals from providing services for 
which they are not authorized. Because of these changes, 
patients may not have to travel to other provinces to seek 
treatment. The old Act prevents Saskatchewan naturopathic 
doctors from practising to their level of training and expertise, 
and these changes mean that naturopathic doctors working in 
Saskatchewan will be more likely to stay in Saskatchewan 
because they will have the same scope of practice as those 
working in other Canadian provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of how we are putting the 
patient first. People will have more treatment options, and the 
regulatory body governing naturopathic doctors will be able to 
better protect patients from harm. With that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 172, The Naturopathy Act. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Assiniboia.  



6240 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Sorry, Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And we 
look forward to having the MLA for Assiniboia being on this 
side of the House very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that as I look at the Bill 172, 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk about the naturopathic college for 
doctors of Saskatchewan, I understand there are about 25 
naturopathic doctors that operate within our province. And I 
understand that the naturopathic practice, Mr. Speaker, involves 
alternative medicines because obviously many people go 
through what I would make reference to as the traditional way 
of dealing with ailments, whether it’s going to see a doctor for 
medicine, for modern-day medicine, or modern-day services. 
 
There are many families in Saskatchewan and many people and 
individuals that go to doctors that are promoting a different 
style of dealing with human health challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to point out that it is nice to be able to see that the 
government is recognizing that the naturopathic doctors that are 
providing services in Saskatchewan are valued and that they’re 
part of the primary care system, you know, as the minister 
spoke about. 
 
And certainly I think since some of the activity that we’re 
dealing with and speaking about today have been occurring in 
Saskatchewan since 1955, we know that the naturopathic 
services that many doctors provide in the province of 
Saskatchewan has a lot of merit, and they certainly have a lot of 
support. And they, Mr. Speaker, have a great number of patients 
that seek their advice, and there are many people out there that 
use naturopathic doctors. 
 
And I understand that many of these doctors are Chinese trained 
because obviously there are different ways in which you can 
nurture the mind, body, and soul, Mr. Speaker. And some of 
these doctors of course have some very good training that 
originated in China, where I think there’s a lot of information, a 
lot more established practices and, Mr. Speaker, a lot more 
modern-day information that the Chinese institute and of course 
train some of the Saskatchewan-based doctors that provide the 
naturopathic services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my home community, prior to many of 
the hospitals being established, I often tell people back home 
that we should be proud of the history that Ile-a-la-Crosse has in 
terms of being one of the oldest settlements in Western Canada. 
And obviously Cumberland House is one community that 
boasts that they are the oldest and, Mr. Speaker, we certainly 
want to respect them and recognize them for that as well. 
 
But we’re not that much further down the path in terms of being 
one of the oldest. We’re the second oldest settlement in Western 
Canada. I think Cumberland House has been established a 
couple of years prior to Ile-a-la-Crosse being established. But 
when you celebrate your bicentennial in 1976, you can see that 
there’s a lot of history to Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And as generations come and go, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
information is saved. Some of the practices are transferred, and 

I would dare say that some of the information is how you would 
use natural products of the environment to deal with ailments 
100 years ago, Mr. Speaker. Some of the people in the 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse and surrounding the community 
have kept some of that information. 
 
So we see a lot of people that are using different types of plants, 
different types of herbs, different types of animal products to 
deal with certain ailments. And, Mr. Speaker, during my life I 
haven’t seen too much of that, but I note that there was some 
families in our community that really had intimate knowledge 
of how to use different parts of I guess nature to deal with 
common ailments. 
 
And one of the things I quickly learned as I was growing up is 
that the actual, what they would’ve referred to as rat root, it’s a 
plant that is being used to treat a number of ailments in our 
community for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, much prior to 
any doctors or modern day medicine reaching Ile-a-la-Crosse in 
the early years. They used these types of medicines to really 
deal with a number of ailments, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have a list 
of all the ailments, but it has shown historically that the whole 
notion of dealing with or having nature assist you with dealing 
with some of the diseases, really, and some of the ailments 
really does have a lot of merit. 
 
So the naturopathic Act itself, in dealing with the doctors and 
understanding how they’re working and begin to formalize their 
work to begin to ensure they have protection, to begin to ensure 
that they’re part of the health care system, to begin to ensure 
that they’re properly certified and that they’re properly 
accountable to their patients, these are really important steps to 
embrace the notion that there are natural cures to some of the 
ailments in our human body, Mr. Speaker. And there’s evidence 
that shows that, time and time again. 
 
And I’ve just shared some of the stories that I have in the early 
years that I’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, because obviously I’m much 
too young to remember the days in the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse before there were doctors. Because obviously 
this practice has been going on for hundreds of years, Mr. 
Speaker, and there are some families that are lucky enough to 
retain some of that knowledge. 
 
And one of the ladies I think is really important to recognize, 
Mr. Speaker, is a lady by the name Margaret Johnson. Margaret 
had a number of children. Her maiden name was I believe 
Kyplain. She married a gentleman by the name of Nap Johnson. 
And Margaret Johnson, her married name, she was one of the 
ladies that many, many people in the community went to see 
when they had ailments in the early years. They wanted to see if 
she had ways and means in which she could actually cure some 
of the challenges and the ills of some children and of course 
some ladies and men in our town, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So she was actually very, very well known, and she was 
respected for her knowledge of how to use Indian medicine or 
the land medicine to deal with common ailments. And Ms. 
Johnson I think taught a couple of her daughters some of the 
values, some of the medicines that are found on our lands, Mr. 
Speaker, and she taught them of the value, you know, of some 
of the lands. And I would point out the medicinal properties of 
some of the plants in and around our lakes, in and around our 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6241 

forests, Mr. Speaker. There’s a tremendous value there. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So long before we had doctors, long before we had X-ray 
machines, long before we had hospitals, Mr. Speaker, long 
before we had CAT [computerized axial tomography] scans, we 
obviously had to find ways and means in which you deal with 
common ailments and some severe ailments of our community 
when you’re looking at living in northern Saskatchewan and 
even southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can remember a number of stories in all parts of our 
province where people had good information of the different 
medicines that were available naturally to help with some of the 
ailments that some family member may be suffering through. 
And that information certainly helped and assisted overall at 
that time. And in those days, Mr. Speaker, it greatly assisted 
families going through some traumatic times as a result of 
threats to their health, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s 
important that we recognize the naturopathic opportunities that 
some of the doctors out there are providing to their patients. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is why it’s important to recognize their 
work and to also point out this has been happening and this has 
been occurring in Saskatchewan for a great number of years. 
And certainly from my perspective and my history, I can tell 
you that it has been happening in the communities that have 
celebrated years and years and years of birthdays, and that 
includes Cumberland House and that certainly includes the 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. Some of them are over 240 years 
of age. 
 
So these kind of activities, Mr. Speaker, are really important 
that . . . Again we’re pleased that there’s work to recognize this 
particular practice. We think there are a lot of people who 
would rather avoid the modern-day opportunities for some of 
the medicines that are available today. We think that’s their 
choice. Mr. Speaker, some people have an incredible belief that 
there are natural ways to heal your body, Mr. Speaker. These 
naturopathic doctors can give you some great advice. And it’s 
obviously encouraging to see that there is some way and there’s 
some means to formalize and to qualify their practice, and to 
continue recognizing them as part of the primary health care 
team to support Saskatchewan people’s health. 
 
So it’s important that we recognize the history, the value, the 
modern language. And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said at the outset 
of every bill, we certainly want to see what the SMA 
[Saskatchewan Medical Association] have to say about this, the 
association that deals with the naturopathic doctors, the type of 
training. There’s a lot of questions that we have on this. And 
it’s all meant to understand the naturopathic doctor services that 
we’re making reference to, to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people’s interests are being served well and that there’s a 
greater understanding of what these services do, and the value 
of these services. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing wrong with 
awareness and comprehensive awareness of any service, any 
health services, natural or modern, in the sense of making sure 
that people understand what is available and what the 
challenges and opportunities of each of these services might 
present to them. 
 

So there’s a lot more information that we need on this. We 
obviously have . . . It’s a new piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
so we need to talk about these issues at greater length. We need 
to consult with a number of groups. I for one look at the value 
of, as I mentioned at the outset, Ms. Johnson’s contribution to 
our community over the years when she gave some solid 
advice, and her mother and her grandmother before that. They 
pass this information and this knowledge on from generation to 
generation. And, Mr. Speaker, when at times when there’s no 
power, no doctors, no hospitals, many people sought the advice 
and support of Margaret Johnson in the early mornings when 
one of their loved ones was sick, and before that her mother and 
before that her grandmother and her great-grandmother. And 
thank goodness they passed that information down from 
generation to generation. Because you look at all the value that 
Ms. Johnson may have offered to the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse 
in their area, it would have been a tremendous amount, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this is part of a contribution that they’ve made and certainly 
a part of the recognition that I want to confer upon Margaret 
Johnson. She has since left us. She since has passed, Mr. 
Speaker, but as a young kid growing up in Ile-a-la-Crosse, I just 
knew that she was one of the ladies that we respected because 
we knew, even in our young minds, that she was a lady that 
helped sick people in the community and something that we 
obviously, at a young age, learned to respect very quickly. 
 
So the naturopathic medicines and all the opportunities that the 
bill has identified, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of information that 
we want to read through, we want to digest, we want to consult, 
we want to understand better, Mr. Speaker. And as an 
opposition it is our duty to do so. And when the time comes 
during the committee process, we’ll be able to ask some of the 
hard-hitting questions to the minister in ensuring that we get 
this particular process right because we owe it to the people like 
Margaret Johnson. We owe it to the many people in our own 
community. There’s hundreds of stories of the different 
pioneers of our province that will tell you of families, of people 
that have saved many lives and have helped many people 
through trying times and illnesses from their community when 
there was no doctors available and no modern medicines 
available and no hospitals around. There were families and 
people that did help, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure every single 
MLA in this Assembly would know of stories of people that 
done that type of work, Mr. Speaker, in the early years. 
 
So it’s important that we respect that work. It’s important that 
we formalize our understanding of the naturopathic services 
that are out there. It’s important we ask the questions how we 
can strengthen it, but what’s also very, very important is to pay 
tribute to those pioneers and those families and those people 
that provided the services before we had modern medicine, 
before we had highly skilled doctors, and before we had 
services such as hospitals. 
 
It is a tribute to them, Mr. Speaker, and we would hope that this 
industry not only thrives, Mr. Speaker, but is respected and 
widely acknowledged as an alternative form of energy to 
modern medicine and be part of the overall delivery system of 
our health care system. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 
Bill 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. 
 



6242 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 152. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 170 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 
Safety Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The Clerk had me worried for a minute there but I’m on the 
right page so that’s good. 
 
This bill was introduced yesterday, The Fire Prevention Act. 
The minister thankfully gave fairly lengthy and detailed 
comments on the purpose of this bill and quite generally the 
idea was to replace The Fire Prevention Act of 1992 and he said 
that’s a 22-year-old Act and it was time to modernize it. 
 
We’re seeing a lot of the work of this government in this term 
doing this kind of work. I would think that, having been a 
former public servant, I think public officials are going to be 
very pleased with the freedom they have and the time they have 
to reflect on some of these older bills and have an opportunity 
to maybe modernize and bring some recommendations forward 
to the minister to modernize some bills that may need some 
updating. 
 
Certainly there isn’t much of substance in terms of substantive 
new policy that this government is bringing forward. In fact it’s 
probably a very flat legislative agenda as far as innovation and 
positive ideas. But it does give public servants, who are always 
looking for ways to sort of improve the work that they do, to 
take a chance and look closely at some of these bills and dig 
into them and see where modernization may be required. 
 
The minister said there is three things that the bill is trying to do 
in terms of updating the powers and responsibilities not only of 
local fire services but provincial fire services. And he’s saying 
the first thing is they’re going to replace the Act that’s in place 
now with the new Act. It will update powers, definitions, and 
other terminology to better reflect current realities and 
requirements of the full scope of modern fire departments. 
 
Secondly it’s going to give local authorities, their firefighters, 
and fire inspectors more transparent rules regarding entry in 
situations involving fire. And then thirdly, the new Act is going 
to give the province, through the fire commissioner, clearer 
authority and greater ability to assist and support communities 
and local fire departments when requested or required by a fire 
situation. 

Before I get into the actual substance of the bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this was only introduced yesterday and so obviously 
we haven’t had time to connect or reflect on the impact of this 
bill. It will have a lot of implications for smaller communities 
for sure, and I think, given the broadened responsibilities of the 
fire commissioner, we’re going to see some changes on that in 
how the fire commissioner interacts with the local communities. 
 
I think one of the big changes in definition — and I’m just 
going to take a look at the old Act here for a second — is local 
communities and how they’re defined. In fact there is very few 
definitions in the original Act or the current Act, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. There are a number of more definitions, newer 
definitions, in the bill that was introduced yesterday. 
 
And for example, there’s a new definition of local authority. In 
the past we had municipalities. We had hamlets. We had towns. 
But this says the local authority means “a municipality or a 
council of a municipality and includes the City of 
Lloydminster,” so something very specific there, and “any 
prescribed authority or body.” 
 
So then when we see that word, prescribed, in the legislation, 
it’s always a clue to go to the back of the bill and see exactly 
what things are that would be prescribed. And when we talk 
about prescribed, we talk about where regulations may come in. 
So a lot of bills that we see these days have fairly extensive 
regulatory permissions or directions under the bill. And in this 
case, when you’re looking for the regulatory authority, you 
generally go right to the back of the bill. In this case, in the 
original bill, it’s section 38. In the new proposed bill, it’s 
section 51. So how do you describe local authority then? What 
it says in section 51(c) is that for the purpose of the definition 
“local authority,” the Lieutenant Governor in Council may 
make regulations prescribing other authorities or bodies as local 
authorities. 
 
So one of the questions I have right away here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is whether or not the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
could prescribe a First Nation community on a reserve as a local 
authority. And certainly the breadth of the description found in 
section 51(c) suggests that it could very much be a First Nation. 
 
And then that leads me to some of the news stories we’ve been 
seeing lately in respect of First Nations and how we know that 
First Nations fire protection is something that’s certainly of 
concern here in Saskatchewan. And this isn’t something that’s 
limited to Saskatchewan of course, but we know that fire 
protection on First Nations reserve is, well, weak I guess is one 
way of putting it. 
 
There was a story in the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] on January 27th, 2014, and it indicated that fire 
safety on First Nations is a national problem. And it talks about 
a terrible tragedy in northern Saskatchewan earlier this year 
where two young boys died in a house fire on a reserve in 
northern Saskatchewan. It was in Pelican Narrows, in the 
constituency of my colleague from Cumberland. Pelican 
Narrows is about 120 kilometres northwest of Flin Flon. 
 
And there was two young boys. Solomon Ballantyne, 10 years 
old, and his brother Josiah Ballantyne, 9 years old, died in this 
house fire. And also a young girl was seriously injured. Four 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6243 

other people escaped, but the boys didn’t make it out, and the 
fire investigators found their bodies the next day. The boys 
were described as outgoing youngsters who loved to laugh and 
had many friends. And their dad said he’d “. . . tried to bring 
them into this world to be nice people to anybody, to be 
forgiving. To have a positive outlook on life. That’s basically 
how they were.” That’s what their dad said. 
 
It was believed the fire was accidental, but what happened, Mr. 
Speaker, the fire truck in the community wasn’t working. The 
reserve fire truck, the only reserve fire truck is over 25 years 
old. It wasn’t up to standard, an old piece of equipment. And of 
course this was January 27th, so you can imagine it’s very cold. 
And the chief also, Chief Peter Beatty of the Peter Ballantyne 
Cree Nation said, “. . . we don’t have trained personnel for the 
volunteer fire department or the crew.” 
 
[15:15] 
 
And one of the other volunteer firefighters said the truck was 
also needing repair back in September when a 10-year-old was 
killed in a house fire. And he says: 
 

I’ve been here 16 years. I’ve seen quite a number of people 
that burned. It bothers me because I know these people. I 
have a hard time sleeping, when we attend to fires like this 
and we can’t do nothing. 

 
And that’s the tragedy, Mr. Speaker. We know that proper 
firefighting equipment is expensive, and I think maybe that’s 
something this bill will attempt to ameliorate, in a way, is to 
ensure that local communities and local authorities such as First 
Nations would maybe have some assistance from the provincial 
government to ensure that these kinds of tragic deaths stop 
occurring. 
 
I know on March 6th, our leader wrote to the Prime Minister of 
Canada, and he talked about another fire on March 2nd where 
Iesha Rabbitskin died in a house fire on Witchekan Lake First 
Nation. Again, a horrible tragedy. And our leader also referred 
to the two deaths that I just referred to. And then also in 2013, a 
young 10-year-old girl, Denasia Highway, died in a house fire 
in Pelican Narrows. 
 
So we’ve called on the federal government to increase its 
funding to help First Nations get training and equipment needed 
to save lives, and that the federal program is inadequate. So we 
were calling on the federal government to make those changes. 
 
I guess my question for this government: is that something 
they’re prepared to do now by changing the definition of . . . 
Well they didn’t even have a definition before, but having this 
Act apply to a local authority and then having the ability in the 
regulations to define a local authority as other authorities or 
bodies. 
 
So whether or not the chief and council of a First Nation could 
be considered a local authority, I think that’s a legal 
determination, but it’s certainly one that there is room for 
interpretation. And I’m hoping that perhaps that might help 
alleviate some of the serious, serious inadequacies that we see 
once we cross into First Nation reserves where the supports 
aren’t there to assist them with their firefighting and their 

training of their firefighters. 
 
The Act itself is quite detailed, and first of all I think one of the 
things we want to look at is the actual role or function of the 
fire commissioner, the deputy fire commissioner, and then of 
course there are assistant fire commissioners and provincial 
inspectors. So there’s a lot of people involved in the whole 
world of fire safety. 
 
And this is, I have to admit, a fairly new world to someone like 
me who, you know, for me, I just hope that if I have a fire I’d 
call 911 and the fire truck shows up. I think that’s something 
that as normal citizens we just hope and expect will happen. 
 
I certainly remember when my kids were small. I think it’s in 
grade 3 maybe. My two boys, when they were going through 
school, at a certain point in grade 3 the curriculum was about 
fire safety and burning. And I remember my sons, each one of 
them, coming home when they were in grade 3 and asking, 
Mom, what would happen if there was a fire in the house? And 
they were all panicked about it, and they were going around 
unplugging things and making sure that there was not going to 
be any fires because they, I think, at that age sort of start getting 
an awareness of the world around them and the outside world. 
 
And they were quite terrified, both of them. They’re two years 
apart. So the first time was my son Zach and the second time 
was my son Sam. And I remember saying, well you know, it’s 
okay. We have safety things in place. We have a fire alarm. 
You know, we have safe plug-ins. And they weren’t convinced. 
 
And I remember one son actually quite panicked saying, well, 
Mom, what happens if there is a fire on the main floor of the 
house? How would we get out? And I said, well we would 
climb out the window or, you know, out the door in the back 
part of the house. Well what if we couldn’t do that? What if the 
fire is in your room? And finally I had to say to my son, well 
then you probably are going to burn. Like I didn’t know how 
else to say it. But that satisfied him at that point because I think 
their little brains are kind of logically thinking through all the 
consequences, and he knew that was the answer that I was 
going to get to but he had to hear it. And then I think finally he 
was able to go to sleep that night. 
 
But I really appreciate the fact that the fire people came to the 
school. Often the kids can have a tour of the fire truck. 
 
And I remember when I was young, probably about 10 years 
old, there was a house fire in my hometown, and that was such 
a shock to drive by and to see a house completely gutted by fire. 
It was horrifying. 
 
And as I told my kids at the time, you know . . . “Well what if 
things burn down and everything? You know, I don’t feel safe.” 
I said, look around our neighbourhood. How many houses have 
you seen that are burned down? And they couldn’t think of any. 
And really, I have to commend our fire protection services for 
the amazing work they do and for, I think, the education that 
people now have when you have fire alarms. If you leave that 
pot on the stove and something starts burning and all of a 
sudden your fire alarm goes off, that really, really I think helps 
prevent fires. 
 



6244 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

And obviously the original bill, the bill that’s in place right now 
is called The Fire Prevention Act. This new bill I think is The 
Fire Safety Act. So it goes beyond prevention, according to the 
intent of the drafters, and it’s going to talk about not just fire 
prevention but fire safety. 
 
One of the things the minister mentioned in his opening 
comments was about fire safety and how fires these days are 
quite a bit different than fires in days past. And I think part of 
that, well largely is because of the materials that are used in 
construction nowadays. Quite often I think a lot of firefighters 
don’t know what they’re walking into in terms of the chemical 
mix that’s in place, and I think the danger that they’re exposed 
to is something that . . . I think it takes a lot of courage to be a 
firefighter these days because it’s not just wood and nails and 
maybe some vermiculite or whatever insulation was used 30, 
50, 70 years ago. But we know that a lot of the modern building 
materials are made up of all kinds of polymers with all kinds of 
plastic configurations that could be very, very dangerous. 
 
We were fortunate on November 19th to sit down with the 
Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association. I think 
both caucuses were invited to meet with them. They actually 
bought us lunch, which was really quite wonderful. But they 
also brought to us some of their concerns and some of the 
things that they want to see this government do, and I think they 
made a very compelling case. And I’m hoping that those who 
were available to attend — perhaps Mr. Deputy Speaker was 
there for that, when the firefighters attended and made their 
case to the government — I hope it didn’t fall on deaf ears, 
because I think they made some very compelling cases for some 
of the safety concerns that they have. 
 
So one of the first things they talked about . . . There’s a 
number of things that they’re looking for in terms of better 
supports for firefighters in Saskatchewan, and the first piece 
they talked about was the additional funding for the fire service 
and staffing for safety. And one of the things, I think the biggest 
worry that they have is the shortage of . . . the size of crews. 
And we know that some of the larger cities in Saskatchewan put 
in place professional fire departments staffed around the clock 
by full-time firefighters, and certainly the larger the city, the 
more capacity you have to have that kind of staffing. 
 
And they go on to say that these cities have identified the 
greater risks that exist from the large number of homes built 
close together, from multi-family dwellings, and from larger 
numbers of different businesses, proximity of businesses, and 
so on. And they’re saying a crew size of four firefighters or less 
on an initial first-arriving single pump response to residential 
structure fires inadequate to safely perform the functions: water 
supply, interior firefighting, search and rescue, and also be in 
compliance with provincial occupational health and safety 
regulations for firefighters. 
 
And unfortunately in a number of cities in Saskatchewan, they 
aren’t able to continue to meet these requirements. And I think 
there’s a lot of very serious concerns by the firefighters on that 
shortfall. And unfortunately I think it’s fallen on deaf ears, 
because municipal governments are saying we don’t have the 
money to do that. The money that we’re getting to do what we 
need to do and provide services is not enough, and we simply 
cannot provide the additional funding. 

I know a lot of these firefighters identified, that live in smaller 
cities in Saskatchewan, are actually looking to move out 
because they’re too scared for their own safety. They’re scared 
for their health. They’re scared for the wages that they’re 
getting. And I think it’s really a shame that the smaller centres 
aren’t able to properly fund these firefighters and make sure that 
they have the adequate crews that they need. It’s a serious issue, 
and I’m hoping that their message did not fall on deaf ears 
when they met with the government last month. 
 
The second issue that they raised is about occupational illnesses 
among professional firefighters. And I was alluding to that a 
couple minutes ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talked about 
the chemical mix that’s often present now in modern fires. And 
in their background notes they . . . it’s become known, they say, 
that professional firefighters suffer from serious occupational 
diseases and among those diseases are cancer and heart injuries. 
So there’s been some examination of those types of illnesses 
and work to bring this to the attention of workers’ 
compensation boards showing the linkages between the 
firefighting and these types of cancers. 
 
So the firefighters indicated that they’re grateful that the 
Government of Saskatchewan introduced some presumptive 
cancer legislation for professional firefighters in 2003 and then 
adding to the list of cancers that are covered in 2005 and ’11. 
But there are a number . . . They’re saying there’s still 
additional cancers that they would like to see added to the list. 
And in particular they’re suggesting that breast cancer, prostate 
cancer, skin cancer, and multiple myeloma are occupational 
illnesses among professional firefighters. So there’s a number 
of . . . They explain how the science works here. And they are 
saying that these four types of cancer should also be added to 
The Workers’ Compensation Act as recognized occupational 
diseases for firefighters. 
 
An interesting fact, Mr. Speaker, that the firefighters shared 
with us is that there are over 70 million different chemical 
combinations that firefighters can be exposed to over the course 
of their lives and their careers. So 70 million different chemical 
compounds. I mean, who knew there was that many and that 
these are the ones that firefighters are exposed to? Also of 
course a lot of these chemicals in and of themselves may not be 
dangerous, but when they’re put into a chemical soup, they can 
be incredibly dangerous. 
 
They indicated some of the kind of toxic soups that they can get 
from smoke. Firefighters are exposed to benzene, hydrogen 
chloride, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons or PAHs, chlorine, 
acrolein, formaldehyde, acetic acid, formic acid, oxides of 
nitrogen, phosgene, hydrogen cyanide, carbon monoxide, 
dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls, and acetaldehyde, I think. 
And then from building materials . . . So that’s just from the 
smoke. Then from building materials, firefighters are exposed 
to asbestos and lead. Diesel exhaust exposures include 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which I mentioned earlier, in 
the smoke, and then benzopyrine and sulphur oxides. 
 
So it sounds terrible, and I think hearing those kinds of things 
make me really realize how thankful I am that we have these 
brave firefighters that are willing to go in and fight these fires 
and save lives and save buildings. 
 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6245 

The other thing that they mentioned in their lobby when they 
were here in the Legislative Assembly was using the fire 
service itself to enhance the delivery of emergency medical 
services. And I know this is something that my colleague from 
Riversdale has also brought to my attention several times, is 
that in a lot of the private care homes — and we’ve been 
hearing about some terrible falls that seniors are exposed to — a 
lot of private care homes don’t have the lift capacity that they 
need, and I think the acuity of some of the people living in 
private care homes is getting more and more serious. So a lot of 
them, when they need to lift one of their clients or one of the 
people living in their homes, they’ll call on the fire department 
to provide those lifts. 
 
And I don’t think the firefighters are ever saying, we don’t want 
to do that, but it is an extra strain on their services. And we 
know that, you know, firefighters are always there to help, but 
that’s something that, you know, if the private care homes don’t 
have the adequate facilities, it will take place. 
 
What the firefighters are saying is that they can help actually 
improve also our emergency response system or EMS, 
emergency medical services. So when looking for ways to 
improve EMS or emergency medical services, the firefighters 
are urging this government to recognize the efficiency of using 
firefighters to improve patient care and patient outcomes. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we know, certainly from what we’ve heard here in 
the legislature this fall, that the government needs help when it 
comes to patient care and patient outcomes. 
 
One of the things . . . Well there’s a number of bullets that they 
had provided in terms of making their case for using firefighters 
to help improve EMS. First of all, they’re strategically 
positioned in Saskatchewan cities. They’re on duty 24/7, and 
they’re typically the first on scene at medical emergencies. 
They already have medical training, and the majority of 
full-time fire departments in the province are requiring a 
pre-entry qualification of primary care paramedic. So they 
already have that training. 
 
They’re feeling that the fact that they have that training is 
greatly underutilized and wasted in enhancing the delivery of 
emergency medical service, and they’ve identified — like we 
have, Mr. Speaker — there’s a financial crisis in the delivery of 
health care in Saskatchewan. And yet nothing has been done in 
examining the cost-effective approach of utilizing the fire 
service. 
 
Systems of cross-trained firefighter paramedics serve a number 
of Canadian cities very well and it would be a cost-effective 
resource for EMS and patient care that remains largely 
untapped in Saskatchewan. So that was the third piece of the 
package that the firefighters brought to us last month. And there 
is two more. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The fourth one is about post-traumatic stress disorder, PTSD, 
and they are identifying it as an occupational illness among 
professional firefighters. And I think we heard a little bit of that 
earlier when we heard from a volunteer firefighter up in Pelican 
Narrows who witnessed a fire that took the lives of two young 
children. And I just can’t imagine how that would feel, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve never had to have that experience and I certainly 
don’t ever want to. But to deal with fires where lives are lost, 
where children are lost, where beloved pets are lost, where 
people lose all their worldly belongings, where we see 
businesses that are destroyed and business owners being 
completely devastated by these kinds of traumatic and 
disturbing events, I can’t imagine what you would go home 
with as a firefighter, either a volunteer firefighter or a 
professional firefighter. 
 
In their opening comments, they say that one of the problems 
. . . We know the physical demands of firefighting but less 
known are the mental demands of the occupation, including the 
effects of working in a profession that regularly exposes 
firefighters to graphic scenes and images that anyone would 
find disturbing and difficult to use. Firefighters are required to 
attend the scenes of accidents, crime, suicides, and other 
incidents where people have died or been seriously injured. 
They have to maybe extricate a deceased accident victim from a 
vehicle or other confined space who has suffered extreme 
physical trauma or severe burns. In other cases like a medical 
call or a drowning, a firefighter may experience the difficulty of 
trying to save someone but not being able to do so. 
 
What they’re saying is that PTSD was often hidden. It was 
hidden behind the scenes. Nobody wanted to talk about it and 
people were feeling . . . They felt, you know . . . This we hear 
about in PTSD all the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that 
it’s always been hidden, when soldiers didn’t want to admit 
weakness. And I think that’s where we first heard it coming out 
was soldiers who came back from war. But you know, it’s the 
whole idea of being weak. And I don’t think that stigma is there 
anymore. People are starting to recognize that this is real, this is 
traumatic, this is debilitating. And so they’re saying that in the 
past they didn’t want to reach out for help and often what would 
happen is they would turn to alcohol or other drugs to deal with 
their difficulties. In many cases, they were worried about 
turning, calling themselves sick because they needed the money 
to feed their families. They needed their wages. 
 
So what they say in their report here is that PTSD has claimed 
the lives of numerous firefighters across Canada who 
succumbed to thoughts of despair and homelessness and then 
committed suicide. They’ve identified there’s a growing 
awareness, and there are actually some provinces in Canada, 
particularly British Columbia and Alberta, that formally 
recognize the mental health aspects of emergency services 
personnel, and they’ve passed legislation saying that PTSD is 
presumed the result of a firefighter’s occupation for the purpose 
of worker compensation benefits. 
 
So they cite examples from British Columbia’s legislation and 
they also talked about Alberta’s legislation. What they’re saying 
is that they’re calling on the government here to show their 
continued leadership in the area of recognizing occupational 
illness, and they’re asking this government to amend The 
Workers’ Compensation Act to add PTSD to the list of illnesses 
presumed occupational when experienced by professional 
firefighters. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a reasonable request. 
And I hope again that the request did not fall on deaf ears, that 
this government heard that request at the lobby meeting they 



6246 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

had with the firefighters, and that they will make these changes; 
the Minister of Labour will take this into account and amend 
The Workers’ Compensation Act to include PTSD as an 
occupational illness for firefighters. 
 
And then finally the last piece they talked about was a piece of 
fairly heavy-handed legislation that was introduced by this 
government early in its existence, and it was Bill 85. And what 
happened in that bill is it created a problem for firefighters that 
simply did not exist ahead of time. What they’re saying here is 
that what happened in Bill 85 is it upset the binding arbitration 
process that firefighters . . . that had provided labour stability in 
Saskatchewan for decades. It was very, very unfair. It imposed 
a harsh and unfair constraint on the ability of the province’s 
four smallest firefighter local unions to strive for fair working 
conditions, without any rationale. 
 
So I think it’s one thing to change the law and impose 
something that’s unfair and harsh on someone when there’s a 
rationale, but what they said in this case with Bill 85, there 
wasn’t even a rationale. They say, and I’ll quote this from their 
brief. It says: 
 

It is a harsh solution to a problem that does not exist, and it 
stands to drive down the wages of the lowest paid 
firefighters in the province, also some of the lowest paid 
firefighters in Canada, despite the fact that they risk their 
lives and their safety on behalf of their fellow citizens 
every day just like firefighters everywhere else. A 
firefighter should not be treated differently in terms of their 
ability to bargain for fair wages and working conditions 
simply due to the size of their municipality. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have four communities here: Weyburn, 
Yorkton, North Battleford, and Swift Current, and they are the 
lowest paid professional firefighters in Canada. We’re in 
Saskatchewan where we’re doing pretty good right now. We 
have a strong economy, and yet we have the lowest paid 
firefighters in Canada. This seems very unfair and, I would 
submit, very unnecessary. 
 
I think part of the problem again is that the local municipalities 
are saying, we don’t have any money for this, and then the 
firefighters are now prohibited by Bill 85 in terms of going to 
arbitration at least and saying, wait a minute, this is incredibly 
unfair, it’s harsh and it’s unnecessary. And as I mentioned 
earlier, I think a number of those communities are going to have 
difficulty finding qualified and professional firefighters if they 
continue to put them at the bottom of the pay scale across 
Canada for firefighting. I mean you can just imagine. Of course 
the individuals are going to want to be able to feed their 
families. They’re going to want to be able afford the cost of 
living. And so they’re going to seek higher pay elsewhere, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when you look at their lobby, they’re asking that the 
Government of Saskatchewan reconsider, just reconsider 
revoking access to interest arbitration the province’s four 
smallest firefighter locals. For example, all they have to do is 
restore the previous population threshold of $10,000. They’re 
asking us as members of the legislature to restore fairness by 
asking our Labour minister to make this change and demand 
that all the full-time firefighters who risk their lives protecting 

the people of Saskatchewan be given the same ability to achieve 
working conditions as other full-time firefighters everywhere 
else in Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present these petitions on the 
part of the firefighters’ association here in the Assembly today. 
I certainly hope that the Minister of Labour has taken their 
request seriously and that, you know, it just doesn’t seem right 
to single out firefighters from Yorkton, Weyburn, North 
Battleford, and Swift Current and tell them, you have to be the 
lowest paid firefighters in Canada. It just doesn’t seem fair. And 
to take away the arbitration provisions, which is what Bill 85 
did, is simply, well it’s harsh and unnecessary and I think very, 
very unfair. 
 
So hopefully the Minister of Labour has a heart and he’s 
listening carefully to their plea and will revisit some of the 
harsh and unnecessary impositions that Bill 85 brought on our 
professional firefighters of Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to talk a little bit now about the actual office of the 
fire commissioner. I really knew nothing about . . . As I said 
earlier, I don’t think about fire and sort of the larger political 
and infrastructure that’s part of the firefighting here in 
Saskatchewan. But I can tell you this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
office of the fire commissioner is here in Regina, and there’s 
one in Saskatoon as well. 
 
And how many employees do you think they might have, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Well I can tell you that. There’s 13 full-time 
employees right in the offices of the fire commissioner and that 
includes the fire commissioner him or herself; two fire 
prevention officer supervisors who are in charge of regional 
services, technical services, programs, and standards; and eight 
fire prevention officers for delivery of programs to regions; and 
then of course the administrative support staff. 
 
And the mission of the office of the fire commissioner is to 
provide communities, fire departments, and emergency service 
organizations throughout Saskatchewan with information, 
education, and leadership to enhance their capabilities to protect 
citizens from the devastation of fire, environmental, natural, and 
man-made emergencies. 
 
So they have a fairly lengthy description on their web page of 
the types of services and programs they provide. For example 
they deal with fire prevention, and I think that’s something that 
the school programs are all about, is preventing fires, making 
sure that homes are safe, and educating people on how to do 
that. 
 
They teach how to use firefighting extinguishers to groups, 
including industry, health care workers, prison guards, 
babysitters, and scouts and guides. They have educational 
meetings for the public. And so there’s a lot of work that’s 
being done. And we know always, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
prevention is always less expensive and more prudent than 
dealing with emergencies and fires that are avoidable. 
 
The second types of services they provide is fire investigation. 
And I think this is something that’s really important in terms of 
prevention as well. So they keep records of fire losses to 
analyze why fires occur. They’ll determine methods of reducing 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6247 

losses by fire, and this is distributed throughout all the fire 
departments and fire safety agencies. It could be things like 
flame-resistant children’s pyjamas, childproof lighters, 
flame-resistant tent materials. 
 
And certainly from my days tree planting, Mr. Speaker, I know 
there was a number of near disasters where people would have 
lit candles or lanterns that are, you know, propane lanterns, and 
those kinds of tent materials are really important. 
Flame-resistant carpeting is another example of items that have 
come about as a direct response to the gathering of these 
statistics. 
 
They develop new codes. And of course every fire in the 
province has to be reported, so that helps them take this 
information and data and then analyze it and then make 
recommendations. 
 
They also provide advice and consulting services to every 
municipality in Saskatchewan. They conduct seminars and 
training for department staff, municipal authorities, and they 
also provide answers to questions if there are questions. So 
anybody can call the office of the fire commissioner and get 
some advice. 
 
And finally they’re responsible for the administration and 
enforcement of the law. In this case, once the Act is replaced it 
will be under The Fire Safety Act. It’s currently The Fire 
Prevention Act of 1992. So this is sort of the administration 
that’s been built up and established over the years for the office 
of the fire commissioner. 
 
There’s different layers of responsibility. There’s obviously 
layers under the federal government and it even refers to the 
National Fire Code of Canada, for example, that they’re 
responsible for, but of course there’s also The Saskatchewan 
Fire Code Regulations they have. Municipalities are 
responsible for fire suppression under three Acts: The Urban 
Municipality Act, The Northern Municipalities Act, and of 
course The Rural Municipality Act. So there’s the interaction 
between the fire commissioner’s office and the individual 
municipalities. 
 
The local assistants or fire inspectors also have a number of 
responsibilities under the Act, and then they also have a number 
of powers. So for example a local assistant has the right of 
entry, and that’s under the current bill, but it’s also under the 
proposed bill . . . or the current law, but it’s also in the proposed 
bill. So it allows people to go in and inspect. They can issue 
orders. They can authorize corrections. They can charge people 
under the Act, and of course they are limited by a number of 
pieces as well. So that’s kind of a bit of a summary of the 
current situation for the office of the fire commissioner. 
 
Now under the bill itself, I think it’s important to take a little 
look at the actual description of the fire commissioner and the 
types of authorities that they do. 
 
Whenever I look at a bill, Mr. Speaker, I always look at the 
second part because I think that’s usually where the meat of the 
bill is. And if you’re reviewing legislation, you want to make 
sure you understand what is this bill all about, so usually you 
find that in the second part of the bill where the real powers are 

identified. And that’s what is actually happening in this bill. As 
I said, at the end of the bill, you’ll find the regulatory authority 
that’s been given to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the 
executive government. And then in the second, in the 
subsequent parts, you’ll often find administration, enforcement 
of bills, some general clauses dealing with liability, and things 
like that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And then the third and fourth part of the bill in this case is sort 
of the meat and potatoes of what this power is all about. 
 
So what is the power of the fire commissioner? We’re going to 
take a look at that and we will see it in part II of the bill. Section 
4 . . . And I compared as quickly as I could, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, previous duties and powers of the fire commissioner in 
the old bill and the duties and powers of the fire commissioner 
in the new bill. They’re very, very similar. A lot of the wording 
has been updated. But there are some new changes as well. 
They haven’t really taken anything away from the old law, but 
what they’re doing in the bill is actually adding some additional 
duties and powers. 
 
So in section 4 we talk about who are these people that are in 
charge of fire safety in Saskatchewan. And so it allows the 
minister to employ or appoint an employee of the ministry as 
the fire commissioner. And the ministry here is the ministry 
over which the minister presides. It doesn’t tell us in the bill 
itself who the minister is for this, so we would have to go to an 
executive order of the government to determine which minister 
is responsible. It’s a bit of a goose chase, but you can find it. 
There’s always a line. If you want to follow it, you can find the 
line to the power. 
 
So the minister can appoint the fire commissioner and other 
employees as deputy fire commissioners to carry out the Act. 
So there we go. We have the fire commissioner and we have 
deputy fire commissioners. Deputies can always act in place of 
the fire commissioner, so that’s down in section 4(2).  
 
And of course in 4(3), the fire commissioner can limit the 
powers of the deputies in terms of what the fire commissioner 
feels is appropriate.  
 
In sub (4), well it’s just a technical clause where “The exercise 
of powers and the performance of duties by a deputy fire 
commissioner pursuant to subsection (2) are deemed to be the 
exercise of powers and performance of duties by the fire 
commissioner.” 
 
You will see this often in delegation of authority clauses in 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s just a typical 
legislative instrument where you can have deputies when 
they’re acting, they’re acting as if they are the commissioner 
him or herself. 
 
Subsection (5) allows the fire commissioner to designate an 
assistant fire commissioner, a provincial inspector, and any 
other staff required to assist the fire commissioner. And for the 
purposes of that under subsection (6), it tells us that the 
commissioner can designate anyone the fire commissioner 
considers qualified. And also the fire commissioner can impose 



6248 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

limitations or terms and conditions on the designation that the 
fire commissioner would consider appropriate. 
 
Section 6 is the meat of the bill. It’s called duties and powers of 
fire commissioner. So we see, as I mentioned earlier, there’s a 
number of these that are already in existence. This isn’t a 
complete re-haul of what’s in place, but there are some 
additional responsibilities. 
 
So under 6(1) it says “. . . the fire commissioner shall.” So this 
is what the fire commissioner must do. First of all “promote and 
encourage fire prevention and information about fire services 
and other fire programs.” 
 
Secondly, “investigate or cause to be investigated or hold 
inquiries into any fire whenever the fire commissioner 
considers it necessary to do so in order to . . . [determine how 
the fire happened.]” 
 
Thirdly, “keep records of all fires that occur in Saskatchewan 
. . .” These are all from the old Act as well, the legislation that’s 
in place.  
 
Now here’s something that’s new. The fire commissioner now 
shall, and this is section 6(d): 
 

keep records of all emergencies to which a fire department 
or fire brigade in Saskatchewan responded, including the 
cause, origin and circumstances of each emergency and 
other information respecting each response that the fire 
commissioner considers appropriate. 

 
So this is a new responsibility and it’s one of gathering and 
collecting data. That is considered to be incredibly important. 
Also, again some of the powers that he has: 
 

collect and disseminate information respecting fires . . . 
 

administer and enforce this Act . . . within park land. 
 
And that was in the old Act as well, so they’re still responsible 
for what happens in parks and regional parks. 
 
The next one is “provide or facilitate the provision of training 
courses . . .” So there’s a whole responsibility for training of 
fire departments.  
 
And then of course there’s always a catch-all, “perform any 
other duties that the minister may direct.” And that’s also in the 
existing legislation as well. 
 
The second clause is sort of his advisory responsibilities and it’s 
more, I guess, permissive or not quite as direct as the previous 
clause. It says here, “The fire commissioner may advise and 
provide recommendations and assistance to local authorities 
. . .” And again we have that word local authorities. So we don’t 
know exactly what it means right now but we’ll find out once 
the regulations are passed.  
 
So he can “. . . advise and provide recommendations and 
assistance . . . respecting the following.” And in this case, again 
these are from the current legislation. There’s not a lot that’s 
new. But they mention something here called the fire brigade. 

And I’m not sure why that’s something that’s added as new. I’d 
be interested in knowing that. I guess if you look to the 
definitions here, this is a new definition that didn’t exist in the 
old bill, I don’t think. I just want to double-check that. Yes, fire 
brigade is a new term. 
 
What would you think a fire brigade might be? When I think of 
a fire brigade I think of those old movies where you see people 
lining up with buckets and passing water along and putting out 
a fire. Well in this case, it’s a private enterprise. So a fire 
brigade according to this Act is “. . . a privately owned fire 
suppression service that provides a response to an emergency 
fire situation but that is not established or operated or 
contracted with by a local authority.” 
 
So I’m trying to imagine in what circumstances you might have 
a fire brigade, so somebody that has their own private fire 
suppression service. Maybe in agricultural contexts there might 
be something like that where they’re providing services to . . . 
Maybe in the oil patch or somewhere like that where you can 
hire private firefighters, basically. And it said it’s not 
established or operated or contracted with by a local authority. 
So it would have to be something definitely in the private 
sphere. But what’s interesting about this is that we are giving 
the fire commissioner the direction to advise — I guess it’s his 
discretion, his or her discretion — to advise and provide 
recommendations and assistance to local authorities or other 
people regarding the establishment, administration, and 
effectiveness of a fire brigade. 
 
So I guess that maybe reflects something that’s happening on 
the ground right now. The minister didn’t really give a lot of 
explanation in his comments about why there’s a fire brigade 
established here and why they chose that term, which I think is 
interesting in and of itself. But there it is. And I think, you 
know, as we have an opportunity to consult with folks out in the 
field — this is the second day this bill has existed, basically, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — that we’ll maybe get some answers to 
some of those questions. 
 
The other thing that’s new in terms of what the fire 
commissioner may do under section 6(2) is the establishment of 
a fire department services agreement or an interjurisdictional 
area to plan, organize, and deliver fire safety programs and fire 
department services. And I think this is a reflection of quite 
likely the shrinking population of rural Saskatchewan, where 
we know that municipalities are really struggling to provide 
services on their own because of the lower tax base and the less 
people that are living there. They still have the responsibilities 
for covering the same geographical area, but there’s less people 
that are there to do it. 
 
So I suspect this is reflective of some of the regionalization that 
we’re seeing happening in rural areas. And now the fire 
commissioner is being asked to assist in the establishment of 
these interjurisdictional areas for proper planning and delivery 
of fire safety programs and fire department services. I would 
think many municipalities would really struggle to be able to 
provide proper and adequate fire services on their own, so this 
is maybe a way for them to work together, and certainly that’s a 
responsible approach. 
 
In terms of changes from the old Act to the new Act in this 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6249 

duties and powers area, there is a fair amount of new clauses 
now. The old bill was pretty straightforward and had only . . . 
The bill that’s in place right now really only had maybe five or 
six clauses in relation to the powers of the fire commissioner 
and his deputies and assistants. There is now a new section, 
section 7, that talks about the powers of the fire commissioner 
in an emergency, and again emergency is a new defined term as 
well in this bill. But they’re talking about a new definition of 
something called an incident command structure, and I’ll just 
read what the clause says. 7(1) says: 
 

In this section, “incident command structure” means a 
management system of procedures for directing personnel 
and the use of facilities, equipment and communications 
during a fire or an emergency that requires fire department 
services, police services, environmental services and other 
emergency services personnel to work collaboratively in an 
effective and efficient manner towards the goal of 
eliminating, reducing or controlling the effects of a fire or 
an emergency. 

 
So it sounds like this is a collaborative, interdisciplinary type of 
command structure where the fire commissioner is going to 
have a direct involvement. Now it’s not clear to me, and I 
would have to go into great detail in terms of the clause itself in 
terms of who decides who’s the head of the command structure, 
but we know that this is now establishing this definition, and 
it’s a management system of procedures. 
 
So what it says in section 7(2) is that in an emergency that 
requires fire department services, the fire commissioner may, 
after reasonable consultation with the local authority or if 
they’re not willing to provide a response, he could take any 
action that he considers necessary to meet the emergency and to 
eliminate, reduce, or control its effect, including establishing an 
incident command structure. 
 
This is an incredible power that we’re giving to the fire 
commissioner here where he can establish an incident command 
centre and direct quite directly fire department services, police 
services, environmental services, and other emergency services 
personnel. So it’s giving a great responsibility and authority to 
the fire commissioner to commandeer, so to speak, all of those 
different agencies to attend to the site of the emergency. He is 
also responsible for coordinating all these services personnel at 
the site and directing land that needs to be evacuated, causing 
the closure of premises or land as necessary. 
 
So there’s quite a long description here of how the fire 
commissioner can create one of these incident command 
structures and basically take charge of a major emergency and 
direct other emergency professionals in the management of the 
emergency. 
 
There’s other new clauses that we find in this bill. The 
provincial inspectors are now prescribed as peace officers, so 
they’re going to act as peace officers under the Criminal Code. 
They’re saying that the provincial inspector can enforce this Act 
and the regulations throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So again, I’m not sure how that applies to First Nation reserves 
which, although they are geographically located within 
Saskatchewan, I think section 88 of the Indian Act always says 

that provincial Acts apply except where they affect land. So 
there’s always a question of whether that would apply here or 
not. 
 
General powers of fire inspectors are described in section 10. 
So this is an interesting clause. It says: 
 

In addition to exercising the powers conferred, and 
fulfilling the duties imposed, by this Act on fire inspectors, 
a fire inspector may aid in the enforcement of any Act, 
regulation or bylaw. 

 
So it’s pretty broad. Now we’re talking about fire inspectors not 
just the commissioner, so they can help enforcing any Act, 
regulation, or bylaw. So again, and I’m thinking in an 
emergency situation whether they can act as . . . well, obviously 
as peace officers. We’ve already said provincial inspectors can 
be peace officers, but here the fire inspectors may also aid in the 
enforcement of any Act. So I think it’s broadening the duties of 
fire inspectors for sure. 
 
And then section 11 is also new. 
 

The fire commissioner may appoint a person as fire chief 
for park land constituted pursuant to The Parks Act or a 
regional park established pursuant to The Regional Parks 
Act . . . 

 
So that’s a new area. I think it used to . . . Certainly the area of 
hamlets was in the old bill, where we could appoint a fire chief 
for hamlets. But now the fire commissioner can do that for 
parks as well. 
 
And then there’s a few other clauses here in terms of powers of 
the fire commissioner, fire chiefs, local assistants, provincial 
inspectors and municipal inspectors, peace officers. So there’s a 
lot of detail in this particular new bill. 
 
Part III of the bill deals with the actual suppression of fires, 
reporting and inspecting fires in emergencies requiring fire 
department response. So as I mentioned earlier, quite often we 
know our professional firefighters are called in for emergency 
medical services actions although, as the firefighters have 
indicated, there certainly is more room for utilizing our 
firefighters in that capacity. And that’s something they are 
looking forward to being able to do, so I’m hoping that this 
government will do that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Part III goes into things like suppression of fires, entry and 
related powers. So in terms of people’s privacy, when do you 
give people the right to enter? This bill describes that in quite a 
bit of detail. We have imminent risk of fire, and so if there’s an 
imminent risk, what kinds of powers do you have to enter 
premises or people’s property? 
 
And then there’s investigation in clause 20, and reports. So 
there has to be an investigation for any fire occurring within a 
local assistant’s jurisdiction. So again that’s part of that data 
collection. 
 
There’s also rights of entry. When investigations are being 



6250 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

conducted, it gives local assistants and fire inspectors 
authorities to enter the land to do the inspection and 
investigation. 
 
And in section 22 it talks about notification and investigation 
regarding significant fires. So there’s actually a definition here 
of significant fires. To me, every fire is significant, but I guess 
these are ones that are maybe larger or more destructive. But if 
you take a look at it, there’s a definition here. A significant fire 
in section 22 means a fire that is . . . 22(1)(a) says, a fire that: 
 

is, in the opinion of the local assistant, of suspicious origin 
with a significant amount of loss or damage sustained to 
property or the environment or is otherwise of interest to 
the fire commissioner. 

 
So first of all we have suspicious origin in (a); (b) says 
“involves death or serious injury to a person.” And the third one 
in (c) is “involves a premises owned or leased by the Crown.” 
 
So there’s three types of things that will identify something as a 
significant fire. First of all, is it suspicious? Secondly, is there 
death or serious injury? And third, does it involve premises 
owned or leased by the Crown? So that’s a new definition that 
does not exist in the existing bill. 
 
So there’s a bunch of things that the local assistant must do 
every time there is a significant fire, and there’s also 
responsibilities here for the fire commissioner as well. 
 
Section 23 talks about investigation and report by provincial 
inspectors. 
 
And then there’s other reporting requirements, section 24. 
 
Also section 26 talks about inquiries. So you will see the fire 
commissioner, that he can always conduct or cause to be 
conducted an inquiry into a fire or an emergency. And there’s 
two conditions here, whether it’s “destroyed or damaged 
property or the environment” or “caused injury or death.” And I 
can think of almost every fire that would be certainly one that 
would destroy or damage property. Now an emergency may not 
be something that destroys or damages property, but quite often 
then you would have injury or death as well. So this is fairly 
broad range for the fire commissioner to determine whether or 
not to conduct an inquiry. 
 
Of course when you have fire, you have insurance. And so 
there’s quite a report here on . . . an extensive section here on 
section 27 to require reports by insurance corporations and 
adjusters. And it says that, every fire insurance corporation 
that’s licensed under The Saskatchewan Insurance Act shall 
provide the commissioner with a statement with respect to 
every fire for which they are interested as an insurer. So again 
it’s the gathering of information and tracking of information. 
There’s all kinds of things that the insurer must provide the fire 
commission under this section. 
 
Part IV deals with compliance. So the responsibilities an owner 
or occupant when . . . Let’s just have a look at this. On section 
29(1) it says: 
 

Every owner of a premise shall ensure that the premises is 

. . . [designated], constructed, erected, placed, altered, 
repaired, renovated, demolished, relocated or removed in 
accordance with this Act, the regulations, any order made 
pursuant to this Act . . . 

 
So basically it’s saying, if you own premises, you have to 
follow this Act. And that would mean, especially when you’re 
destroying or constructing or doing anything to your premises. 
I’m not sure that a lot of owners or occupants are aware of that 
requirement and take time to look at what their obligations are 
under The Fire Safety Act. So that’s something maybe I want to 
check up when I get home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of other clauses on investigation powers and 
warrants that can be provided, how orders can be established. 
There’s all kinds of orders that the fire inspector can issue. He 
can order people to repair, remove, or demolish their premises. 
They can replace materials used, remove combustible, or 
explosive material. It’s quite a long section in that area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And then with these orders, there’s also a 
provision for appeal through various levels. 
 
Part V is the enforcement clause of the bill and under this 
clause there’s a number of offences and penalties that can come 
into place. “No person shall: tamper with fire alarm devices or 
systems,” or fire, heat, or smoke detection services. So the other 
night in my apartment when I left the heat on for too long and 
the alarm went off, I immediately did what everybody does, I 
pulled it apart. But I shouldn’t have done that I guess. But I did 
put it back together, so it’s still working and I made sure it’s 
still working. That is an offence under The Fire Safety Act. So 
we have to make sure that all those detection devices and fire 
alarms are in place and are functioning properly. 
 
The last part of the Act is section 6. And I talked about earlier 
— part VI — where we have just a number of different types of 
boilerplate clauses that you will see in a number of bills. 
There’s a lot of specificity of course for this particular bill, but 
it’s the type of, you know, things about immunity, service of 
documents, posting notices of closure, effective use of the 
bylaws and the like. So that’s it. 
 
And then finally is the regulations clause that I spoke of earlier. 
There’s a large number of things listed in here in terms of what 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council may do, in terms of how 
they’re going to define some of the definitions in this Act. And 
that’s always something . . . I really think that the definition of 
anything should be found within the Act and not in the 
regulations. Maybe I’m old school, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
really struggle with the idea of having the ability of the 
executive government to make definitions when really they 
should be defined . . . I don’t know if this is a cost saver or a 
time saver for the drafters, and why this practice is taking place, 
but I think it’s really important for people who are looking at 
legislation to be able to know what the words mean rather than 
having to go to the regulations to find out what they do mean. 
 
So there’s all kinds of, you know, more detailed things here 
about what kind of regulations can be made. For example, they 
can make regulations: 
 

with respect to solid fuel burning appliances and 
equipment, including fireplaces, furnaces, ducts, flue pipes 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6251 

and chimneys: 
 
governing their approval, sale, distribution, installation and 
servicing; and 
 
respecting the training and qualifications of persons who 
install, service or test the appliances or equipment and 
requiring those persons to be licensed or certified in the 
manner prescribed.  

 
So some very, very detailed requirements that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council can do through the regulatory process. 
 
In general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel that, you know, this bill 
is comprehensive. It certainly is attempting to modernize what’s 
going on or what has been going on to date under The Fire 
Prevention Act.  
 
Again I think it’s really important to recognize the importance 
of our firefighters and the service they provide to us as citizens 
and keep an eye on us and provide for our safety. We don’t see 
a lot of fires. We don’t see sort of the kind of destruction and 
damage that we know occurred in centuries past. I think of, you 
know, trying to do family research and family history and 
finding out that my ancestors in Ireland, I can’t find out where 
they were born because everything burned down. Anything that 
was made of wood back in the late 1800s, early 1900s would 
generally end up, if there was a fire, it was gone. 
 
We saw a fire destroy parts of our own House of Commons in 
Ottawa, and so we know the devastating effect of fires. And 
certainly one applauds the work that has been done by our fire 
commissioner and by our firefighters and by the people that are 
looking out for the safety of Saskatchewan people. 
 
At this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve extended or 
reached the extent of my comments on Bill 170, The Fire Safety 
Act, so I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 145 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 145, An Act respecting the 
Waiver of Fees and making consequential amendments to other 
Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding of this particular piece of 
legislation is that it relates to a number of issues that are current 

in this decade. Quite a number of them relate to the cost of 
litigation, how much it costs people to participate or use the 
public court structure. We know that the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court of Canada, Beverley McLachlin, has regularly 
given speeches about the cost of litigation for people in Canada, 
and she specifically talked to members of the courts of the 
country and to members of the lawyers’ associations across the 
country around some of these costs. And many times it relates 
actually to the professional fees of the lawyers who are 
involved, but there are also costs that directly relate to the fees 
that are paid to use the adjudication services of the courts.  
 
And so in Saskatchewan we have looked at this issue in a 
number of ways. Clearly the government has looked at the 
issue. I know that members of the Canadian Bar Association 
have looked at this issue. And also we have the Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan who has taken a look at the 
whole issue of this access to justice and in fact completed a 
final report on this called Access to Justice — Needy Person 
Certificates and Waiver of Fees. And that report was delivered 
in May 2003. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this bill is the response of the 
government to the report but also to the general discussion in 
the community. And it’s an important issue, and I think that 
there are some good suggestions in this legislation. But I think 
we need to talk a bit about what is being done here and why it’s 
being done and then probably talk a bit more about where there 
are some additional things that we need to look at the 
legislation. 
 
So practically, what we have is a system whereby fees will be 
waived for litigants in various courts in Saskatchewan, and it’s 
also courts and public bodies. And so when we look at the 
legislation, the definition of court now includes the Provincial 
Court of Saskatchewan, the Court of Queen’s Bench, and the 
Court of Appeal. Now this is important because fee waivers 
were available in the Court of Queen’s Bench and, through 
using the Court of Queen’s Bench rules, in the Court of Appeal, 
but they have not been available up until this point — or until 
this legislation is put through — in the Provincial Court of 
Saskatchewan. So what we have here is an expansion of the 
places where fees can be waived in the court system. 
 
As well we have a reference to public bodies. So basically fees 
can be waived in courts but also in public bodies. And what are 
public bodies? It seems like a bit of an interesting term that has 
been defined in the legislation. I’m not sure if it’s used in any 
other pieces of legislation, but it actually relates to an 
organization or a tribunal that’s available. 
 
So right now the public bodies mentioned in this Act are the 
Automobile Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of 
Residential Tenancies. But in section 2, it says that public body 
means also, in section 2(g)(iii), “any other prescribed board, 
commission, ministry, Crown corporation, or government 
body.” So we have this fee waiver opportunity that applies to 
three courts and two bodies that are similar to courts, which is 
the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of 
Residential Tenancies. 
 
[16:15] 
 



6252 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

The Automobile Injury Appeal Commission is a body that is set 
up with a number of people who hear claims under the SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] legislation that we have 
in Saskatchewan. And they effectively have expert judges of a 
sort who are usually senior lawyers who have experience in this 
area, who listen carefully to the concerns of the individuals 
involved, and basically make an adjudication over their 
concerns as it relates to how their claims have been dealt with 
by SGI or, I assume, some other bodies that are there. 
 
In that process there are obviously fees, and what this 
legislation will do is give the Automobile Injury Appeal 
Commission the opportunity, through an official of the 
commission, to waive the fees for somebody who is using their 
services. 
 
In the same way, the Office of Residential Tenancies will have 
that ability to waive any fees that they have for people who 
qualify for having their fees waived. Now it’s interesting that 
the third category under that public body is “any other 
prescribed board, commission, ministry, Crown corporation or 
government body.” I don’t think that there will be an ability to 
apply, you know, for waiving fees that might be charged related 
to something other than a court-like dispute or dispute 
resolution process.  
 
And that’s in fact what the legislation says. It says that a 
proceeding — it’s going to be waiving fees related to a 
proceeding — and so the definition of proceeding in section 
2(f) describes that it’s “any matter before a court or public 
body.” So and then public body includes “any other prescribed 
board” and “includes an application, investigation, hearing, 
review, dispute resolution process or the issuance of a 
document or certificate.” So we don’t know exactly what other 
kinds of disputes that may come up there, but it could be 
something as practical as insurance inspections and fees that 
might be there that are needed in an investigation of an 
insurance claim and an adjudication. So it could be that it would 
relate to the Crop Insurance Corporation, for example, or to 
other property that’s being dealt with. 
 
And so what we need to understand is that these questions 
around the waiver of fees can have quite a broad application 
even though the legislation itself is brought primarily to deal 
with the three courts and these two public bodies. 
 
So how the application for a fee waiver is to be done is set out 
in section 3, and I’ll give a little bit of a description of what 
goes here, and then we’ll go back and take a look at what was 
recommended by the Law Reform Commission. But effectively 
what this legislation says is that a person, other than a 
corporation . . . So in other words corporations are not going to 
be getting into this whole area of being a needy person even 
though they may be short on cash. It’ll only apply to 
individuals. And so they’ll be able to apply for a fee waiver 
certificate. So in other words they get their certificate directly 
from the body or the court that they’re dealing with. 
 
And how this is done is not totally set out in the legislation 
because it does say that many of the ways and the limits of who 
can apply will be set out in the regulations. So what happens is 
it says you can apply before a proceeding commences. In other 
words, you want to have the fees waived right at the start. Or 

during a proceeding, if you end up running out of money, you 
can apply at any stage during the proceeding for a waiver of the 
fees and it’s subject, all of these waivers are subject to an order 
in section 3(3). And subsection (3) reads: 
 

After an order is made in a proceeding, a person who has 
not previously obtained a fee waiver certificate may apply 
for a fee waiver certificate with respect to fees relating to 
the enforcement of the order. 

 
So what that relates to is, they may have paid the fee to get to 
getting a final order, and then don’t have sufficient funds to pay 
the fees related to enforcement of the order, and that may be 
sheriff’s fees or other things. And then they would be able to 
apply at that stage. 
 
So what do they do to apply to have the fees waived? Well 
section (4) says that that application, which has been submitted 
by a person, not a corporation, will go to an official of the court 
or public body and that official may issue the fee waiver 
certificate if (a) the applicant meets the prescribed 
requirements. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s an issue here because 
we don’t know what the prescribed requirements are under this 
legislation. We can assume that some things will be done that 
will set these kinds of requirements in an appropriate fashion, 
but we don’t know that from the legislation itself. 
 
And also in that section they can issue the fee waiver certificate 
if “subject to the regulations [again], the applicant demonstrates 
. . . there are special circumstances that justify the issuance of a 
fee waiver certificate.” So this term, special circumstances, if 
you go and look in the definitions in section 2, “‘special 
circumstances’ means special circumstances as defined in the 
regulations.” So once again we have a bit of a circular situation 
where we don’t know whether an applicant meets the prescribed 
requirements in part (a) or in (b), whether there’s special 
circumstances that justify the issuance. So we have legislation 
where, kind of in the core of what you’re doing, nothing is here 
until we get regulations from the Justice department. 
 
Now normally when we have a bill like this, if you go and look 
at the very end of the bill, it will say that the Act comes into 
force on proclamation. So that means it may be there for a year 
or more as they develop the regulations, and that hopefully it 
won’t take that long on this type of a bill. But what it does say 
to all of us is that we don’t have the full package here to 
actually make our decision about. 
 
So then what do you do? Well basically the official of the court 
who gets the application may have some instructions or may 
have information in these unknown regulations, these 
prescribed requirements that just allows the fee waiver to be 
issued. But if there was some question about that, then the 
official may refer the matter to a judge of the court to which the 
application has been made. And so that’s in section 3(5). So 
then the judge of the court will have the ability to determine 
whether to issue a fee waiver certificate. 
 
Now it doesn’t say in this legislation, I don’t think, that the 
judge will be bound by the rules or the regulations. And maybe 
there will develop over the course of time some guidelines for 
judges about when these kinds of applications would be 
granted, but I think it probably once again is a place where we 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6253 

don’t really know how this will be laid out. Now there may be 
some precedents over the last number of years as it relates to 
the applications to the Court of Queen’s Bench that will be of 
assistance to this, but in the legislation we don’t have that 
information. 
 
Then if we go on to section 3(6), we end up looking and to see 
that a public body, in other words as defined here, the 
automobile insurance appeal commission or the Office of 
Residential Tenancies, if an official of one of those places 
doesn’t have a clear application for the fee waiver . . . And so 
what will happen is that that person will refer it to the public 
body. So what you would have then is the whole commission, 
the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission, making a decision 
about the fee waiver certificate. And once again we don’t really 
have the terms or the parameters of how that’s going to be dealt 
with. 
 
So now it’s interesting, as you move on in the legislation you 
get to section 3(7) and it says that “notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section but subject to the regulations [in other 
words, rules that we don’t yet have] an official may waive the 
requirement for a person to apply for a fee waiver certificate.” 
And so it’s possible then that the person would automatically 
get a fee waiver in certain circumstances, and we would hope 
that may be the case. And as we’ll see in a few minutes, that 
may be responding to some of the recommendations that are in 
the Law Reform Commission report. 
 
Now then, when you go on further into section 3(8), it says this, 
that: 
 

If an official waives the requirement for a person to apply 
for a fee waiver certificate in accordance with subsection 
(7), the person is deemed to be the holder of a fee waiver 
certificate issued by the court or public body for which the 
official is responsible for administering fee waiver 
certificates. 

 
And so basically we’ll see how that relates to the report, but 
there may be certain classes of people that automatically have 
their fees waived, and this would allow for that to happen. 
 
The final part of section 3 is subsection (9) and it basically says, 
once again, “Subject to the regulations, the decision of an 
official, judge or public body pursuant to this section is final.” 
In other words, it can’t be appealed through a structure. 
 
Now we don’t know what the regulations are that are going to 
be set up around that particular process, because usually there 
will always be a place where people can appeal. And I think the 
attempt is in the legislation to say, we’ve got this process in 
place, and once decisions are made, the issue around the fee 
waiver is done. It will be interesting to see whether that can 
hold out in all situations, but it is an attempt to have the fact that 
the discretion of the official or the judge or the public body is 
final discretion and there’s no further appeal from that. 
 
Now an important part in section 4 is that when you’re talking 
about fee waivers, any time a person applies for a fee waiver 
certificate, you can’t be charged a fee for that. So that’s a pretty 
smart move actually because it would be the ultimate in very 
strange legislation to have to pay a fee to apply for a waiver of 

fees in a proceeding. 
 
So then what we have in section 5 is that the fee waiver 
certificate is issued, and at the date when that certificate’s been 
issued, the person is then excused from paying any further fees 
in that proceeding before that particular court or before the 
public body. And it’s presumed I think, looking at this 
legislation, that that would only relate to the proceeding in 
which the person is involved at this time. It wouldn’t 
necessarily relate to another subsequent proceeding as it relates 
to this matter. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Section 6 of the legislation goes on to say that there’s, once 
again subject to the regulations which we haven’t seen, there’s 
an ability of the official or a judge or the public body to cancel 
the fee waiver certificate at any time. So it appears to be a bit of 
a transitory . . . or something that’s there but may not be there if 
somebody decides that you should no longer have that waiver 
certificate. And we don’t know what the regulations are that 
would allow for the matter to be removed, but quite clearly in 
the legislation this allows for an official or a judge or a public 
body to cancel that waiver certificate. 
 
You go on to section 7 of the legislation. It talks about the costs 
that may be paid by one party to another party in a proceeding 
that’s intended to reimburse the recipient for any fee or expense 
paid by the recipient with respect to that proceeding. And 
effectively I think what this section is trying to do is to make 
some adjudication or comment on what happens in a proceeding 
where costs are awarded to somebody who has had their fees 
waived under a fee waiver certificate. And what it says is that 
— here once again subject to the regulations which we haven’t 
seen — the court or the public body can make an order for costs 
that includes that waived cost in some fashion, I think is what 
they’re trying to say. 
 
So in other words, a person who loses their case and they can 
afford to pay, they shouldn’t be in a position where they’ve had 
to pay a little less in costs because the person who sued them 
doesn’t have any money. Now how that works and how the 
regulations will work, it will be quite interesting to see how that 
all is organized. But it’s interesting. And in this, only in this 
particular area, it sets out in section 7(3) this, and this is another 
interesting aspect: 
 

When determining whether to make an order for costs to or 
against the holder of a fee waiver certificate, a court or 
public body may take into account one or more of the 
following: 
 

(a) access to justice; 
 
(b) fairness to the parties; 
 
(c) the conduct of the parties; 
 
(d) any other factor that the court or public body 
considers appropriate. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this basically says that the court or 
public body has almost absolute discretion about how to order 



6254 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

costs, but it clearly will give the court power to make an order 
for costs if the conduct of one of the parties is inappropriate. 
And this I think is important. It also talks about the fairness to 
the parties. And so it’s something . . . I think these concepts 
probably underlie the whole Act, but they’ve specifically put it 
only in this part related to costs. 
 
Now section 8 goes on to look at the whole question of waiver 
of fees where a certificate has not been applied for. And what 
this is clearly doing is giving or confirming the discretion — I 
don’t know if it’s giving, but it’s confirming the discretion — 
of the courts or the public bodies to waive fees whether that 
person has applied to have the fees waived or not. And that’s I 
guess a recognition of the power of the court or of the public 
body to make decisions about that. 
 
Now section 9 goes on to say that, “This Act and the regulations 
prevail if there is any conflict between this Act or the 
regulations and any other Act, regulation, rule of court or law.” 
I think what they’re trying to do here is to say these rules 
around fee waivers and around how costs may be awarded will 
supersede any other provincial laws as it relates to the kinds of 
issues that we are dealing with here. And so then that ends up I 
think confirming that this power to waive fees and to award 
costs in these proceedings is set up such that it will override 
everything else in the rules as to costs or the rules that the 
courts make that lawyers will understand and work with. 
 
So then we get to the regulatory part of this legislation which is 
section 10. And you know, you look at the regulatory powers 
that are here, and they kind of go back and confirm what we’ve 
been talking about when we go through the legislation. So you 
have the ability, which is standard in all regulations, to define, 
enlarge, or restrict the meaning of any word or expression used 
in the Act but not defined in the Act. So in other words, the 
cabinet, the Premier and cabinet can make these regulations. 
 
Then it goes through and it confirms that the fees in section 
2(1)(b) can be set by regulation under this legislation. It goes on 
to say under (c) that additional public bodies can be prescribed 
and listed. And that’s where we now have the Automobile 
Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential 
Tenancies. What other boards could be added in there? Could it 
be some of the crop insurance appeal boards or other things like 
that? We don’t know for sure, but the power is here to do that. 
 
And then (d), it can define special circumstances. And that’s the 
part that once again is not entirely clear in, you know, how this 
legislation will apply. And then we go on to the regulatory 
powers as it relates to how the applications are set up, 
regulations about what forms are to be used and how they’re to 
be used, setting out some of the requirements for the purposes 
of section 3(4), and that relates once again to some of the 
special circumstance kinds of applications or the applications 
that meet the prescribed requirements. 
 
I’m not sure, but I think that may relate to the fact that if you’re 
a Legal Aid client or you worked with Pro Bono Law or with 
CLASSIC [Community Legal Assistance Services for 
Saskatoon Inner City Inc.] or one of these other groups that you 
would automatically have your fees waived, and you might not 
have to spend much time going through the application process. 
But once again, we don’t really know that because we don’t 

have the regulations to work with. 
 
And so then we go through and see that (j) will allow for the 
regulations that would relate to the payment of lawyers’ fees by 
the holder of a fee waver certificate. Now we don’t totally 
understand or have here in the legislation what that means for 
lawyers, but clearly there’s a power to set some rules in the 
regulations around how the lawyers’ fees are paid when 
somebody holds a fee waiver certificate. 
 
And then we go into the regulations that will set up procedures 
for review of decisions of officials, judges, and public bodies 
made pursuant to section 3. In other words, that’s the rules 
around how these decisions are made. Even though the 
legislation has stated that these decisions are final, there’s still 
seems to be a process which allows for some review of the 
process of how the decision was made. And so once again 
there’d be a whole series of regulations that we haven’t seen. 
 
And then there’s regulations that would be there around 
prescribing the rules for a cancellation of a fee waiver 
certificate, and it’ll include regulations about how much notice 
is required and also setting out the rules around how an appeal 
of a decision to cancel a fee waiver certificate may be created. 
So we have a whole layer upon layer of regulations that will 
actually tell us how this Act is going to work. It’s not in the Act 
now; it’s going to be coming in the regulations. 
 
Then you get to section 10(m) and basically it talks about 
prescribed regulations as it relates to section 7. And section 7 is 
all of that issue around costs and dealing with the issues of 
access to justice, fairness of parties, conduct of the parties, and 
any other factor that may be included. So there has to be a 
whole series of regulations in that area. Then we also have 
regulations that are sort of the general regulations, and so it 
gives us that power. And then finally we have our standard 
catch-all clause which says that there will be regulations 
“respecting any other matter or thing that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers necessary to carry out the intent 
of this Act.” 
 
So practically we have not necessarily a very long Act, but it 
has oodles of regulations which will actually define what the 
Act does. And so it’s interesting how then you end up having to 
make regulation upon regulation to actually have this piece of 
legislation work. 
 
Section 11 talks about the transitional situation where a needy 
person certificate that’s been issued now under The Queen’s 
Bench Rules, and this certificate’s been issued by the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, that fee waiver will 
continue through into this new legislation. 
 
And then practically, the consequential amendments relate to 
the Acts, The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and The 
Residential Tenancies Act because the appeal mechanisms 
under those pieces of legislation are the Automobile Injury 
Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential Tenancies, 
which are both defined or are part of the definition of public 
body under this particular legislation. 
 
So we have an Act that’s, you know, not necessarily that long, 
but so much of the substance of the Act is in regulations that we 



December 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6255 

haven’t seen. So we don’t really know exactly how this is all 
going to work. We have an inkling because we hope that rules 
of fairness will be applied, that the concept of access to justice 
is the overriding concept and that needy persons or people that 
can’t afford to pay some of these fees will have a method of 
having the fees covered. And so what we have then is 
legislation which responds to some of these particular issues. 
 
So in the speech from the Minister of Justice that was made on 
November 5th, it’s clear that the intention is to enhance the 
existing fee waiver program to include the other two courts and 
also the public bodies that we referenced, the Automobile 
Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential 
Tenancies. So now the legislation will also allow for people 
who are represented by themselves to apply for these 
certificates. I think traditionally some of the fee waivers had 
been done by Legal Aid or by some of the Pro Bono Law or the 
CLASSIC law group in Saskatoon. 
 
[16:45] 
 
But what this does is appear to grant that fee waiver to 
self-represented litigants. They will have to make the 
application. We don’t know exactly what the application is until 
we get the regulations. We don’t know what the standards are, 
but we’re assuming that the people will qualify if they don’t 
have a lot of extra money to pay fees in court. 
 
Now one of the things that the minister also says though, in his 
comments on November 5th, is that “. . . the Act will grant 
courts and tribunals discretionary authority to determine if costs 
should be awarded to or against a litigant who has been issued a 
fee waiver.” And basically that allows for the court to attempt 
to deal with some of the issues that relate to meritless or 
frivolous litigation, is the wording that the minister has used. 
 
And so it appears to be a bit of an attempt to chill out or keep 
people from making applications who may be qualified for the 
fee waiver because their income is low or they don’t have many 
assets, but maybe their cases don’t have much merit or they 
appear to be frivolous, and it gives that discretion to the courts. 
I’m not totally certain whether that’s going to be then dealt with 
in the legislation itself or whether it’s actually covered under 
the regulatory portion because I think it does relate to one of the 
regulatory powers that’s here giving that discretion to the 
courts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, as I stated earlier, is a 
response to the general discussion in the Canadian Bar, the 
Saskatchewan Bar, the lawyers of the country, the judges of the 
country as well around access to justice. And when the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan took up this issue, they 
looked at a whole number of pieces or examples from other 
provinces. And so I think, you know, it’s quite a lengthy 
document, but I think that there are . . . It’s well worth going 
through the kinds, the recommendations that they made in 
summary form and assessing whether the legislation, as we 
have it so far, deals with some of these or all of these 
recommendations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, everything I say here will be subject to the 
fact that we don’t really know all the rules until we get the 
regulations at some point in the spring. This is a type of 

legislation where having the regulations prepared at the same 
time as the legislation would actually make a lot of sense so that 
we can see the whole picture rather than just to get a bit of a 
glimpse of what’s going to happen. 
 
So we have the Law Reform Commission report of 
Saskatchewan. And the law reform commissioners at the time 
that this report was prepared were Mr. Donald Layh, who is the 
Chair; Susan Amrud, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
Justice, is on the committee; Professor Ron Cuming from the 
law school who is a long-serving member of the Law Reform 
Commission and great advisor on all aspects of justice; the 
Honourable Georgina Jackson, who is a Court of Appeal 
justice; Professor Michaela Keet, who’s a professor at the law 
school; and then Mr. Michael Milani, who’s a Regina lawyer 
with broad experience in many areas of the law. So we have 
their report prepared with assistance from staff at the Law 
Reform Commission. 
 
So what did they say we should do here? Well basically the 
summary of their recommendations is this: First area is the 
whole availability of fee waivers. And what did they say? 
“Needy Person Certificates and fee waivers should be available 
to self-represented litigants.” So that’s the first 
recommendation. It appears from the words of the minister that 
self-represented litigants will be able to apply for these fee 
waivers. I think that will be part of the regulations. It’s not 
necessarily . . . It doesn’t preclude it in the law itself, but in the 
regulations it will set out procedures for self-represented 
litigations. 
 
Second recommendation from the Law Reform Commission is 
that “Needy Person Certificates and fee waivers should be 
available at any point in a proceeding.” Mr. Speaker, this 
particular recommendation is set out in the Act, and so I think 
that’s an important one. It also includes the ability, after the 
whole proceeding is completed and somebody’s trying to 
enforce an order or judgment or whatever they have, that fees 
may be waived at that point as well. And a person can maybe 
afford the fees in the first part and by the end of the litigation 
not have sufficient funds to enforce the judgment they’ve got. 
This legislation will allow for a person to apply for a fee waiver 
at that time. 
 
Third recommendation is that “A fee waiver program should be 
established in Small Claims Court.” Now, Mr. Speaker, this 
legislation does do that. That’s good. 
 
Fourth recommendation is that “Administrative tribunals in 
Saskatchewan that regularly adjudicate matters for members of 
the public should adopt fee waiver policies for individuals.”  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that recommendation has been dealt with 
here as it relates to the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission 
and also the residential tenancy work. And so it’s there for two, 
but the opportunity by regulation is to add more bodies to that 
particular list. I’m not sure if the Labour Relations Board would 
get involved in that. I think they have some of their own 
procedures to deal with that, but that may be another one that’s 
there as well. So it appears that that one is mostly dealt with, 
although we don’t know if the Law Reform Commission maybe 
had other administrative tribunals to include. 
 



6256 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2014 

Recommendation no. 5 says that “The fee waiver application 
policy and process should be the same across all Saskatchewan 
courts and tribunals.” Mr. Speaker, it appears that that’s true on 
the face of this legislation as it relates to the Provincial Court, 
the Court of Queen’s Bench, and the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal, and then the two public bodies, the automobile injury 
review commission, and then the residential tenancies one. So 
we don’t know about other tribunals, so there may be some 
more work to do there, but it appears that we’ve substantially 
covered that. So that’s the whole availability of fee waivers. 
There were five recommendations and it looks like they’re 
mostly covered. Although some parts we don’t know yet until 
we get the regulations. 
 
Then we go into the whole list of recommendations around the 
qualifying for a fee waiver. Recommendation no. 6 says, “Fee 
waiver eligibility should be determined with reference to the 
Low Income Cut Off [or LICO is the shorthand], with 
flexibility to consider an applicant’s extraordinary 
circumstances.” Mr. Speaker, we can’t tell if that 
recommendation has been dealt with because that’s probably 
going to be put in the regulations rather than in the Act itself. 
There’s maybe a debate about whether that should have been 
more directly here. 
 
Recommendation no. 7 is, “No merit or ‘reasonable grounds’ 
test should be included in the fee waiver application process.” 
Once again, we don’t know whether that recommendation has 
been responded to, because we don’t have the regulations. 
Although it appears with some of the wording that this point 
may be respected. But we don’t know for sure because we don’t 
have the actual regulation around the fee waiver application 
process. 
 
No. 8, the recommendation is, “A fee waiver application should 
be easy to use, clear and in plain language.” Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t know if that recommendation has been 
responded to because we don’t have the regulations. We’re 
assuming that that’s part of the plan, but we don’t know that at 
this stage. 
 
Recommendation no. 9 is that “A litigant who has qualified for 
Legal Aid or met the income testing requirements of a 
Saskatchewan-based pro bono organization such as Pro Bono 
Law Saskatchewan or Community Legal Assistance Services 
for Saskatoon Inner City Inc. (CLASSIC), should automatically 
qualify for a fee waiver without further application.” Those 
things aren’t spelled out directly in the legislation, so once 
again we’ll have to look at the regulations when they’re here to 
see whether that recommendation has been dealt with. 
 
No. 10, “A fee waiver application should be made directly to a 
court official or officer of a tribunal.” Mr. Speaker, that 
recommendation has been met because that’s right in the 
legislation. 
 
No. 11 is, “A fee waiver application form should require a 
declaration of receipt of social assistance or a simple financial 
statement, with additional proof to be provided only upon 
request.” Mr. Speaker, we can’t tell if that particular 
recommendation has been met because it will be part of the 
application process which will be in the regulations, and we 
don’t have the regulations yet to look at. 

No. 12: 
 

An applicant for a fee waiver who does not meet the 
financial eligibility requirement should be entitled to apply 
for a fee waiver on the basis of extraordinary 
circumstances to a court official or officer of a tribunal and 
the application may be referred to the court or tribunal for 
decision. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular recommendation has been met 
because, quite clearly, in the Act it says that the official can 
refer the matter to the court or to the public body for review. So 
that one has been met in the legislation. 
 
Then we get to their recommendations around consistency of 
fee waivers. Recommendation no. 13 is that “Courts and 
tribunals should be responsible for issuing fee waivers for the 
fees they charge.” Well clearly this legislation has the 
application going to the courts or tribunals themselves, so that 
recommendation has been met. 
 
Recommendation no. 14 is that “Court and tribunal staff should 
be trained about the process and be willing to assist people to 
fill out the application form.” Mr. Speaker, we don’t know 
whether that recommendation has been met because the process 
is to be dealt with in the regulations. 
 
Recommendation no. 15 is that “All courts and tribunals should 
name their fee waiver.” We don’t know about that as well, as it 
will be part of the regulations. 
 
And the final recommendation is no. 16: “Education programs 
and materials should be available to inform people on the 
availability of, and application process for, fee waivers in 
Saskatchewan courts and tribunals.” Mr. Speaker, we’re 
assuming that that one may come, but in the legislation itself 
it’s not directly there. And as a matter of fact, it probably does 
relate to some of the budgets for the different tribunals and 
courts that are involved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a good report from the Law Reform 
Commission, and I think a pretty good effort from the Ministry 
of Justice in responding to all of these things. We very much 
look forward to seeing the regulations. 
 
The Speaker: — The time now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6225 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6225 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6225 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6226 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6226 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6227 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6227 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6227 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6227 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6227 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6228 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6228 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6228 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Black Lake Students Recognized for Math Excellence 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6228 
 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6228 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6229 
 Yorkton Athlete Excels at Tennis 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6229 
 Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6229 
 New Educational Facility Opens in Humboldt 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6230 
 Weyburn Native Wins Most Outstanding Lineman Award 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6230 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Health Care and Physician Services 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6230 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6230 
 Role of the Health Quality Council 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6232 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6232 
 The Lean Initiative and Contract With Consultant 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6233 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6233 
 Distribution of Medication in Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6234 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6234 
 Route of the Regina Bypass 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6234 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6235 
 Government Use of Consultants 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6235 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6235 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6235 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6235 
 



 

 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6236 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6236 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6237 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6239 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6240 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6242 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6251 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


