
























































Hansard: March 12, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4661 
 March 12, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
my colleagues for leave to make this introduction. We are 
honoured today to have some very special guests seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and then some in the east gallery as well. 
Mr. Speaker, today joining us are veterans of our military, 
representatives of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police]. In the east gallery are grade 7 and 8 students from two 
schools in Regina, Lakeview and St. Josaphat. And we want to 
welcome all of our guests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few minutes ago outside the Legislative 
Building, we gathered together all of us, these groups and 
members of the Assembly — and we thank the members for 
their attendance there — to commemorate the conclusion of the 
Canadian military mission to Afghanistan. Mr. Speaker, the 
ceremony coincided with the lowering of the Canadian flag at 
NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] headquarters in 
Kabul, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s important that we observe here today that 
hundreds of Saskatchewan citizens served in Afghanistan 
during Canada’s 12-year mission. And you think about 12 
years, how quickly those years have passed. Seventeen people 
with Saskatchewan ties, Mr. Speaker, died while serving in this 
mission, together with 158 Canadians. That’s the number of 
Canadians who lost their lives in the mission. Many others 
came home wounded in body or mind or spirit. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, today’s ceremony was an opportunity for all of us, on 
behalf of a very grateful province, to say thank you to all of 
those from Saskatchewan and indeed from our country who 
were a part of this mission. 
 
What did they do, Mr. Speaker, on the mission? Well here’s 
some interesting things they did that might not come 
immediately to mind as we think about the Afghan mission. 
They did help local security forces promote law and order. They 
did build national institutions and they did support the 
democratic process. They provided humanitarian assistance for 
vulnerable people, including refugees. 
 
They trained police officers. They built and repaired more than 
50 schools, Mr. Speaker, built and repaired more than 50 

schools. They rebuilt the Dahla dam and its irrigation system. 
They contributed to the eradication of polio in Afghanistan, Mr. 
Speaker. And from time to time they also hunted the Taliban. 
 
And upon their first deployment, together with other 
freedom-loving countries and their respective missions, they put 
terror camps out of business so that we are safer today for their 
heroism and for their willingness to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also joining us in the gallery is someone that’s 
well known to our Assembly, someone who helps us as a 
commissionaire and is a friendly face. Ben Walsh, I think has 
joined us in the Legislative Chamber today. And I asked him if 
he would do that because I would just offer one other, one other 
explanation, one other reason why Canadians would participate 
in this mission. 
 
These are the words of his son, Master Corporal Jeffrey Scott 
Walsh from Saskatchewan who was a member of the 2nd 
Battalion Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry and who, 
9 August 2006, at age of 33 was killed. 
 
Choosing words that his young children would understand, 
Master Corporal Jeff Walsh told them and other Canadians why 
he was willing to risk his life for freedom. 
 
Here’s the poem he wrote to his kids. “Monsters In the Dark,” 
it’s called: 
 

I know that they are out there; 
I will not be ignorant any more, 
Pulling the blanket over my head; 
Will not keep them from coming ashore; 
Instead, I choose to confront them; 
As afraid as I might be; 
Because if I don’t stop the monsters; 
Our children can never be free. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we have the ability to add to those 
words to make them more significant. But we should take every 
single opportunity that we can to remember Master Corporal 
Jeffrey Walsh, the other 16, the 158, and all those who served in 
this mission for the cause of freedom and for our safety. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming the individuals who have come 
to the Assembly today and who are seated in the galleries, 
whether it’s the students from Lakeview and St. Josaphat 
schools, or whether it’s the members of the Canadian Forces 
who are here today in the galleries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had an important ceremony outside in front of the 
legislature marking the return of Canadian troops back to 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as Canadians, as we look at this point of time in our 
country’s history, we have a variety of emotions that we all 
experience as Canadians. Most of all we’re thankful for the 
service that has been provided and appreciative of those who 



4662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

have been willing to put their own life on the line in order for 
the common good, in order for the bettering of many people’s 
lives. We’re proud of that service that has been provided and 
proud especially of the men and women from Saskatchewan 
who have done their part. 
 
We’re also hopeful, Mr. Speaker. The Lieutenant Governor 
spoke of these remarks earlier. We’re hopeful for the future of 
Afghanistan and for the work that has been accomplished by 
Canadian Forces and the work that we want to see continue for 
the people of the country. 
 
But we also mourn, Mr. Speaker. We mourn for those who lost 
life: for civilians, for members of the Armed Forces. We mourn 
for the families who are here in Canada who have empty spots 
at their dinner tables, who have empty spots at their holiday 
celebrations, who don’t have the pleasure of experiencing the 
day to day what is normally mundane and routine happenings, 
but the things that make family life so special. So we mourn 
with those families as well and remember the sacrifice that has 
been given. And as the Premier mentioned, we especially think 
of Mr. Ben Walsh who has a close connection to this building. 
 
Members of the Armed Forces have done their duty. And as we 
mark this completion, Mr. Speaker, of this stage, it’s important 
that we remember what our duty is as Canadians. It’s in order to 
ensure that those who have made the sacrifice, those who have 
returned wounded, whether the wounds are seen or unseen, 
receive the attention, receive the care that they deserve. And let 
us use this day to recommit our efforts to ensuring that all 
veterans receive the care that they do in fact deserve and need. 
 
I thank the Premier for his earlier remarks and for this 
opportunity to express our thanks on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This afternoon I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, members 
of the Student Medical Society of Saskatchewan that are here 
today seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a number of names that are joining us, perhaps a few that 
didn’t make it down for the trip. But I will go through the 
names. Today with us are Jordan Li, Jaylynn Arcand, Jon 
Herriot, Keith Johnstone, Lena Xiao, Lindsey Anderson, John 
Schulte, Reid Sonntag, Kristin Black, Cheyanne Vetter, Jessica 
Harris, Sarah Smith, and Christine Chang. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members of the Student Medical Society are 
here in the building to meet with elected officials regarding a 
number of topics of interest. Myself and the Minister for Rural 
and Remote Health will have an opportunity to meet with them 
this afternoon after the proceedings. And I’d ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister in welcoming the students from the 

Student Medical Society of Saskatchewan, the government 
affairs and advocacy committee. The opposition had an 
opportunity this morning to hear from 12 of the members here 
and learned tons. It’s always good to hear from students who 
have some insight as to what will help keep them here down the 
road, ensuring that we cross that 50 per cent barrier when it 
comes to ensuring that doctors practising here are from 
Saskatchewan, have roots here and can stay here. 
 
So it’s always a pleasure to hear from you and your good ideas, 
and we look forward to a continued working relationship and 
hearing what else you have to say down the road. So with that, 
I’d ask my colleagues to join me in welcoming these medical 
students to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, we have 
some people here coming down from northeastern 
Saskatchewan. I’ve got a bit of a list here too. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mark Knox who is a reeve of 
the RM [rural municipality] of Nipawin; Merv Tweed who’s the 
president of OmniTRAX Canada; Sinclair Harrison, president 
of Hudson Bay Route Association; Leonard Gluska, president 
of Gateway Keewatin Corridor from The Pas; Deputy Mayor 
Lewis Robin, town of Nipawin; Richard Porter, provincial 
Chair of regional transportation planning committees; George 
Haas of the Hudson Bay Route Association; Jim Hallick, 
Hudson Bay Route Association; and Christopher Hudyma, town 
of Nipawin. 
 
And in the west gallery, we have the reeve of the RM of Moose 
Range, Ray Mazurek; and Richard Colborn who is 
administrator of the RM of Moose Range. I would like all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member from Carrot . . . Well I guess first of all, Mr. Speaker, I 
would again just like to acknowledge our people that have 
served in uniform and thank them for coming here today. 
 
I would like to join member from Carrot River in 
acknowledging delegation from northeastern Saskatchewan as 
well, beginning with the deputy mayor of Nipawin, Mr. Lewis 
Robin; Councillor Mike Botterill. In the east gallery, Ray 
Mazurek and Richard Colborn, George Haas, Jim Hallick, Chris 
Hudyma and Len Gluska. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to make just a special 
acknowledgement of Merv Tweed who is now the president of 
OmniTRAX and previously was the MP [Member of 
Parliament] with our federal government for the area of 
Brandon-Souris. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no stranger to Regina on a week like this 
when SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4663 

Municipalities] is on, I would like to make an 
acknowledgement of Sinclair Harrison who’s come down. And 
I had the opportunity to meet with Sinclair and the delegation 
prior to the House here today. 
 
And another previous member of SARM, a previous member of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency is Richard Porter, or anyone 
who’s met him more than once will know him as Porky Porter. 
Mr. Speaker, Porky has been involved in numerous projects in 
the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook from landfills to 
hospitals and everything in between. And Mr. Speaker, he’s 
been a true friend of the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
And I appreciate all of you coming today. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like all my colleagues to join with me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d like to join with members opposite 
in recognizing the municipal leaders that have joined us here 
today, both from the northeast and other parts of the province. 
These leaders are certainly committed to their regions, to our 
communities, and I know are engaged in a whole host of very 
important issues from economic development through to health 
care through to grain transportation challenges. 
 
I appreciated the time I spent today and as well yesterday over 
at SARM, appreciated the discourse and the issues that you’re 
bringing forward. We will be following up on some of those 
resolutions as well. Thank you for the leadership to those 
municipal leaders that they provide to our province. 
 
I’d be remiss not to join the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming our veterans, our Armed Forces, our 
RCMP members that have joined us here today. Thank you. 
 
I also would like to just recognize Donna Kadash who’s here as 
well. She works with the RCMP. And I know Donna; she’s a 
friend. And she lost her nephew a few years back, Corporal 
James Hayward Arnal, and I certainly recognize the loss in a 
family there. And of course our good friend Ben Walsh who’s 
here with us here today, I think it’s hard for any of us to get our 
minds around what that loss within a family means. Certainly 
we value and are thankful for the service of your loved ones. 
 
I’m also really pleased to have the students from St. Josaphat 
that have come here today, a grade 7 and 8 class, a really 
special bunch. I’ve gotten to know them a little bit. I had a good 
time with them not too long ago for an impressive debate. And 
certainly if democracy is something that we’re fighting for, 
there’s an impressive group within that room that will 
contribute to our democracy and to our province years forward. 
 
And I am really pleased to have the group from St. Josaphat 
join us here today, the grade 7s and 8s along with their teacher, 
Mr. Clayton Ford. He is certainly an exceptional teacher. Thank 
you so much for joining us and please send my best to Principal 
Chicilo. Thank you. Please join with me in welcoming these 
students. 
 
[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in my capacity as Minister of Education, I would like to 
introduce the two school groups that are with us today — one 
just recognized by the member opposite. 
 
These students came here today, and we thank them for coming. 
But they came here for a specific purpose, and that was for the 
flag-raising ceremony outside to commemorate the return of 
Canadian soldiers from Afghanistan. To them I would like to 
say, this is something that should be a special event in their 
lives. This is something, a conflict that has gone on for most of 
them throughout the better part of their lives. So to them it 
marks the end of something, and hopefully is something that 
leads to a greater and better world in which we focus on 
freedom and liberty.  
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, 27 grade 7 and 8 students from St. 
Josaphat School. The teacher that brought those students was 
Clayton Ford. And there are 30 grade 7 and 8 students from 
Lakeview Elementary School. The teacher there is Rochelle 
Anderson. We’d like to thank the teachers and all the students 
for being here today and ask them to enjoy their time in the 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today we witnessed a very auspicious ceremony in front of the 
legislature, and we as individuals and as a province and a nation 
are better for the experience, as difficult as it might have been. 
And so I want to offer my appreciation also to the members of 
the military that have joined us today and individuals who have 
suffered deep personal loss. 
 
On another note, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize constituents 
that have joined us today. I don’t have this opportunity very 
often, so when I have five rural government leaders from the 
constituency of Cypress Hills in the gallery, I want to be sure to 
recognize them. And if anybody ever doubted why Cypress 
Hills is the greatest constituency in the province, we are home 
to a rural municipality that goes by the name of Happyland. 
And the reeve of Happyland is with us today, Mr. Tim Geiger, 
who has become a very good friend of mine, a hard-over 
Liberal that I’ve softened just a little. We have, at the other end 
of the line, Doug Smith who is the reeve of the RM of Deer 
Forks. And we appreciate his work on behalf of his citizens. 
 
With those two gentlemen who serve as reeve, each of them 
have brought a councillor. Gerald Wagner is the councillor for 
the RM of Happyland that’s with us today, and Basil Dietrich is 
the councillor from Deer Forks. And in the midst of them is the 
administrator for both RMs, Tim Lozinsky who has joined this 
delegation at SARM and in the gallery today. I would like all 
members of the House to welcome my constituents for their 
visit here. They’re not just looking for good administration; 
they want to know if I’m representing them well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the other members and the Premier who have welcomed the 



4664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

students from Lakeview School. There are 23 students in grade 
7 and 8 accompanied by Rochelle Anderson and Shannon 
Lyons. And Lakeview School is very close to the legislature, so 
they have a long experience of coming each year to visit this 
place. But I think today they’ve had a special visit, and they all 
know that. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I have the honour of introducing some of the 
Minister of Agriculture’s constituents but some good friends of 
mine: my cousin Darren Steinley from Rush Lake, 
Saskatchewan; Terrie Unger; and reeve of the RM of Excelsior, 
Harold Martens. 
 
This may be a rare instance, but actually it’s a honour to 
introduce Harold because he introduced me in 1988 as I was on 
the grade 5 class trip and he was the MLA. So it’s turnabout is 
fair play. So welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
And it’s a pleasure to have my cousin here. They’re here for the 
SARM festivities and it’s been fantastic so far. I was happy to 
be there this afternoon, and I’m looking forward to getting 
together with him this evening at the banquet. 
 
And I, just on another note, I had the opportunity to get to know 
Ben Walsh quite well. He was with us when we did the 
Highway Traffic Safety Committee and we travelled. And he 
shared some wonderful stories, and I’m proud to call him a 
friend and a great constituent. So I just wanted to mention him 
as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to join 
into the induction of the many honoured guests we have here 
today. With SARM on, it’s nice to see a lot of our rural 
constituents coming up. 
 
In your west gallery we have Dennis Fuglerud who is the reeve 
of the RM of Rudy. I know he’s up today working on behalf of 
the RM. So I want to — myself and the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose, we share him as a constituent — and also the 
members, I want to have everybody welcome here to his 
legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support of 
education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 
services a government provides to its citizens and that we must 
build the best education system for today and for 
Saskatchewan’s future. But we know that this government has 
yet to deliver a long-term plan and vision and necessary 
resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence 
and that government has yet to develop a real plan, to develop a 
plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as 

an additional language students, and support community 
schools and their communities and students. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best 
practices, that is developed through the consultation with 
the education sector, and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents in support of 
safety and rerouting heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney 
Avenue. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of city centre to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina communities and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 
concerned about seniors’ care in the North. The Croft report of 
2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 
seniors, and the problem has only gotten worse. Seniors have 
done their part for this province and it’s time for the 
government to do its part. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 
citizens with respect and dignity and immediately invest in 
a new long-term care facility in La Ronge area. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4665 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School. The petitioners point out that any 
school needs a gym as a place for the school and the community 
to gather together to engage in cultural and educational 
activities and to promote physical activity which is good for the 
mind, body, and spirit of all children. 
 
They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School 
has been closed because it was falling apart, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a temporary solution on offer in terms of the use of the 
old sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart Church, but the students 
need a gym. The petitioners also point out that Sacred Heart 
Community School is the largest school in North Central with 
450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and 
Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased by 100-plus 
students over the past four years, and that attendance and 
learning outcomes are steadily improving. And they point out, 
as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart 
Community School needs a gym. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina who 
represent a grandfather, a grandmother, and a mother of a 
Sacred Heart student. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Entrepreneur Wins Just Watch Me! Contest 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize a young entrepreneur from the town of 
Outlook, a town that both myself and the member from 
Rosetown and Elrose have both represented over the many 
years. 
 
This entrepreneur has shown that determination and believing 
in yourself are key to achieving goals. Last month, 20-year-old 
Taylor Layton won the Just Watch Me! contest run by the 
entrepreneurs with disabilities program. Layton has Down’s 
syndrome, which limited her employment options in her 
hometown of Outlook, but she was determined to work like 
everyone else. 
 
The solution was Taylor’s Recycling Pick-Up, which she 
started two years ago with the help of her mother, Eloise. 
Taylor gives each of her customers a bin to put out once a 
week, when she picks up all the household recycling and sorts it 
for processing. 
 
Taylor started with five customers, and now it’s grown to 59, 
who she says has become part of her family. This community 
support is what resulted in a landslide victory for Taylor, with 

an army of people voting for her video entry day in and day out. 
By winning the contest, Taylor received a cash prize of $1,000 
as well as some vital business tools and resources to help her 
recycling program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Taylor Layton on both the success of her business and on 
winning the Just Watch Me! contest. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Ceremony Honours Contributions in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 
today, the Canadian flag was lowered in Kabul at a ceremony 
marking the end of Canada’s 13-year military mission in 
Afghanistan. Our Assembly, alongside those across the country, 
also started the day by lowering our flags to half-mast. And 
over the lunch hour these flags were raised to full height to 
mark the end of the military mission and to support Afghanistan 
moving forward. 
 
The ceremony was to honour the contributions and the 
sacrifices of Saskatchewan people, soldiers, and civilians who 
have given years of their lives to support this cause. The last 
100 Canadian soldiers who were training Afghan National 
Security Forces will be withdrawn over the next couple of days, 
are the last of the troops to come home. This symbolic 
recognition is also extended to the people of Afghanistan with 
the aspiration that the country has the will and the stability 
required to secure a better future for their people. On this 
mission’s final days, it is important to contemplate what this 
part of shared Canadian and Afghan history will mean moving 
forward, and undoubtedly we can learn a lot from our Canadian 
Forces about sacrifice, about community, and about leadership. 
 
I ask that all members of the Assembly join me today in 
recognizing our Canadian and military heroes for their courage 
and dedication in supporting the Afghan people on their path 
towards democratic stability and lasting independence. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Estevan Police Chief Retires 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise in the House to recognize an outstanding constituent of 
mine for his work in the city of Estevan. For nearly four 
decades, Del Block has been striving to prevent crime, protect 
Estevan’s residents, and be a positive influence in the 
community. He spent the last 38 years as a member of the 
Estevan Police Service and the last five of his tenure as police 
chief. Del knew when was a grade 10 student at the Carnduff 
High School that he wanted to be a police officer after the 
RCMP came to the school to promote a career in policing. 
 
Since Del joined the Estevan Police Service on May 1, 1976, he 
has seen many changes in both the police service and the city of 
Estevan. He remained loyal to the police service and gained 
respect both locally and nationally. At one point he also held 



4666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

the position of the national vice-president for the Canadian 
Police Association. Although Del is retiring, two of his 
daughters have chosen to follow in their father’s footsteps by 
pursuing careers in law enforcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. 
Del Block on his 38-year career with the Estevan Police 
Service, and in thanking him for all his contributions to the 
Estevan community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Women With Disabilities Luncheon and Woman of 
Illumination Award 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
March 7th I attended the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living’s 14th annual Women with Disabilities 
Luncheon. This important gathering was held in recognition of 
International Women’s Day. 
 
The keynote speaker, Reka Kincses, described her journey from 
Romania to Saskatoon with her daughter, Boglarka, as well as 
their plight to prevent deportation due to Boglarka’s diagnosis 
of cerebral palsy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was also inspirational to hear about the Woman 
of Illumination Award, Marilyn Baker. This award aims to 
recognize a woman within the disability community whose 
actions can serve as a role model for all women, regardless of 
ability. Marilyn has devoted herself to the disability community 
through her volunteer work as well as her time at Cheshire 
Homes as a resident representative. She has become a leader 
that residents and staff look up to for guidance. Though Marilyn 
had to leave her position as an LPN [licensed practical nurse] 
after sustaining an injury, she kept busy spending time 
independently raising three wonderful children, and she now is 
also the proud grandmother to four grandchildren. 
 
Would members join me in congratulating Marilyn Baker on 
her award as well as recognizing the important role of events 
like the women’s disability luncheon in raising awareness about 
the important work being done in the disability community in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Battlefords. 
 

Land-based Learning Camp 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
recently invited to a luncheon hosted by the Living Sky School 
Division. At the luncheon, they highlighted the success of a 
program recently introduced in their school division. The 
program, titled land-based learning, was first implemented in 
the Cando School. 
 
Both teachers and administrators spoke of the great success of 
this initial land-based learning camp. Students had an 
opportunity in a natural environment to learn about First 
Nations and Métis culture, local traditional language, 
academics, community engagement, environmental awareness, 
and how to have a healthy mind, body, and spirit. Students 
returned from this camp refocused and recharged, and the 

improved graduation rates were phenomenal. Of the 17 students 
who attended that first camp, 15 will graduate this year. 
 
The next land-based learning camp will held from May 26th to 
29th this year with grade 9 students from both Cando and 
Leoville schools participating. The four-day camp will be a 
bicultural camp with both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
students and will follow a bicultural and co-teaching model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Elder Ethel Stone spoke of the students who now 
want to go to school as a result of what they experienced at that 
first camp. In her words, “Programs don’t work without 
relationships.” Mr. Speaker, students certainly built 
relationships at this camp. To quote another elder, Elder 
Theresa, “Working together is better than talking about each 
other.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Living Sky School Division for taking the 
initiative to develop this program and wish them every success 
with their 2014 camp. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Honouring Bill MacRae 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize a lifetime of achievement by one of the most 
respected RCMP officers in the Regina community and indeed 
in the province, Bill MacRae, who passed away February 24th, 
2014. 
 
Bill MacRae spent 31 years with the RCMP and is fondly 
remembered by many. Mr. Speaker, MacRae may best be 
remembered for his time stationed at Depot Division here in 
Regina as the chief training officer. Not one for complacency, 
MacRae oversaw a number of significant changes to the 
division, including the start of training female recruits and a 
shift to the human relations training. This was no doubt a 
historic time for Depot. 
 
MacRae was not done serving his community upon his 
retirement, and his list of accomplishments continued to grow. 
He went on to become president of the Saskatchewan Golf 
Association. He became CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. I met Mr. MacRae at that 
time. I was Vice-Chair of the commission, and he was certainly 
an agent of change in that area. He was a member of the 
National Parole Board, president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehab Centres, chairman of Canadian Special 
Olympics, an aide-de-camp to two Lieutenant Governors, and 
an honorary doctorate of law from the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a life well lived. Our condolences and 
thoughts and prayers to his family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Agricultural Safety Week 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this week our Agriculture minister and the Minister of 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4667 

Labour Relations and Workplace Safety proclaimed March 9th 
to 15th to be the Agricultural Safety Week in Saskatchewan. 
This coincides with the Canadian Agricultural Safety Week, a 
partnership between the Canadian Agricultural Safety 
Association and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. 
 
Agricultural safety should be a priority for all farmers and 
ranchers to ensure the continued success of not only their 
operations but also the agriculture industry as a whole. This 
year’s theme, Let’s talk about it! encourages farmers and 
communities to talk about farm safety. While we strive to 
provide safe workplaces across the province, we must also 
ensure that farms and ranches, ranchers are safe as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture provides funding to 
the Agricultural Health and Safety Network, an affiliation of the 
Canadian Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture, to offer 
agricultural health and safety programming to farm families in 
Saskatchewan. In addition funding is provided to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Ag Societies and Exhibitions for 
farm safety day camps for youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in asking our 
farmers and ranchers to take care this spring, whether it’s 
putting in this crop or working with their livestock. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Personal Care Homes 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 the 
Provincial Auditor flagged significant concerns related to the 
health and safety of residents in privately run care homes. The 
Provincial Auditor said that this government needed to get 
serious about how it regulates privately run care homes, how it 
inspects those homes, and how it reports the results of those 
inspections. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier insisted the government 
could not post the results of the inspections until legislative 
changes are completed. But the truth emerged last night in 
committee, Mr. Speaker. Nothing, nothing was stopping the 
government from posting inspection reports. In fact, this is what 
the Ministry of Health said: “I want to make it clear that the 
ministry did have the authority to release that information and 
under what circumstances and when and any conditions around 
that.” 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: why did he insist 
that this government cannot act until legislative changes are 
made when that’s actually not true? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true. That’s 
the advice we received from Justice officials. That’s the legal 
advice that the Government of Saskatchewan received with 
respect to posting these inspections in the way that the bill 
prescribes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously the release of information. 
We’ve seen it through freedom of information requests, and 
some of that’s actually been posted then on media websites. But 
the legal advice to the government in the case of restaurants, as 
I recall, and also in this case is that legislative authority is 
required, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to obviously honour 
the advice that we get from the lawyers and the Justice officials 
for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we learned in committee last 
night, it was clearly said by the Ministry of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, that legislative changes were not required for the 
release of information. They said it was preferable, Mr. 
Speaker, so that there could be a framework in place for the 
frequency of releasing reports and all of that. But he made it 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that it was not necessary. 
 
That’s not the only inconsistency we see here with this 
government’s lines. Yesterday the Premier was asked whether 
the government would have the regulations ready to get the 
inspection reports up quickly. The Premier said, Mr. Speaker, 
that cabinet could meet today, get these things done, and “have 
this in full effect.” But yesterday in committee, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister confessed that the regulations are not ready. And in 
fact, his timeline, he hopes — he hopes — online reports might 
be up by the fall of 2014. 
 
So my question is for the Premier, who suggested the 
regulations were good to go: what did he mean when he said 
that this government could have this in full effect quickly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I meant that we could have it 
in full effect very quickly, which is exactly what the 
government intends to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member’s preamble, I want to be very 
clear. Advisers to the Government of Saskatchewan from 
Justice, legal advisers to the government might say, you can 
post these inspections, but there is a risk to posting the 
inspections if you don’t have the legal authority to do so. So we 
chose to have the legal authority to do so, as we did in the case 
of restaurant inspections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to inform the Assembly that the draft 
regulations are complete, that we will now consult with the 
sector. And in the days ahead, after we consult with the sector 
on the regulations, we will take the next step and move forward 
to the implementation of this process quickly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this story is changing second by 
second here. Last night we were sitting in committee. We were 
sitting in committee until about 11 o’clock. The minister said 
that the regulations are in fact not ready. Here we have a quote 
from the minister. The member from Saskatoon Centre actually 
asked this. He said, “Are the regulations ready to go?” The 
Health minister said, “I don’t believe they are ready to go for 
tomorrow.” So apparently someone was up with a pencil all 



4668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

night writing regulations for this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are concerning stories coming out with this 
government’s approach to this issue. Supposedly there’s great 
urgency, but then there’s mixed-up stories coming out. Here’s 
what’s also, Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s also very concerning 
about the government’s story. Last night in the committee I 
asked the Health minister, in how many instances are there 
where privately run care homes are currently having significant 
deficiencies and that’s affecting the health and safety of the 
residents? The minister could not provide an answer. I asked for 
a ballpark how many instances. He could not provide an 
answer. 
 
To the Premier: has he looked into this? In how many instances 
are there deficiencies with privately run personal care homes 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we know 
what’s happened here. The minister . . . or the Leader of the 
Opposition I think is embarrassed about what happened 
yesterday. He’s embarrassed. He’s embarrassed because he 
asked this government for immediate action. This government 
said, let’s take the next step immediately. The Government 
House Leader stood up at the end of question period and said, 
with leave of the Assembly, let’s go. Let’s start this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the comment on regulations, I said 
after question period when asked by the media how quickly we 
could move things, Mr. Speaker, the normal process is that it 
takes some time to draft regulations for any particular piece of 
legislation. And that’s what the minister was reflecting in his 
answer in Committee of the Whole. But, Mr. Speaker, we made 
an undertaking yesterday to make things happen a lot more 
quickly. And I want to thank officials within the government for 
assisting us to ensure it happens more quickly. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition yesterday asked that it happen 
more quickly. We gave him the chance. He didn’t take it then. 
It’s happening now. Exactly what he asked for is happening 
today. So what’s the problem, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, I don’t know on 
what napkin the Premier and members of cabinet are making 
this plan, Mr. Speaker, but their stories are completely 
inconsistent. We have the minister, Mr. Speaker, last night in 
committee at 11 o’clock suggesting regs aren’t ready. We had 
the Premier saying that they could meet today, Mr. Speaker. 
Why on earth would the minister be providing contradictory 
information to what the Premier is admitting today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the Leader of the Opposition owes an apology to officials 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. Not us. Not us. Frankly 
we’re not interested, but officials of the Government of 
Saskatchewan that were working on the first drafts of this 
legislation months and months ago, before it was introduced in 

the fall, who were helping and assisting the government consult 
with the sector. And then, Mr. Speaker, as we advanced the 
process yesterday at that member’s request, also the officials of 
the government moved promptly on regulations. And now we 
have an unprecedented situation where the regulations are 
drafted and we can go to the sector for support. 
 
I think that that’s not writing things on the back of a napkin. I 
think that’s earnest effort on behalf of the people of the 
province at the request of that member opposite, and he owes 
those officials an apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the genesis of this whole debate is November the 
12th of last year when the Minister of Health introduced the bill 
in the first place, and then every one of the members opposite 
spoke to the bill. They ragged the puck. They kept it out of 
committee. That’s something they control. They could have 
moved it to committee in November by stopping the lengthy 
speeches they were giving. Well the total speeches were two 
hours and 15 minutes, about 15 minutes each. They all spoke to 
it except the Leader of the Opposition, by the way. He didn’t 
have time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this. We want to move quickly 
on this. Now are the NDP [New Democratic Party] going to 
co-operate or not? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is tying himself up in 
knots in this explanation here. In the explanations we’ve heard 
from the minister, Mr. Speaker, there’s been bizarre tales in 
terms of what’s happening and what’s not happening. But we 
also asked some serious, some very serious questions additional 
to the timelines. And committee was especially important to get 
the information on the timelines because it was in committee 
where the minister said they hope they can hit the fall of 2014; 
in fact it actually might be much later. 
 
I asked the minister in committee, Mr. Speaker, I asked the 
minister how many instances are there where private care 
homes are in violation, and the safety and the quality of care for 
seniors is in jeopardy. There was no answer. There was not 
even a ballpark. I’ve asked the Premier in how may instances 
this is the case. Can he report to this Assembly, in how many 
instances are there where there are deficiencies in the quality of 
care for personal care homes here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we take the work of the 
officials of the Legislative Assembly very seriously when they 
give reports on any part of government. Most assuredly that’s 
the case when it comes to personal care homes, and then we’ve 
acted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see the response of the Leader of 
the Opposition to what happened in this House yesterday, to 
what happened arguably to him yesterday. It was all of his own 
making. Mr. Speaker, he comes back to the Assembly today and 
it is all about process. That’s what this whole debate’s been 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4669 

about, not about the issue. 
 
Here while the NDP were talking about it for 16 years and 
worrying about process, the government changed in 2007 and 
created the personal care home benefit, taking that benefit to 
1,875 a month. Long awaited — talk over there; action over 
here. We increased the Saskatchewan income pension plan, Mr. 
Speaker, benefits now $250 a month, up 160 or 178 per cent — 
talk there; action here. The caregiver tax credit — talk; action. 
Four point five million for Home First, Mr. Speaker — talk; 
action. 350,000 for the expansion of the Alzheimer Society — 
talk and action. New long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, a 
commitment to seniors in this province. Instead of closing beds, 
Mr. Speaker — that was the record of members opposite — 
instead of freezing SIP [seniors’ income plan], the benefit for 
seniors, Mr. Speaker, we’ll let the record stand for itself. Talk 
and process; and action on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question was very specific 
about the quality of care for seniors here in the province. How 
many instances currently exist within the province where there 
are identified deficiencies and violations in the health and safety 
and quality of care for seniors who live in privately run personal 
care homes? How many? Last night the minister couldn’t say 
this. They’ve had all evening to write regulations. Perhaps 
they’ve had all evening to look into this number. How many? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all to correct the Leader of the Opposition, I 
don’t believe at any time last night I indicated that it would take 
longer than the calendar year of 2014 to implement the 
regulations, the legislation, and the new electronic monitoring 
and reporting of this, Mr. Speaker. He’s indicated that in the 
House. He indicated that in the committee last night and at no 
point, I believe, did I ever indicate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done is we’ve made . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Perhaps the members of the House would be 
interested in hearing the answer. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I’ve indicated, and what has changed since from when the 
Provincial Auditor conducted their work in 2010 to 2012 when 
they reported to us, Mr. Speaker, is that we have moved to a 
new process where rather than all of the annual inspections 
being bunched up in the month of March, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve the workflow we’ve now extended that over the year 
so that it’s more of a staggered process which means to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that at any given time the annual licensing process for 
a facility may be due. When there is a deficiency, we work with 
that facility to correct it, Mr. Speaker, within a set period of 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked the Premier, in how 

many instances are there care homes right now in Saskatchewan 
where there are violations identified? The Premier could not 
answer. The Health minister could not answer. 
 
We have another Health minister as well, the Minister for Rural 
Health. I’ll ask him. Perhaps he’s read the briefing note, or 
hopefully there is a briefing note. To the Minister for Rural 
Health: how many instances, Mr. Speaker, in personal care 
homes, privately run ones, are there current violations where 
deficiencies exist? What is the number? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, because of the ongoing 
process, the ongoing work that we do with our personal care 
homes, Mr. Speaker, when the deficiencies are identified it may 
be at various parts of the year based on the cycle that that 
facility will be on in the licensing, Mr. Speaker. Depending on 
the type of deficiency, there will be a period of time that the 
ministry, the consultants will work to help the facility make the 
improvements, Mr. Speaker. So at any given time, that number 
would be different based on when each facility would be in 
their reporting cycle. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s shocking and concerning that 
a concrete number cannot be provided. For a government, Mr. 
Speaker, that huffs and puffs and has a lot of bluster about 
wanting to take urgent action, Mr. Speaker, the story and the 
facts tell a very different reality. And this is what we’ve seen 
from this government. They claim they want urgent action, Mr. 
Speaker, but then it comes out in committee that, well they 
actually didn’t even need legislation to start posting the 
information. Ministry officials clearly said it was preferable; 
they did not say that it was necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last night, the minister says regulations weren’t even ready, 
Mr. Speaker. A different napkin story today from the Premier. 
But who knows? Mr. Speaker, we have the minister say that the 
public reporting of online reports won’t even happen till the 
fall. Supposedly there’s urgency but nothing until the fall, and 
even he admitted that they might not make that fall mark. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they can’t even, Mr. Speaker, they can’t 
even identify in how many instances there are violations where 
seniors do not have safe living conditions and a quality of care 
that they deserve. My question to the Premier: when will this 
government get serious about the regulation, about 
enforcement, about inspections for private care homes here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the 
Opposition leaves out in the narrative of this situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that there were recommendations made by 
the Provincial Auditor late in 2012. We took that very seriously, 
Mr. Speaker. I had met with the Provincial Auditor, and we 
made a decision that we were going to accept the advice of the 
Provincial Auditor and actually publicly report on the 
inspections of personal care homes, Mr. Speaker, which had not 
been done up to this point. 



4670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, in the advice that we received, it was advised that 
legislation would be the preferred route so that we wouldn’t 
have a challenge in the future from an operator, Mr. Speaker, 
that would question whether or not the government has the legal 
authority to actually publish the information online. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we took the advice of the lawyers. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition will know, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have consulted. Over 300 stakeholders have been consulted on 
this. That took us beyond a window where we could introduce 
legislation. The first available time to actually introduce the 
legislation was last fall, which we did, Mr. Speaker, and we 
look forward to passing that legislation today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Care of Dementia Patients 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Sheila Caron’s father, Ron, has 
dementia. Sheila’s father needs a placement in a dementia unit 
in a long-term care home but has been rejected. Instead her 
family was told to try private care homes. But private care 
homes are unable to provide the intensive support that Sheila’s 
father needs. 
 
Mr. Caron has been living in a psychiatric facility in Saskatoon 
for months. This is a facility that’s often over capacity. Mr. 
Speaker, a psychiatric facility is not an appropriate place for 
someone with dementia. Does the Minister of Health agree with 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to work with 
the member to address this very specific case. I don’t have the 
details at hand in terms of Mr. Caron’s care. Certainly the 
situation that has been described by the member opposite 
wouldn’t be the ideal situation. We do try to find placement 
within long-term care facilities. Of course there’s a number of 
factors, ensuring as best we can that it’s close to family 
members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know in Saskatoon we do have a new facility, 
Samaritan Place, that does have a dedicated wing of the facility 
for dementia care, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure, at Samaritan 
Place, I’m not sure why . . . just the particulars of why that may 
not have been available. We’ll certainly follow up to see what 
help we can provide this family. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the reason given for why 
Sheila’s dad has been rejected for long-term care is that he 
needs too much care and support. That’s what Sheila has 
actually been told. There are not enough front-line workers in 
long-term care facilities to provide the kind of care that Sheila’s 
dad needs, so the only place for Mr. Caron is in a psychiatric 
facility, and he has been there for months. To the minister: how 
does it make any sense for people to be denied a long-term care 
placement because they require too much care and support? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in this particular case I’m not sure if the member opposite or the 
family have checked with the quality of care coordinators that 
are available in the regions to help navigate the system in these 
types of cases. I don’t know the specifics, Mr. Speaker, as to 
why this, as presented by the member opposite, this would be 
the case. If they haven’t done so, that’s first of all where we’d 
refer individuals, is quality of care coordinator for the health 
region. If that’s been done, Mr. Speaker, then we can work with 
the member to follow up with the family. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what Sheila says: 
 

There’s a huge gap in this area of our health care. It’s a 
very long, very frustrating road, and the people I thought 
were supposed to be my team and advocating for my dad 
are lacking. I feel they are just throwing me back the ball 
because they don’t know what else to do. They have so 
many patients they can’t stop to offer any specific care to 
just one person. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, when that one person is your dad or your 
mom or your grandparent or your spouse, you need help. And 
you also need hope, Mr. Speaker. Sheila needs that today and so 
does her dad, Ron. To the minister: what will the government 
do to find a proper place for Sheila’s dad so he doesn’t have to 
keep living in an acute psychiatric facility? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, not being familiar with the 
specifics of the case, we’ll certainly follow up with the family 
and with the member if she would provide some additional 
information after question period to find out the specifics of the 
case and why that may have been the information that would 
have been relayed. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, within our regional health authorities, 
within the Ministry of Health, we have very dedicated staff that 
work with families each and every day to try to find the right 
place at the right time for every single resident within the 
province, knowing that it is sometimes a challenge to match up, 
Mr. Speaker, the right facility for that individual, based on their 
individual needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we were very eager as a government to 
move forward with Samaritan Place in Saskatoon, because of 
the work that they did commit to do around dementia care, Mr. 
Speaker. But we know that we have a long ways to go in this 
regard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Sheila was told that the way to 
get her dad into long-term care is to drug him. That way he 
won’t require as much care and support. This is a common 
concern for families of those with dementia. There aren’t 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4671 

enough front-line workers in seniors’ care homes to meet their 
needs, so many families believe their loved ones are 
unnecessarily drugged into a stupor. 
 
We need more dementia units but we know this government 
rejected at least one urgent request from a health region for a 
desperately needed dementia unit. To the minister: there are 
about 20,000 people with dementia in Saskatchewan. What is 
this government doing now to address this huge gap in our 
health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, well we have taken a number of steps. First of all we 
did agree to the building of Samaritan Place in Saskatoon, that 
they’d have a dedicated wing for dementia, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately the members opposite were opposed to that 
initiative of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of dementia and people that are living in 
the communities, we’ve made a significant investment in this 
year’s budget to increase funding for the Alzheimer Society, 
which typically in an annual year had been $50,000. That is 
now $400,000 to expand the First Link program around the 
province to help those families that are being diagnosed, those 
family members that are being diagnosed with dementia, to help 
provide support within the community and to help be a resource 
for those families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, we are, Mr. Speaker, in general we are updating a 
number of long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 
provide the care that our residents need. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
sure who within, whether it was the health region or wherever 
else, had been indicating this information to this family member 
but, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make a commitment that we’ll be 
following up closely with this case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Transfer of Community Pastures 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, at SARM’s convention 
yesterday, delegates passed a resolution regarding community 
pastures that said: 
 

Be it resolved that SARM lobby the province to deal with 
the original PFRA transfer agreements to the satisfaction 
of the affected municipalities; and further be it resolved 
that, if the issues with the original PFRA transfer 
agreements are not addressed to the satisfaction of the 
affected municipalities, SARM assist with bringing a class 
action lawsuit against the province for a breach of 
agreements. 

 
And they want this to happen no later than August, Mr. 
Speaker. To the minister: why has this reached the point that 
SARM delegates have to threaten legal action against this 
government with regard to community pastures? 
 
[14:30] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This issue has 
been brought to my attention previously and I’ve told the RMs 
in question that we will work with them, and accordingly our 
legal counsel has pored through minutes of the Land Utilization 
Board from 1936 to 1963 inclusive and they have found no 
contractual agreements between the Land Utilization Board and 
RMs for the land to be reverted to RMs. No reversionary clause, 
as is the case for land to come back to the province. 
 
I’ve told the RMs previously that if they have information or 
agreements that would suggest otherwise, that we are interested 
in reviewing that. And it’s our priority to make the patrons, 
make sure that they continue to have access to the land. But we 
are willing to work with RMs that think they have agreements 
to the contrary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the affected 
RMs have also done some legal research and looked into the 
documents that relate to these transfer of lands when they went 
to the Land Utilization Board. And in fact most of them have 
minutes from their meetings when they agreed to pass this land 
over to the utilization board, were then transferred to the PFRA 
[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration], and that these 
minutes in many cases have a number of conditions attached to 
them. And will this government honour those conditions when 
those RMs turned the land over, back 80 years ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I 
have said from the beginning of this process. If documents can 
be found that show that land should revert to RMs rather than 
the province of Saskatchewan, we’ll certainly honour those 
agreements, Mr. Speaker. And you know, we’re working with 
the RMs. Our staff from the ministry have been working with 
them. The legal counsel has been working in conjunction with 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is going to be resolved. I don’t think there’s going to be 
any lawsuit, class action, or otherwise. This is just going to be 
resolved, and there’s no ambulance to chase here. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment 
Act, 2013 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before the 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 



4672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and this 
bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 102, The 
Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill be now 
read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 
Orders Amendment Act, 2013. This is a bilingual bill, and it’s 
reported without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill now be read a third time. 
 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 103, The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 
Act, 2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 
Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole and this bill now be 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 104, The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2013 and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4673 

granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, 
and that the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 105, The 
Informal Public Appeals Act and that the bill be now read the 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 105, The Information Public 
Appeals Act be now read the third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 126, The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 
 



4674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that this bill be now read a third 
time, Mr. Speaker, and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal 
Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 109, The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2013 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 109, The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2013 and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I move that this bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 107, The Wildfire 
Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 107, The 
Wildfire Act and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this bill be now read the third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4675 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 111, 
The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 and that 
the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes 
Amendment Act, 2013 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 
2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the House will take 
a very short recess for the arrival of the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
I am advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here 
for Royal Assent. All please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:45 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 102 - The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 
Bill No. 103 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant 
la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 
ordonnances alimentaires 

Bill No. 104 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

Bill No. 105 - The Informal Public Appeals Act 
Bill No. 126 - The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment 

Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 109 - The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 
Bill No. 107 - The Wildfire Act 
Bill No. 111 - The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 

2013 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:48.] 
 
The Speaker: — You may be seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of natural — 
obviously I don’t recognize him very well — Energy and 
Resources. 
 

Support for Northern Gateway Pipeline 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we 
have a very important debate in front of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, something that I think is of great importance to our 
province but more broadly to our country. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
is in regards to pipelines and specifically the Northern Gateway 
pipeline. Mr. Speaker, I will have some comments that I would 
like to make in regards to the broader issues, to the specific 

http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/details.cfm?p=509
http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/details.cfm?p=509


4676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

issue of the Northern Gateway pipeline. And at the end of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion which we’ll be 
voting on here later today in regards to supporting that pipeline. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about pipelines, it is an issue 
that has garnered a great deal of attention in Canada in the last 
several years, also south of the border. We find ourselves in a 
situation where Saskatchewan is producing more oil today than 
we have at any point in our history. In 2012 we set a record for 
oil production. In 2013 we broke that record. Today we’re 
producing just under half a million barrels of oil a day, Mr. 
Speaker. And the great progress that we’re making in this 
regard, it’s being reflected in our neighbours to the east and to 
the west, Mr. Speaker, even to the south of us. We are seeing a 
technologically driven oil boom in the central part of our 
continent, Mr. Speaker, and this is having great effects here in 
Saskatchewan and more broadly. 
 
The effects we see here in Saskatchewan is revenues, jobs. We 
see our economy leading the nation in several categories over 
the last several years. We see job growth. We see population 
growth, a large portion of which I think can directly be 
attributed to the energy sector. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the main controls or throttles on the 
growth of prosperity, of wealth for our province, Mr. Speaker, 
is the ability to get our products to market. Now in this 
Chamber just last week, Mr. Speaker, we had a very important 
debate about moving another product to market, on the grain 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have some serious concerns about rail capacity to get our 
agricultural products to market. Mr. Speaker, the concerns that 
were expressed that day are relevant. They are a reality and, Mr. 
Speaker, those same concerns are reflected in the oil industry 
and are exacerbated by the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our province, along with the rest of North America, did not 
utilize rail to transport crude oil for most of the last 100 years. 
It’s a technology that we thought we saw the end of with the oil 
booms in Texas and Louisiana, Mr. Speaker. From the early 
part of last century, rail was a major way to get it to market. 
Today pipelines is the recognized method, but when capacity is 
not there, rail has been filling in. And, Mr. Speaker, we today 
see about 20 per cent of the oil from Saskatchewan leaving our 
province in railcars. 
 
There are concerns around the efficiency of that. There is more 
greenhouse gases emitted with moving this oil to market in 
railcars than there is in pipelines. There are safety concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think do not need to be highlighted because of 
the substantial scrutiny that they have cast over this industry in 
the past year — Lac-Mégantic, another one in the United States, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that needs to bear on the reflection of the 
pipeline debate as well. 
 
Direct to the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide services to the people of our province, the lack of 
pipeline capacity over the last several years, we have seen the 
differential, the price that we get at the wellhead here in 
Saskatchewan versus what we get at west Texas or at tidewater, 
Mr. Speaker, has deteriorated and deteriorated dramatically. 
Last year we saw about a $300 million reduction in revenues to 

the people of Saskatchewan to the General Revenue Fund, just 
off of what we lost in differential, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year that mechanism is still in place; about 150 million is 
our best estimate. But, Mr. Speaker, that is grossly 
underestimating the loss of opportunity for our province when 
we see that the government, the people of Saskatchewan may 
have foregone $450 million over the last two years. The 
industry, Mr. Speaker, that wants to invest in our province, that 
is investing in our province, is also losing out on two and a half 
billion dollars worth of revenue, Mr. Speaker, because of this 
same lack of pipeline capacity. 
 
And our province has come a long way. We’ve come a long, 
long way, Mr. Speaker. We are now recognized as the 
second-best jurisdiction in North America to drill an oil well. 
We are recognized as one of the best jurisdictions in North 
America for economic freedom. And within Canada, we are the 
number one place in the world to produce oil. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this hasn’t always been the case. Just a quick 
walk down memory lane, Mr. Speaker. The first rig that was 
doing some exploratory work in southeast Saskatchewan, the 
government of the day in the mid-1940s sent it packing. It went 
to Alberta and struck oil in Leduc. 
 
We then had another administration, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Blakeney’s administration that took a then thriving energy 
industry — about 100 million barrels a year of oil production in 
the late 1960s — they nationalized the industry in 1973, Mr. 
Speaker, and drove production down to about 60 million barrels 
by the end of the 1970s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time with the lack of production, I would 
argue largely because of the policies of the government of the 
day, the then premier said, and this is a quote, Mr. Speaker, of 
Mr. Blakeney: 
 

We do, however, anticipate that over a period of time a 
significant curtailment of production is likely to take place 
. . . production cuts are necessary if Saskatchewan farmers 
and . . . consumers are to be assured oil in the 1980s and 
1990s. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that statement bears no resemblance on the reality 
of today, where we are breaking records of oil production, 
where the oil industry is one of the great employers of our 
province, where it is one of the great wealth generators, great 
opportunity providers for the people of our province, across our 
province, Mr. Speaker, with great opportunities still ahead of us 
and that I am certain we will capitalize on. But we need to 
confront the challenges facing this industry head-on as well. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, and for a great deal of time, we have 
been making the case for pipelines. And there is no single 
pipeline, Mr. Speaker, that is going to solve this problem. We 
are working very hard with the legislators south of the border 
on the Keystone XL. We think this is a good pipeline. We are 
working with proponents of the Energy East pipeline, Mr. 
Speaker, a very important pipeline, to get our oil here in 
Saskatchewan to tidewater on the East Coast, to fuel refineries 
in central Canada, refineries today that are being filled with 
tankers coming out of the Middle East, out of Europe. Mr. 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4677 

Speaker, we would like to displace that Middle Eastern oil with 
Canadian oil, with Bakken oil, with Lloydminster oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see projects going to the West Coast. Our 
government has specifically targeted Asia as one of the great 
markets that we want to feed our food products, our 
manufacturing products, our energy products, Mr. Speaker. In 
the growth plan we put out a year and a half ago, we 
specifically targeted Asia as a market that we need, we need to 
have access to. And, Mr. Speaker, in that regard, the Kinder 
Morgan project is likely to move forward. And we are in 
support of that. 
 
But today, we’re discussing the Northern Gateway. And, Mr. 
Speaker, before I go specific at the Northern Gateway, I think it 
is important to put a little context in this regard. We advocate 
often for pipelines. We advocate because we think they’re 
important, because we think they’re safe. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that is important. We’re talking about large energy 
infrastructure. We’re talking about infrastructure that is 
fundamental to our country. 
 
But it is important to note that in Saskatchewan, we regulate the 
pipelines inside this province. And we would not accept any 
pipeline that was not environmentally responsible, any pipeline 
that did not use the highest engineering and standards of safety. 
If a pipeline is not safe and environmentally responsible, we 
would not approve it here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that same very high standard, that same very high oversight that 
we utilize here is what we think is appropriate elsewhere as 
well. 
 
So when we advocate for any of these additional pipelines, Mr. 
Speaker, it is through that lens, that if we are talking about a 
pipeline that is going to tidewater, well the expectation . . . not 
the expectation, the absolute standard is that that pipeline would 
have to have the most modern, environmental oversight and 
technologically-driven spill detection. It would have to have a 
world-class, leading world-class spill cleanup response in place 
and ready to go, Mr. Speaker, in case something happened that 
was unmitigated. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the lens that we will 
judge any of these projects. 
 
But if that high standard is met, Mr. Speaker, we believe that 
projects like this are essential for Canadians and for people of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the argument is sometimes 
made, but you know what about the risks? And that is exactly 
what the safety measures are about. And I would like to raise 
this for the members opposite who will be entering in this 
debate a little later on this afternoon. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, tonight I will tuck my daughters into bed 
in our house. Metres away, there will be a natural gas pipeline. 
A very volatile substance, natural gas, far more volatile than 
crude oil. And, Mr. Speaker, with confidence I will tuck my 
family in, knowing that there is a natural gas pipeline that runs 
through the street in front of my house, that has a connection 
that comes into my house, a pipeline that enters through the 
wall in my basement and feeds many of my appliances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this volatile substance that could be extremely 
dangerous, isn’t because we utilize technology. We utilize very 
safe practices. There is a very good safety record, Mr. Speaker, 

in regards to how this material is handled. And I think that 
when we can accept that there are pipelines all around us, that 
we utilize them every day, and that the risks that are associated 
with them need to be handled with responsibility, well, Mr. 
Speaker, that is why I can speak with confidence that an oil 
pipeline, a natural gas pipeline, an interprovincial pipeline can 
be done and should be done safely. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with the Northern Gateway, this is a 
pipeline that has received a great amount of scrutiny. It is a 
pipeline that has gone to the National Energy Board, the joint 
review task force. They have heard from over 1,100 people. 
They have held 180 days of hearings. They have looked at 
170,000 pages of evidence. And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of this 
review process, the board has recently come forward with a 
statement, and it is that the joint review panel concluded that 
Canada and Canadians would be better off with the Enbridge 
Northern Gateway pipeline project than without it. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have seen it here in our province where 
energy infrastructure, where energy development has truly 
driven opportunity for the citizens here in our province and that 
that same opportunity should be afforded to other people within 
this great country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, within this discussion there has been a great 
deal of ideology driving this discussion, as opposed to safety 
and engineering. And we hear from groups like Greenpeace, 
like the Sierra Club. Greenpeace has vowed, and I’m quoting 
here, “. . . to do what it takes, from court cases to civil 
disobedience, to ensure this pipeline never gets built.” Not 
based on the safety, not based on the engineering, Mr. Speaker, 
but based on pure ideology. And, Mr. Speaker, we feel that is 
irresponsible and is something that should not be governing this 
debate. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, think that too often people in Saskatchewan, 
people involved in the energy industry sit idly by when 
statements like this are being made. And we need to stand up 
and say no, that’s not right. This energy project is good for the 
people of our province, our community, our town, or my 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, problematically we have recently heard from 
Nathan Cullen, an NDP MP who said that this project is, I’m 
quoting here, “This project was a dinosaur and should die.” Just 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, not based on science, not based on the 
safety, but on ideology. 
 
We further see comments, Mr. Speaker, from the NDP MLA in 
British Columbia that says Alberta gets all the benefits. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that’s not true. I would ask my members 
opposite to speak to their colleagues. Canada gets all the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. The people that work on this pipeline get 
the benefits. The people that work at the terminals get the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. A pipeline like this links resources to 
consumers. The consumers get the benefits. The suppliers get 
the benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mulcair, the leader of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, has also made 
some statements that I find problematic. His opinion is it is 



4678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

categorically that this is wrong. He uses words such as, and I’m 
quoting, “It is madness,” Mr. Speaker. Again not about the 
safety, not about the environmental responsibility, but about the 
ideology. 
 
I choose, Mr. Speaker, to look to people such as the mayor of 
Kitimat, BC [British Columbia], the end of the pipeline and the 
start of the terminal, Mr. Speaker. She was interviewed about a 
year ago. She’s been on council for 38 years, and her quote 
really struck me, Mr. Speaker, when I read through the news 
article. It says, I honestly felt four years ago that I was the 
mayor of doomtown. She felt that her town was doomed. 
 
She went on to say, I now feel like I am the mayor of 
boomtown. And she talks about the great things that are 
happening in her community. Little things, things you don’t 
even think about but are important to our citizens. She says, we 
now have a Tim Hortons. Tim Hortons is somewhat of an 
iconic Canadian symbol. It means that your town has made it, I 
guess, and Kitimat now has one. 
 
She goes on to speak about what her town council is looking at, 
at bringing forward, that they are thinking of reaching out to 
neighbouring communities and having a ferry service so that 
neighbouring communities can be involved in the work and the 
prosperity that will come with the building of the plants and the 
pipelines. She talks about the First Nations communities of 
Klemtu and Bella Bella and Hartley Bay, Mr. Speaker, that 
might use this service that they are putting forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that Canada has a great decision to 
make here. Any pipeline that crosses national borders is a 
national pipeline. But we can be looked at as a country that has 
great national resources, world-class resource endowments. 
And I would hope that we aspire, that we aspire to be a country 
that in the future is looked at as a world-class energy producer 
that has the endowments that go with being a world-class 
energy producer. And, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t, what should 
we aspire to? I think that we as a country have done such great 
things. 
 
We’ve built a railroad that linked our country together. Part of 
the bargain of getting British Columbia is that we would 
connect them. And it has been an important piece of 
infrastructure, a piece of steel that stretches across our country 
and tied British Columbia to us in the early days, and it’s kept 
us tied together ever since. 
 
We have also done great things like the dredging of the canals 
in eastern Canada, Mr. Speaker. The St. Lawrence Seaway has 
tied eastern Canada together, given central Canada an access to 
a port. And, Mr. Speaker, Canadians do great things. 
 
We now speak about a trans-Canada energy grid, tying some of 
the hydroelectricity in some of our provinces to provinces that 
don’t have it, an environmentally responsible piece of 
infrastructure. These are the things that we should aspire to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as I conclude my remarks here, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite will have a moment to raise their voices, hopefully in 
support. My great hope is that they stand here in this House 
today, and if they want to chastise this government for too little, 

too late, and that we should have advocated stronger for this 
pipeline earlier, I’m willing to wear that, Mr. Speaker, if they’re 
willing to say that we need more pipelines, that we need to be 
more aggressive in pursuing them. I think that is a legitimate 
point to make. 
 
But I would ask the Leader of the Opposition, when he stands in 
the House today, Mr. Speaker, that he acknowledges the 
importance of the revenue to the people of Saskatchewan as he 
aspires to be a future leader of this province, that we need to 
pay for the health care and the education and all the important 
issues that he and his members bring forward. 
 
When the critic for Energy and Resources gets on their feet, Mr. 
Speaker, that they recognize the technological advancements 
that drive this industry, that drive the pipeline industry, Mr. 
Speaker. I hope that’s what they raise. 
 
When the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, gets to his 
feet, I hope that he stands in this House and says, I have oil 
sands potential in my riding and the people in my riding, Mr. 
Speaker, need that opportunity, want that opportunity, want to 
develop their world-class resources. That is what I hope to hear 
from the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the motion. 
The motion reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly support the construction for the 
Northern Gateway pipeline as approved by the National 
Energy Board on December 19th, 2013; and 
 
That this Assembly asserts that the National Energy Board 
is the best body to determine whether a triple bottom-line 
assessment is met for the new pipeline projects; and 
further 
 
That this Assembly asserts that the construction of the 
Northern Gateway pipeline will (1) maximize the return 
on Saskatchewan resources for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people, (2) be a safer and more 
environmentally means of transporting oil than trains or 
trucks, (3) address the oil transportation bottleneck which 
is driving down the value of the oil Saskatchewan is 
producing. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to submit this motion 
and put it before the House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as 
presented by the Minister of Energy and Resources? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it’s 
quite clear, if one looks at the record of this legislature, of the 
Hansard over decades — I would say six, seven decades — that 
the New Democratic Party and the predecessor party, the CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], have always been 
very concerned about making sure that we make responsible use 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4679 

of the resources in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that in the ’50s, when the gas distribution was 
expanded across the province, it was done by the Tommy 
Douglas government as a way of providing this particular 
Saskatchewan resource to the people of Saskatchewan. And so I 
was quite pleased to hear the minister use the example of our 
gas distribution pipeline as the system that is one that’s safe and 
that develops proper technology. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we on this side of the House say is that 
we want to make sure we make the best use of the resources 
that we have in Saskatchewan and that we use that to promote 
the development of jobs for people, that we protect the 
environment, and that we develop our economy in a positive 
way. 
 
Now what we all know in this province is that when the present 
government was elected, one of the strongest pieces of advice 
that came from the petroleum and natural gas industry was for 
the government to not mess with the royalty regime that had 
been set up by the previous government. And there was some 
hemming and hawing, but eventually that’s exactly what 
happened. And so what we have now in Saskatchewan is the 
New Democratic Party royalty regime, which has benefited this 
province over the last 10 years in a way that’s not matched at 
any other time. And, Mr. Speaker, there have been previous 
developments of that resource in the same way. 
 
Now there are many, many pipelines built in Saskatchewan. 
And we support the transportation of oil and gas by pipeline 
because we know that moving these products by pipeline is 
much safer than by rail. We know it’s more efficient than 
moving these products by rail. We also know, as I said before, 
that there are thousands of kilometres of pipelines in 
Saskatchewan. And we have consistently, as a government and 
as an opposition, supported the development of these pipelines. 
 
Now our party is supporting the Keystone XL pipeline because 
we know that that will transport some of the oil from this part of 
the world down into the central part of the United States. This is 
a direct benefit to Saskatchewan people. It has a small piece that 
passes through Saskatchewan, but it’s an important piece and 
we all know that. We’re also already and supporting of an 
east-west pipeline. We know that there are some methods of 
transporting our products from the west to the east which will 
make sense for the Canadian economy. One of the advantages 
that the East has is that they have much more refining capacity. 
And so this is also a kind of thing that will benefit 
Saskatchewan with more jobs, more value-added economic 
benefit, and more energy independence. 
 
We’re also supportive of looking for new markets for Western 
Canadian oil that go to the west, and that includes any possible 
use in our Western provinces, although they have substantial 
supplies themselves but, more importantly, going to Asia and 
other parts that can be accessed through the Pacific Ocean. 
 
And so we’re open to looking at pipeline projects that go to the 
west. But we have a great deal of difficulty with the Northern 
Gateway pipeline project that is presently being proposed. And 
so as the New Democratic Party caucus in this legislature, as 
the opposition, we will not be voting in favour of this motion. 

And let me explain why. This Northern Gateway pipeline is 
going to be going through an extremely environmentally 
sensitive area. Now I don’t know. I think the minister who has 
just spoken has substantial connections to British Columbia in 
the same way that I do, but I don’t know if he has worked in 
Prince George and then the Upper Fraser region. 
 
One of my summer jobs when I was going through university 
was to deliver goods to saw mills and paper mills in that area 
north and east of Prince George. That’s exactly where this 
pipeline is proposed to go, so I know that terrain. It’s very 
difficult terrain. It was difficult for roads to be built through 
there. 
 
But also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I worked and lived one summer 
in Bella Coola, British Columbia, just on the south side of the 
great spirit bear wilderness. And this is the substantial park or 
wilderness protected area that was created by the province of 
British Columbia after much discussion with people who were 
resource users in the forestry industry as well as all of the 
people who were protesting that. And this particular beautiful 
place is just on the south side of Kitimat where this pipeline 
would enter into the British Columbia coast. Bella Coola, as 
people know, is on the coast as well. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those are the places where the big concern 
arises. The Exxon Valdez was a surprise to the oil industry, a 
surprise to the shipping industry, but more importantly a 
surprise to the people of that part of the Pacific north coast. 
And, Mr. Speaker, nobody wants that to happen again. 
 
Now I know that the minister has said that the whole goal is to 
make sure that there are the best environmental protections 
possible. Well that’s clear from all of us. But I think on this 
particular project, the people who live there, the Government of 
British Columbia, all have a great deal of difficulty with the 
project that’s there. 
 
So this project will take oil from Bruderheim, Alberta, close to 
Edmonton, all the way to Kitimat, British Columbia. And it 
then would take it out the Douglas Channel, which is a fjord, a 
very narrow area, out into the area just by Haida Gwaii. And 
this . . . I think one of the biggest challenges here is that even 
the Premier of British Columbia — and I think rightly the 
Premier of British Columbia — has said that the province of BC 
is not prepared to deal with an oil spill in that particular part of 
the coast. And so that goes right to the heart of, well why are 
we here in Saskatchewan pushing this kind of a proposal when 
we know that there’s substantial discussion in British 
Columbia? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the province of British Columbia 
does not support the Northern Gateway pipeline. I mean that’s 
what we see on a whole number of levels. In the submission 
that was made to the National Energy Board joint review panel, 
the British Columbia government of Premier Christy Clark 
clearly rejected the pipeline, saying that the proposal does not 
meet the five conditions that she had put forward for the 
approval of such projects. 
 
First condition, successful completion of the environmental 



4680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

review process. Second position, they need a world-leading 
marine oil spill response, prevention, and recovery system for 
the BC coastline before anything like this can be built. They 
also need world-leading practices for land oil spill prevention 
response and recovery systems. And that reflects my own 
knowledge of that area north of Prince George where this 
pipeline is going to go. It’s a type of area that would be very 
difficult to reclaim if you ended up with a major spill. Another 
condition is that there are very specific legal requirements 
regarding Aboriginal and treaty rights to be addressed, and they 
need to make sure that First Nations and Métis people have the 
proper opportunity to discuss this, the information, and the 
resources. 
 
Now one of the things about this particular pipeline is it actually 
goes through I think it’s Treaty 10 territory in northeastern BC 
and then into a whole area where there are no treaties. And then 
it’s just south of the Nisga’a territory, but it’s very close to that 
territory as well, and there are a substantial number of issues 
that are there. 
 
One of my political mentors and one of my friends from when 
we used to sing in the church choir at Mount Zion Lutheran 
Church in New Westminster was Stan Hagen. And he was the 
minister of Environment but I think more importantly minister 
of trying to resolve a number of the issues around the whole 
upheaval that came with Clayoquot Sound and that ultimately 
resulted in the great spirit bear wilderness. He was a part of the 
Social Credit government and then part of the Liberal 
government that was elected in 2001. And he said that this was 
about getting social licence to develop resources in British 
Columbia. 
 
And he always would say to me, coming from Saskatchewan, 
well you have treaties there. You have a substantial layer of 
rules already. Many of the areas that we want to work with in 
British Columbia, the rules aren’t there yet. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that one of my former colleagues at MacPherson Leslie & 
Tyerman law firm worked many years negotiating a number of 
the new treaties for British Columbia to deal with exactly the 
kind of issue that we’re talking about here. But they’re not 
done. I mean they’ve got a lot more work to do. And there are 
many, many concerns that arise as a result of that. 
 
Now the BC [British Columbia] government has stated that they 
would even consider denying Enbridge permits it needs and the 
electricity needed to operate the line. I think they are reflecting 
the community response, where there’s obviously support for 
development of resources, but people want to do it in the right 
way and at the right time and making sure that everybody 
shares in that. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think the biggest issue 
here is that the social licence, the ability of the community to 
accept and support this kind of development isn’t there. 
 
We also know that a majority of the First Nations along the 
pipeline don’t support it for environmental and social reasons 
and economic reasons. And they’ve made it very clear that they 
will vigorously oppose the project. 
 
So unfortunately this motion is brought forward today kind of 
maybe as a hospitality gift for the Premier of British Columbia 
when she shows up tomorrow. I’m not sure if that was the plan. 
But practically what is happening here is that we can’t support 

some of the clauses in this motion that’s here. 
 
Now we support economic development. We agree that the 
National Energy Board, even with its present format, is still a 
very important board in making decisions around how the 
pipelines are built. But it’s only a starting point. It’s not a blank 
cheque when they give their approval. And in actual fact, when 
you look at their approval, it has I think 209 conditions in it 
before the matter can be dealt with. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, you know, that process is there. It needs 
to be worked at. I think a second point we have is we don’t 
think it’s appropriate that we should tell the province of British 
Columbia and the Premier of British Columbia how to run their 
province. And I think that we need to listen to the kinds of 
concerns that they are picking up as this project goes forward. 
 
We also believe that there are some other pipeline projects that 
may go through British Columbia that would be more viable 
and be more beneficial for Saskatchewan people. Now one of 
them is clearly the Kinder Morgan pipeline, which follows a 
route that’s been used for many, many years. And I know I’ve 
lived along where that pipeline comes out. And it’s also one 
that I think ends up with quite a number of challenges, but there 
are ways of doing that in a way that makes more sense. 
 
So I think that our position here is that this Northern Gateway 
pipeline project at this stage doesn’t have the social licence. It 
doesn’t have the environmental licence. It doesn’t have the 
positive aspects that would allow us to support it. But I want to 
strongly reiterate that we’re supportive of pipelines as a method 
of transporting oil and of making sure our Saskatchewan 
products are delivered to other parts of the world. And we will 
continue to work on that. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, you can expect that we will be 
voting against this motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured to rise today to participate in this debate to speak to 
this motion. Today I speak as the member for Fairview and 
think of those who I live among who would be part of this 
project. There is a good many neighbours in my constituency 
who work directly in the resource extraction industry and would 
be supportive of the Northern Gateway project. I would think 
that many of my neighbours as well as possibly potential new 
residents would settle in Fairview as a result of this project. 
 
I also speak as the sister of a few siblings who are journeymen 
pipeline insulators and have worked in the industry for many 
years. As the niece to a few family members who have worked 
on the pipelines for many years — over 20 years respectively 
— including helping to build the Alliance in 1999 to 2000; to 
the Alberta Clipper, 2008, 2009; and many others. And a cousin 
to many who are working in the production area for oil and gas 
directly on the rigs and as the sister of a welder who has made a 
career of working on pipelines. Their colleagues will be 
building this pipeline along with many others. I would have the 
confidence in the people and technology that is going to be 
involved in the Northern Gateway project. 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4681 

I would hope and encourage those across the floor to vote in 
favour to support this project as it affects the livelihood of many 
working people in Saskatchewan as well as in Alberta and BC. I 
often hear the statements of those members across the floor who 
say they support working people. Supporting the Northern 
Gateway project will support working Saskatchewan people. 
 
So the member across the floor spoke a lot about the 
environment, and I just wanted to speak a little bit about why 
pipelines are needed. CEPA, who is the Canadian Energy 
Pipeline Association, their pipeline network transports 3 million 
barrels of oil every day, which is the equivalent to 4,200 
railcars, Mr. Speaker, an equivalent to 15,000 tanker trucks. So 
that alone, having the pipeline available, would impact the 
environment in a positive way. 
 
So pipelines simply make sense. The large-scale transportation 
of natural gas by tanker trucks or rail is not feasible, as the 
Minister of Energy outlined, and pipelines are more cost 
effective than the alternative transportation options. And they 
require significantly less energy to operate than operating trucks 
or rail and have a much lower carbon footprint. And 
underground pipelines are safe. The Minister of Energy will 
tuck his kids, you know, into bed a couple feet away from 
pipeline, and I believe I do that too. 
 
So energy is fundamental to our personal and economic 
well-being. The fearmongering that’s going on regarding this 
pipeline as well as other development, you know, is 
ill-informed. And Canadians rely on natural gas and products 
made from crude oil to meet more than two-thirds of their 
energy needs each and every day. I find it interesting that 
somebody who will fearmonger and oppose this will be holding 
a plastic bottle, not realizing that that plastic bottle is made out 
of petroleum. 
 
And we use these fuels to drive our cars and fly our planes. 
Ninety-four per cent of all Canadian transportation energy 
comes from petroleum products, and the vast majority of 
passenger vehicles on the road use gasoline as fuel, while most 
freight transport trucks use diesel. 
 
They heat our homes and businesses, and we know this well 
enough living in Saskatchewan and with the kind of winter that 
we had this past year. And more than half the homes in Canada 
are heated by furnaces that burn natural gas. And natural gas 
meets almost half of the energy needed to run our industries. 
 
They are used to make hundreds of household products. Plastics 
start out as petroleum products and natural gas, and so do many 
pharmaceuticals, chemicals, oils, and lubricants. Those who live 
in Western society have to depend on the energy industry on a 
daily basis. Our oil and gas resources are large contributors to 
our economy, and the value of Canadian exports of crude oil 
and natural gas was more than 80 billion in 2011. The pipeline 
and energy industries employ thousands of Canadians 
coast-to-coast and that being a large majority of my family. 
 
So the member across the floor spoke a little bit about due 
diligence with the National Energy Board. They had evidence. 
They had hearings. They had oral statements. And they have to 
adhere to 209 recommendations made from the consultations 
that they had across Canada. 

[15:30] 
 
So they had an extensive review process. So they have 175,699 
pages of evidence filed on the record; 884 hours the panel spent 
hearing oral evidence, oral statements, cross-examinations, and 
final argument; and 1,179 people who provided oral statements. 
And they had 180 was the number of hearing days that they had 
in 21 communities where the hearings were held and 268 
number of participants who cross-examined witnesses. So there 
was nine First Nations communities where hearings were held, 
and 12 government participants and 47 Aboriginal groups 
participated as interveners. 
 
So the report outlined 209 conditions attached to the panel’s 
recommendation, and there are 76 pages in the volume 1 report 
and 417 pages in volume 2. So the joint review panel had this 
quote, “After hearing all of the oral and written evidence, the 
panel found that Canada and Canadians would be better off 
with the Enbridge Northern Gateway project than without it.” 
 
So I’d like to tie in some Saskatchewan facts and just outline 
. . . And according to the Fraser Institute, Saskatchewan is 
ranked as the third best jurisdiction in the world for oil and gas 
investment policies, right behind Oklahoma and Mississippi. 
And a record of 487,400 barrels of oil was produced each day 
on average in 2013; 2,433 horizontal oil wells drilled in 2013, a 
new record for horizontal oil wells drilled, up 19 per cent from 
the previous record of 2,036 wells drilled in 2012, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s $4.5 billion in investment and new exploration and 
development by the oil and gas industry that was estimated for 
2013 and 35,075 direct and indirect person years of 
employment in the upstream oil and gas industry estimated for 
2013, up 5 per cent from 34,225 estimated for 2012. Seventy 
per cent of Saskatchewan’s oil production is exported to the 
United States, and Saskatchewan is a larger exporter to the US 
[United States] than Kuwait. And 14.7 billion combined value 
of oil and gas production estimated for 2013 was up from 12.8 
billion in 2012. 
 
So approximately 300 companies currently operate oil and gas 
wells in Saskatchewan and 48.3 billion barrels of initial oil in 
place. And we are the sixth largest producer of crude oil in 
North America, producing close to 180 million barrels a year, 
which is just behind Texas, Alberta, North Dakota, California, 
and Alaska. So Saskatchewan has 2.7 million hectares of 
completely undeveloped oil sands potential. 
 
So I could go on a little longer and spout statistics and facts, but 
I would like to close off by saying that I support the Energy 
minister’s motion on the floor. And I would highly encourage 
the members across the floor to rethink their stance and support 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
be able to participate in this debate as well. It’s a subject 
familiar to all of us here of late. We have been working hard in 
Saskatchewan to get the message out, both in the province and 
outside of our borders to the rest of the country and wherever 
we travel, that we believe in a world with the fastest growing 
economies desire energy security and food security, that we 



4682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

need in our country and in the provinces within that country to 
start acting like we’re the place that can answer questions in 
both of those subject areas. Mr. Speaker, it was a dominant 
feature of our interventions in Washington recently in the 
mission there, as it was in some meetings and speeches that I’ve 
been able to give lately, not limited to but certainly in the 
nation’s capital a couple of weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have long supported in all of the above 
approach to pipelines, the proposed pipelines that we have on 
the table today in Canada for a couple of reasons I will get into 
in a moment. We support the Keystone pipeline for reasons that 
are on the public record. I won’t go back into the specific 
reasons for our support of that particular pipeline. We’ve also 
indicated support for an exciting new reversal, pipeline reversal 
— so not a new project but really a reversal of an existing 
pipeline that would take Western Canadian oil, including our oil 
from the Bakken, from Western Canada to Eastern Canada 
where there are value-added opportunities and, frankly, where 
we can provide a bit of a cost advantage over the world price as 
well as increasing the value that we are able to get for our oil 
for Saskatchewan people who own the resource in the first 
place. 
 
And we’ve also been supportive of Gateway. In the debate 
that’s ensued, we’ve noted of the five conditions that the British 
Columbia government has put on its own support and approval 
for Gateway, we can understand and fully support four of the 
five. We were quite public, though. And certainly my colleague, 
the Premier of British Columbia, is aware of our position which 
we expressed in private meetings and then in a public fashion 
that when it comes to royalty sharing, though, we had some 
concerns about that fifth condition. 
 
However I note with some hope that there seems to be a 
renewed discussion happening between those two provinces. 
We do think it’s completely reasonable for the people of British 
Columbia, in the case of Gateway, to expect some perhaps 
some more benefits and dividends, if you will, from the pipeline 
project. We think those are best to come from the industry 
itself, from those who open those companies that will benefit — 
not just the pipeline company but the oil companies on the other 
end. We think that is more than reasonable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we would want to bring this motion 
forward today. We would, I think, help the debate both in 
province and across the country if we could present a consensus 
view, a united voice in the matter of this particular pipeline. 
 
I believe this Assembly, I believe the members of the Assembly 
are in support of Keystone XL on a unanimous basis. I believe 
that’s the case for the Energy East pipeline — that reversal I 
referenced earlier. Certainly that’s the case for the federal New 
Democratic Party, and I heard no opposition from our 
provincial NDP here in the House to that pipeline. 
 
So then that brings us to Gateway. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
important for us to consider how it was that our provincial NDP 
took the courageous position on Keystone they did a year ago, 
in support of it, when their federal cousins opposed Keystone. 
Let’s be clear; they do. Mr. Mulcair and the federal New 
Democrats do not support the Keystone pipeline for reasons we 
don’t have to canvass here now, but I think that’s a matter of 

the public record. 
 
And yet last March, almost a year ago exactly, the new 
provincial Leader of the NDP indicated his support for 
Keystone. Mr. Speaker, it was interesting when he was first 
asked about the Keystone issue in a debate similar to this that 
we’re having right now, he did say that he would support 
Keystone if it had the triple bottom line — environmental, 
economic, social benefit — approval of the National Energy 
Board. And so, Mr. Speaker, we were able to point out for the 
new Leader of the Opposition that actually the NDP had 
provided that some time ago, that the National Energy Board 
had indeed approved it on a triple bottom line basis. 
 
And then to the credit of the Leader of the Opposition and the 
provincial NDP, they did then come back out to the scrums, the 
next day I think it was, and offered support for the Keystone 
pipeline, though their national party, the NDP in Ottawa, 
opposed it. He said that, and I quote, “To clear the record, I 
support the Keystone XL pipeline because of a triple bottom 
line assessment looking at environmental, economic, and social 
reasons.” And there a number of other quotes here. But suffice 
it to say that the provincial NDP are supporters of the Keystone 
XL pipeline, and they are so in large measure because the 
National Energy Board has done its assessment and has decided 
on a triple bottom line basis that the NDP specifically 
prescribed that Keystone ought to be approved. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that same triple bottom line assessment 
approval is in place for Gateway. That’s a very important point 
to make here in this debate. I noted that the member for 
Lakeview said well we can’t support Gateway because it’s 
different because it doesn’t have a direct benefit to 
Saskatchewan, well words to that effect. I think he said, I think 
he referenced, Mr. Speaker, that there wasn’t construction of the 
pipeline through this province. He noted the difference. He said 
Keystone comes to the province and there’ll be job creation, but 
he wondered about the actual benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out to the hon. member 
who now is quite vexed about this — but at least he’s paying 
attention — I want to point out to the hon. member that when 
we close the differential, when we close the discount at which 
we are currently selling oil around the world, Saskatchewan oil 
around the world that doesn’t belong to he or I, but it rather 
belongs to the people of the province, when we’re doing that, 
we’re costing the treasury up to $300 million a year. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because Western Canadian oil, our oil, cannot get to 
tidewater where we can access a higher price, something 
approximating a world price, something closer to the Brent 
price of crude. I didn’t look at the differential today, but it’s 
usually between 5 and $10 a barrel if not higher. 
 
And there have been years when the Finance minister and the 
Finance officials have reported that, were we able to maximize 
that value for the oil on behalf of Saskatchewan people, we’d 
have $300 million more in the treasury. Well how many roads 
could we build with 300 million more — or fix — with 300 
million more dollars in the treasury? I think that’s a direct 
benefit of any pipeline that gets our oil to tidewater, is this 300 
million additional dollars. We could maybe reduce taxes. We 
could pay off some debt with that. 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4683 

Mr. Speaker, here’s a direct benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan of any pipeline that will help take Western 
Canadian oil, even if it’s not Saskatchewan oil, to tidewater and 
decrease the differential. Another benefit would be the estimate 
for our industry is that the differential today, the discount at 
which we sell the oil because we can’t get enough to tidewater, 
is about $2.5 billion to industry. So $300 million to our 
treasury, the province of Saskatchewan, and $2.5 billion to the 
oil and gas industry in our province. 
 
What would they do with that $2.5 billion? Well there would 
probably be dividends, sure, to the shareholders, but there 
would be a significant reinvestment in the provincial economy. 
Those oil companies would reinvest. And you know, they’re 
doing it even without the dividends of that differential right 
now, of that . . . if we were to remove the differential. We’ve 
seen record drilling last year, I think, and record drilling the 
year before. But this money is deprived of our economy, 
deprived of those companies that are creating the jobs the 
member for Fairview eloquently referred to because they can’t 
maximize the value. We can’t maximize the value of the oil that 
we’re selling around the world. 
 
So why in the world would the NDP in Saskatchewan be 
opposed to that? Why would they be opposed to that very direct 
benefit to our economy of decreasing that differential? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting. After the Keystone debate, a 
letter was sent out by the then House leader, the current 
member for Saskatoon Nutana for the NDP, explaining to the 
base of the NDP why they would support Keystone, because I 
think it caused them problems. Therein lies the courage of the 
Leader of the Opposition’s position. I think his base was not 
very happy with him, that one of the very first things that he did 
as Leader of the Opposition and Leader of the New Democratic 
Party was to support an oil pipeline, principally from Alberta, 
down throughout the southwest corner of our province, and then 
down to the Gulf. So she explains to the base, to the 
membership, why they would do that. She says, and I quote, in 
this letter to NDP members: “The caucus has had a consistent 
public position on the XL pipeline ever since it had received 
approval by the National Energy Board. Cam Broten [and I’m 
quoting] has not changed that position.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, except we’ve already noted that there wasn’t 
the awareness that the NDP had come to that decision. But still 
that’s very specifically referenced in this particular letter. 
 
Now the letter goes on to say, to broadly lay out how the 
caucus, the NDP came to support the Keystone pipeline, and 
how they could support pipelines in general. And by the way, I 
noted that the member for Lakeview is freelancing a bit because 
he didn’t reference any of the good work by his own then 
House leader, the current member for Nutana, who wrote a 
letter to all the members. I presume the member for Lakeview is 
a member of the party. I’m presuming he got this letter from the 
member for Nutana who said, and I quote: 
 

Our society is heavily reliant on fossil fuels. As New 
Democrats, we know that’s not sustainable, and we are 
committed to bringing forward workable solutions to 
reduce this reliance. Broadly the position taken by our 
caucus is this: the NDP have long supported pipelines 

because they are safer and they are more environmentally 
friendly than trains or trucks when it comes to transporting 
oil. 
 
Point no. 2. We want to ensure a stringent, triple bottom 
line, economic, social, and environmental assessment of 
such projects. The best process to do that right now is the 
National Energy Board, and we trust their work. 

 
[15:45] 
 
We trust the work, it says, the New Democrats. Apparently this 
is just now maybe the member for Nutana and not the member 
for Lakeview. Maybe he doesn’t trust the NEB [National 
Energy Board]. But she says pretty clearly here, we’re going to 
support those projects that are approved on a triple bottom line 
basis by the NEB, which of course they’ve done for Gateway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on: 
 

Point no. 3. We want First Nations and Métis communities 
to be meaningfully consulted and listened to. We think 
better regulations of the oil and gas industry is important 
in order to better protect the environment. We think 
value-added opportunities [and I’m being fair and reading 
all the points] and more high-quality jobs, including 
through more refining here in Canada, should be pursued. 

 
Agreed. And finally: “We need to do so much more to address 
greenhouse gas emissions and climate change.” By the way, 
we’re now expecting a letter in strong support of our clean coal 
project as a result of that last point. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the point is that after their Keystone support 
I’m sure there was complaining amongst the base. And the NDP 
to their credit, this member to her credit, said, yes we support 
Keystone and here are the reasons why. 
 
Well you could switch out the words Keystone for the Gateway 
pipeline. North Gateway is important to the Speaker, and that’s 
a very important transportation mode that we’re seeing, a new 
rail line right down to the South connecting up with Burlington 
Northern. You could switch out the names of these two 
pipelines and send out the same letter. 
 
So why wouldn’t the New Democratic Party then be supportive 
of both pipelines for the same reason? If they want to know 
what the direct impact is, is there a direct benefit to 
Saskatchewan? Absolutely. That differential is decreased, more 
revenue for the treasury, more income for companies that could 
be reinvested in the province. Any of these other measures are 
also satisfied now by the new pipeline, by the Northern 
Gateway pipeline, including the triple bottom line assessment. 
 
I just think it’s important in Saskatchewan that we send out a 
clarion signal to the world, not just to companies that are 
creating jobs but to those who work in this industry. And the 
member for Fairview quite eloquently pointed out that we have 
people living in Saskatchewan, living in her constituency, some 
of them related to her, that actually travel. If you’re a pipefitter, 
if you work in the pipeline industry, you travel. You don’t have 
to live in Calgary, especially when you could maybe live in 
Saskatoon and enjoy life there. You don’t have to live in 



4684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

Saskatoon. You can live in other places. We have people in this 
province that will be directly employed either by an expansion 
to Kinder Morgan — and we didn’t get on the record what they 
think of that — or the Northern Gateway pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there couldn’t be a clearer case for this 
legislature saying Saskatchewan is in favour of moving our 
energy across the country, of getting better value for the 
resource. This legislature is in favour of our grain transportation 
working more efficiently, Mr. Speaker. We’re breaking export 
records in this province, exports from Western Canada. Export 
records are being broken every year. We need to move our food 
products. We need to move our energy products. And it’s an 
all-of-the-above proposition. It is rail. In this case, though, it 
should be pipeline. 
 
When I was in Washington last week, I was able to point out to 
some of the allies on Keystone, and some who don’t support 
Keystone down there, that according to the American railway 
association, Mr. Speaker, the number of cars hauling oil on rail 
in 2008 in their country was 8,000. That’s not very long ago: 
2008, eight thousand cars hauling rail across America; last year, 
400,000. I was able to point out that we’ve seen studies in our 
own country, reported I think by Global TV, that a typical 
railcar spill of oil is about six times greater on average than a 
pipeline spill. 
 
It underscores a couple of points for this debate and for that 
case we make to our American friends. One, the oil will find a 
way. It’s going to move. That bitumen in Alberta without 
Northern Gateway is going to move — 8,000 cars in ’08; 
400,000 cars just a few years later underscores that fact. And 
here’s the other important point that statistic makes, that there is 
greater environmental risk if we don’t come to support these 
pipelines, even if there were no direct benefit for the member 
for Lakeview to point to, if that’s his measure. Well I don’t 
know what’s in it for me. Mr. Speaker, what’s in it for all of us 
is a safer, as the member for Nutana points out, a safer, more 
environmentally sustainable way to transport oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was also interesting to point out . . . what to note 
while we were in Washington, that our ambassador, 
Ambassador Doer, who I’m sure the member for Lakeview 
knows well, pointed out to the US administration that the State 
Department’s second report on Keystone, basically clearing the 
way I would say for Keystone approval, noted this very fact, 
that oil was moving anyway. It was moving on rail. And by the 
way, the greenhouse gas emissions from rail transportation of 
oil are much higher than they are on any pipeline. 
 
So if you’re worried about spills, you should support this 
pipeline and all pipelines because otherwise it will move by rail. 
If you’re worried about GHGs [greenhouse gases] you should 
support pipelines, if the State Department is correct. And if you 
are worried about our reputation in the world to get goods to 
market in a timely way, if you are worried about us maximizing 
value for this precious, non-renewable resource, then you 
should support pipelines. 
 
And I don’t think you can be selective because it might be 
politically easier to support Keystone because the pipeline 
comes through here or because you could support a reversal that 
goes now west-east. That’s a little easier because it’s got 

Saskatchewan oil in it. Gateway is a more difficult proposition. 
And we do have expectations that First Nations concerns are 
met, that environmental concerns are met. We’re understanding 
those processes are under way. But it’s difficult to see how you 
can just sort of pick and choose and say these are okay but not 
this one, unless you’re doing it for strictly political reasons. Mr. 
Speaker, I say to members opposite, they rose above their own 
federal party’s political considerations on Keystone. They saw 
through the facts. They noted the NEB triple bottom line 
approval, and they supported it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will take my seat, and we’ll have a vote and get 
on with other business in the House. But we can send a strong 
signal, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan, we’re consistent. We 
support pipelines for the reason we mentioned. We support 
them because they’re good for Western Canada as well as our 
province. We support them because they’re better for our 
country. We support them because they’re better for the 
environment because we’ll avoid spills. We can get oil moving 
in the pipeline as opposed to the exponential growth on rail. 
And for all of those good reasons, Mr. Speaker, and because we 
have met the test set out by the NDP for pipeline support as 
noted in the letter from the NDP a year ago on Keystone, for all 
of those reasons, let’s support this pipeline. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a 
motion by the Minister of Energy and Resources. Will the 
Assembly take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:53 until 15:58.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in the favour of the motion 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 38] 
 
Wall Stewart Draude 
Duncan Krawetz Boyd 
Eagles McMorris Harpauer 
Toth Doherty McMillan 
Heppner Harrison Wyant 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4685 

Tell Weekes Elhard 
Bradshaw Bjornerud Brkich 
Hutchinson Ottenbreit Campeau 
Wilson Marchuk Kirsch 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Merriman Jurgens Steinley 
Hickie Lawrence Moe 
Parent Docherty  
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 3] 
 
Forbes Nilson Chartier 
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the 
motion, 38; those opposed, 3. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 127 — The 
Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 127, An Act to amend The Mental 
Health Services Act and to make a consequential amendment to 
The Health Information Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
little more substantial size of legislation than what we’ve been 
receiving from the government more recently, and so I think 
there’s a little bit to talk about here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So effectively the amendments are brought forward to improve 
what’s happening with delivery of and the access to mental 
health services in the province. And as we all know, when 
pieces of legislation which are rather substantial to begin with 
end up having some amendments, suggestions are made as to 
how to amend the legislation, and these suggestions come from 
many different places. And so, Mr. Speaker, it appears to be 
clear that this legislation comes from obviously the people 
involved in the mental health treatment and community, but 
also from others who have worked with the legislation within 
the civil service of Saskatchewan and within the regional health 
authorities. 
 
And so there are quite a number of changes that are here, but I 
think the overall perspective is one where people are 
co-operating and trying to do the best they can to provide 
mental health services. And when you look at what are some of 

the sort of fundamental things that happened here, I think that 
there is a recognition that how mental health services are 
provided in this province has changed from a facility-based 
situation to one where services are provided in a number of 
different kinds of institutions across the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s often interesting that when you discuss 
mental health legislation, you actually have a lot of distractions 
in the House. And I’m not sure what kinds of issues the House 
Leader has, but the House Leader and the Minister of Energy 
seem to be very wound up about this particular legislation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
currently has the floor. Other members will have an opportunity 
to enter into the debate. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — So as I was stating, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
mental health services issues are discussed, there seem to be 
certain members opposite that want to jump in and make some 
comments no matter what’s there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we have, as this legislation goes forward, 
is a recognition that some of the rules around confidentiality of 
treatment and how people’s records are being protected need to 
be modernized or changed to reflect other types of legislation 
that we have in health. And so our HIPA [The Health 
Information Protection Act] legislation, our health information 
protection Act, had some clauses that related to this that need to 
be adjusted. And we also have some other changes that had to 
be made to that legislation to make sure that people were 
protected under The Mental Health Services Act. 
 
Now when we look at the kinds of definitions and changes that 
are here, some of them are quite innocuous. But they’re very 
important, I think, to the people who work in the field. And one 
of those is perhaps no longer using the term facility but using 
the term mental health centre, mental health clinic, and make 
sure that we use them in ways that are more, that recognize 
more of what kinds of services are being provided. 
 
And so what we do in the legislation I think is set out how the 
different responsibilities are delineated between the regional 
health authorities and the central, overall management of the 
system through the Ministry of Health. 
 
And so clearly issues have been identified and now they are 
being corrected. And so for example one of the sections makes 
sure that the term mental health centre will only be used to 
reflect in-patient mental health services. And I think it 
obviously relates both to how the staff deal with patients, but 
also I think it relates to budget issues and how financing is 
arranged and how there is clarity that’s wanted in how the 
legislation is brought forward. 
 
So a substantial number of the changes do relate to some of 
these name changes and making sure that the appropriate 
facilities are designated the way they should be. Now when 
those kinds of changes are made, I think it does allow for better 
service for people and it makes sure that everybody understands 
where and who is responsible. 
 
Another change that’s part of this legislation, and it’s one that 



4686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

actually has to happen in a few different sections of the bill, 
relates to the issue of involuntary treatment. That’s where 
people are committed to a facility. Those types of orders or 
those types of arrangements used to mean that you had to go to 
a specific hospital or a specific facility and it wasn’t possible 
that you could have those ordered treatments or involuntary 
treatments in the community. And so what this legislation does 
is further clarifies how that can be done. I mean, I think you 
could have before ways of doing that, but sometimes the rules 
were not as clear. 
 
A lot of this reflects the changes in the types of medications that 
are available. We all know that in the late ’50s and early ’60s 
there was a dramatic change in what was possible for treatment 
of mental health issues and that it’s taken a long time for the 
legislation to reflect some of the changes that have occurred and 
also just in how the organization of the whole system is set up. 
 
Now when we look at this legislation as a whole, we know that 
different people will have different issues that have been 
resolved. I know many, many years ago when I was in law 
school — so that really puts it a long time ago — I spent a 
whole term of law school in a mental health facility, the 
Riverview mental health facility in British Columbia, as an 
observer of the hearings that people had. 
 
People could appeal whether or not they should be committed 
involuntarily. And one of the issues that had arisen was whether 
there were appropriate legal protections for the people who 
were making these appeals. And many of them would have 
lawyers doing that work and the actual appeal panel did most 
often include a lawyer and a psychiatrist and a social worker. 
But my task was to sit for two or three hours, two or three 
evenings a week and record for our project that we were 
working on when particular issues arose around the involuntary 
treatment of people and what kinds of protections that they had. 
 
This was prior to the implementation of the Charter, and so 
there have actually been subsequent cases that reflect the 
change in the Constitution that would’ve dealt with some of 
these issues of protection of the individual. But, Mr. Speaker, it 
was fascinating to see all of the different circumstances where 
people who were there for treatment and could function very 
well, but you could also then identify and understand where the 
boundaries were that required them to be involuntarily 
committed. 
 
And I applaud the drafters, the people who work in this area to 
get the language right to protect the individuals who are the 
patients, but also protect the workers and the others who deal 
with them. And I know that that becomes even more 
challenging when you try to do this involuntary treatment in the 
community, as opposed to in a particular closed institution. 
 
And so what do we have here, Mr. Speaker? I think it’s pretty 
positive changes that are made. I think that we have not heard 
on this side of the House any dramatic issues with what’s 
happened in this legislation. And so I know that we will 
continue to look at what kinds of issues are here, but practically 
the very detailed work that’s been done by the lawyers and the 
staff people is reflected in the product that we have. And at this 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further comments. Thank 
you. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the House is a 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 127, The Mental 
Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
[16:15] 
 

Bill No. 128 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 128 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter the debate about Bill No. 128, the essential services . . . 
For all intents and purposes, it’s the essential services 
legislation, but it is The Saskatchewan Employment Act, Bill 
No. 128.  
 
I think one of the things that I need to start out by saying that 
this has basically been seven years in the making, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Just last year we actually passed, this government 
passed The Saskatchewan Employment Act, and here we are less 
than a year later already amending it. And this comes out of the 
story around the essential services legislation that back in 2008 
that this government introduced quite . . . plowed ahead with a 
lack of consultation with working people, with unions, with 
people who needed to be consulted, quite frankly. 
 
So what has ended up happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we 
have a piece of legislation that has been before the courts now 
for several years and now is headed to the Supreme Court of 
Canada and will be heard I believe in May of 2014, where this 
government again decided that they would put in place a piece 
of legislation, an essential services legislation — which nobody 
is denying wouldn’t be a beneficial thing — but you can’t have 
a piece of legislation that has no dispute resolution mechanism. 
Which is exactly what happened with this government’s 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4687 

essential services legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we 
continue along with this bungled approach to developing labour 
legislation.  
 
So we had a few pieces of legislation in 2008, prior to me being 
in this House. I was elected in 2009, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
remember actually my first committee meeting ever, attending, 
and it was still . . . This government was in the process of 
passing the legislation at that point, and there were many people 
in the province who were not very happy with that. 
 
It was ironic that some workplaces because of the essential 
services legislation were in fact, in some workplaces there were 
more people deemed essential, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than 
actually work on a regular day. So in some workplaces, I’m 
using this initial essential services legislation, employers were 
deeming essential some employees who . . . or more employees 
than in fact would be scheduled to work on a regular working 
day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This all came out of . . . or at least the government’s narrative 
was around essential services. And why they needed to plow 
ahead was, again prior to me being in this House, in January of 
2007 I believe it was, SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union] was on strike. 
 
So the highway workers were on strike. I remember that 
snowstorm in January very well, the blizzard in Saskatoon 
actually. I can remember being at work in downtown Saskatoon 
and getting the call that we needed to come get our kids from 
school and trying to navigate and get . . . It was a crazy storm. 
There was no doubt about it that that was. In my lifetime I 
haven’t seen too many blizzards like that. Driving in Saskatoon, 
not being able to get from place to place; it was pretty scary, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I think the narrative of the government following that storm 
. . . There had been a strike, but what was happening is the 
management had taken over the operation of some of the 
snowplowing. The roads were being cleared, but when the 
forecast had come out that there was going to be a blizzard, in 
fact the workers, the highway workers, went back to do their 
job. They want people in Saskatchewan to be safe as well. This 
wasn’t . . . No one has any interest in putting people’s lives at 
risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But saying that, I think people, I think employees, employers, 
organized labour, people recognized there was a need for 
essential services but this government plowed ahead without 
consultation, without building relationships. The best way to get 
something done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, is relationships. 
Everything in life is about relationships. In here, it’s about 
relationships; out in the world, everything that we accomplish. 
And the best way to accomplish things is by building positive 
relationships. And this government, when it came to working 
men and women in Saskatchewan, shortly after they were 
elected, decided that that was not something that they needed to 
do. They were going to kick sand in the face, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of working men and women here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So this again is the continuation of this saga. Time and money. 
Like how much time and money has this government spent in 
trying to get this legislation right? Rather than doing it right 

from the beginning, Mr. Speaker, and having that meaningful 
consultation, instead of plowing ahead in an ideological 
fashion, they could have sat down and come up with good 
legislation right from the start. But here instead we have a piece 
of legislation that will be before the Supreme Court of Canada. 
So how much that has cost is a question, I think, that one needs 
to ask the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But then we have The Saskatchewan Employment Act that was 
before us last year, and then we have this Act being amended 
right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And by and large, I think many 
stakeholders have thought it is an improvement. By no means is 
it perfect. But then we have a court case in May of 2014, so 
does that mean this legislation is going to be passed in this 
sitting and then we’ll be back here in the fall with a new piece 
of legislation possibly introduced to deal with the flaws that 
perhaps have been further identified after a Supreme Court of 
Canada ruling, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So that makes absolutely no sense. I think I’d like to point out, 
well again seven years of wasted time and money on the part of 
this government because they’ve chosen to plow ahead and then 
tried to fix their mistakes or band-aid over their mistakes. They 
didn’t even heal or repair what needed to be healed or repaired. 
They like patch over it and plow on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which I don’t think is the way that good public policy is in fact 
created. 
 
I’d talk about a little bit about some of the concerns that various 
individuals and organizations have raised, just a couple of them, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this is something that I had 
mentioned earlier on, that one of the problems that have been 
identified is still the definition of essential services in section 
7-1(1)(c) is far too broad and remains unchanged from The 
Public Service Essential Services Act. 
 
Previously, and this is coming from some of the feedback that 
we’ve received from organizations, in prior negotiations of 
essential service agreements, this definition was relied upon by 
employers to justify business as usual in the overdesignation of 
essential employees within their health regions in the event of a 
work stoppage. And it’s been pointed out that if this issue is to 
be properly addressed, that definition must lend a clear, shared 
understanding of what constitutes an essential service and it 
cannot be all services currently offered within the health region 
and higher staffing levels than those experienced regularly on a 
day-to-day basis in the sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again you can’t deem everybody essential when on any 
given day that not all those employees are there and deemed 
essential on a regular workday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think 
that that’s one thing that’s . . . I know one organization, SEIU 
West, has said that they proposed that the definition in British 
Columbia’s labour relations code which is: 
 

. . . designates as essential services those facilities, 
productions, and services that are necessary or essential to 
prevent immediate or serious danger to health, safety, or 
welfare of the residents of British Columbia. 

 
Might be more appropriate. So there’s been some tinkering 
here. And by and large most people are happier with this, but 
there are still problems. And why would you continue to push 



4688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

ahead a piece of legislation when people are still saying that 
there are issues and that you have a court case before the 
Supreme Court, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
I think another issue that’s, well one that in particular that SEIU 
West has raised is the definition of public employer has been 
expanded in Bill 128 and essential services provisions will now 
have an even broader application. And the union says that they 
remain concerned the application of these provisions is far too 
all-encompassing as the effect of government interference into 
the collective bargaining process in situations outside the 
window of protection of the public. 
 
And they go on to say that it should be noted in respect to 
section 7-37 that SEIU West remains uncertain of the full extent 
of the enlargement or the employers captured by the Act until 
they see the regulations. 
 
There’s a number of issues that have been identified with the 
bill as problematic and again I think it makes absolutely no 
sense to have a bill — this has been total bungling — and 
having a bill that has some constitutionality questions quite 
possibly and is before the Supreme Court for that very reason. 
And why would you introduce legislation and pass it and then 
amend it and possibly have to amend it again? So aside from 
the lawyers who are involved in the essential services court 
case, it costs money, time and money for lawyers to be drafting 
this legislation and doing this work and all the work of public 
services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we continue to have concerns about Bill 128. And I know 
we’ll have an opportunity during committee to raise some more 
questions, and I know I have colleagues who are very interested 
in weighing in on this discussion as well. So with that, I’d like 
to, with respect to Bill 128, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 128. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 129 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 129 — The 
Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 129, An Act 
respecting the Administration of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan, making consequential and related amendments 
to certain Acts and regulations and repealing certain other 
Acts. And of course this is a very important piece of legislation 
and there will be many questions what the consequences both, 
you know, the intended consequences and the unintended 

consequences. 
 
And we see, you know, as this government came into power, 
and of course they were anxious to put their own face on things, 
and so they changed the word from department to ministry. And 
we’re not sure why that was, but it’s a language change and 
they never really fully explained why. Now we’re having . . . 
Here we are, seven years later still dealing with some of that. 
 
And of course we know that this government is particularly 
fond of regulations and not so much legislation. We see a 
decline in legislation in the House, and we don’t know whether 
it’s because they’ve run out of ideas or they just prefer to do 
regulations. And today we probably saw the most bizarre 
example of how quickly regulations can be made overnight, 
where we were in committee last night going late into the 
evening, late into the evening, and the officials and the minister 
were quite clear, there were no regulations. There were no 
regulations. And here we are. Apparently the cabinet meeting 
this morning, from what we understand from the Premier, who 
was twisting himself in knots, about that they had been made. 
And so there you go. 
 
And so here we have a bill before us to talk about the kind of 
management this government has done. And we’ve seen some 
of the most bizarre behaviour of government to date, this 
afternoon and yesterday and last night, just to make sure that 
. . . You know, I’m not sure what they were trying to make the 
point of, you know, because when we looked at what the 
minister said in his remarks of November 12th — and I read it 
last night — he said later in 2014 that this was all going to be 
happening. He was quite, quite fine with that. 
 
And all of a sudden today, we hear that it’s got to be done and 
we’ll see what the timeline is. So I think that it’s really 
important to talk about those kind of things because when we 
have issues before us about making regulations, and this is what 
this bill is, about how do we make regulations . . . And as I say, 
this is the government . . . This cabinet would prefer not to be 
here, not to be accountable, not to be transparent. And in fact 
they would like to do things behind a shroud of secrecy. We see 
that more and more and more, that we have concerns when this 
kind of legislation comes before us. 
 
[16:30] 
 
If it’s just as simple as changing words from department to 
ministry, hey, we have a concern. Is this the best use of our civil 
servants, especially when we have a government that seems to 
be so dedicated to the use of lean? Is this a lean type of 
initiative, that they put together a piece of legislation of this size 
to change the word from department to ministry? This is 
efficiency at its best? I am not sure. So we are here to debate 
this bill and it’s one that we’ll have many, many questions. 
 
He talks about how its intention is to consolidate the provisions 
of The Government Organization Act with the Executive 
Council provisions of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2007, and incorporates provisions of The Tabling 
of Documents Act, ’91, The Federal-Provincial Agreements Act. 
 
The new legislation will remove any confusion about the 
organization of ministries, and they talk about ministerial 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4689 

responsibilities. You know, and it does talk about legislative 
secretaries will not need to be reappointed every year. I mean 
the sad thing about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is you know the 
legislative secretaries themselves have not been as effective as 
we had hoped that they would. They are not out in the 
communities. We are not seeing them at places. So I’m not sure 
what exactly they’re doing. Clearly we have some questions 
about that. And is that part of their lean initiatives, to have 
legislative secretaries? I mean that it is interesting that they 
don’t want to reappoint them every year. Maybe they will even 
forget that they’re in existence. I don’t know. I think it’s maybe 
a good idea to have their contracts renewed every year so at 
least we know that they’re actually . . . that they have a job, that 
they have a job. I think that’s important. 
 
Interesting, you know, the appointment of advisory committees 
to ministers will require cabinet approval in all cases — and I 
think that’s a good thing — and then that they can last, if I was 
reading this correctly, longer than a year. I think advisory 
committees are important. I think that it’s a way to keep your 
ears to the ground, that you can hear what’s happening. It’s very 
difficult for ministers to get their best information, and this is 
one of the ways to make sure that they actually do. So I think 
this is a good thing. And I’ll talk more at length about this. 
 
The federal-provincial agreements will not require cabinet 
approval unless they require an expenditure by government of 
more than $50,000. Of course we have some questions about 
what exactly does that mean. One of the things we know it 
means is that we may not find out about it because if it goes 
through cabinet then it’s an order in council, and that’s one way 
of us knowing that there’s actually something happening. If this 
is done at the ministerial level, there may not be any way that 
the public will get to know that this is happening. And we 
would expect that if something was happening, if 75,000, 
100,000, or 250,000, it might be broken up to meet the 
requirements of being less than 50,000. What’s to stop that? 
 
So I think cabinet, and its way of having orders in councils 
published, that there’s a way of keeping track of what is 
actually happening. What are the decisions being made? What 
will happen here? Will decisions be made publicly? So we’ll 
have a question for the minister about how will he make this 
public. What accountability process will take place? 
 
And I mean the thing with federal-provincial . . . I mean first of 
all we would like to know what examples there are of the kind 
of initiatives. Is it a promotion? Is it a public relations event? 
When you talk about less than 50,000, what kind of a project is 
it that is involving, you know . . . And I assume that when we 
talk about federal-provincial agreements, is that just between 
Canada and Saskatchewan? I would have some questions about 
that because we have here a situation where we have 
governments of like minds who would all of a sudden be doing 
a lot of initiatives of less than $50,000. 
 
This is something that could be very interesting and, you know, 
maybe it could be broken up so if there was something between 
the Ministry of Environment that was 75,000, all of a sudden 
there was two projects, one of 35 and one of 40,000. But what 
happens if there is a multi-ministerial project that involves, say, 
10 ministries? There is 50,000 each from those 10. That’s a half 
a million. I would assume that you would then have the same 

ministries from the federal government side. You have another 
half a million. All of a sudden you’ve got $1 million, and 
nobody knows about it. 
 
How does that work? How does that work for accountability 
and transparency? So this would allow that to happen. Are there 
ways of making sure that doesn’t . . . or if it does take place . . . 
Because there might be a good reason. And we think that 
ministries should work in co-operation and there should be 
federal-provincial co-operation, but what is the accountability 
process here? And I am worried. I am worried deeply about 
what that could mean, and so we’ll have lots of questions for 
the Minister of Justice on this about what kind of accountability 
will this be and where will that take place. 
 
It could slide through the estimates process. Should we be 
asking, are there things that you’re going to be anticipating 
spending 40,000, $50,000 with the federal government? You 
know, these agreements come up in mid-year or at the end of 
the year, and all of a sudden you need to find resources, I would 
assume. This is not part of necessarily the budgeting process. 
So we’ll be curious about this. 
 
And again, you know, there are so many different angles you 
could talk about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because you’re 
talking about federal-provincial. It’s Sask-Canada agreements, 
but what about other provinces? Is it one across, right across? 
You know, all of a sudden we are talking about a lot of money. 
And what kind of projects are we talking about here? 
 
So I have some questions about that, and I think that hopefully 
we can get some straight answers from the officials and the 
minister in the evening that doesn’t change by the time the sun 
comes up in the morning, like what happened today when we 
had questions last night in committee and those answers today 
are irrelevant because something happened over the course of 
the evening, of early morning. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s called work. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — And so now I hear the minister over there, one 
of the folks over there saying it’s called work. But it seems like 
an odd time to be working between midnight . . . You know, 
maybe this is the time they do regulations in Health, between 
midnight and 6 in the morning. I don’t know how you do that 
with consultations. The officials are very clear in here about the 
work, the process that needed to take place. 
 
And so I do have some questions about that, how this will be 
done in a transparent and accountable process, and how things 
that you get the answers in committee, if we get answers in 
committee the night before, that all of a sudden those answers 
the next day don’t stand the light of day. They simply don’t 
stand the light of day. How does that happen in a government 
that prides itself on transparency and accountability? 
 
And today we look at this bill here. And it talks about the 
administration of executive government. Well we saw some 
very interesting transparency or administration of the executive 
government of Saskatchewan in the last 24 hours. So I have to 
tell you, we have a lot of questions about that. 
 
And how do we, when we go to committee and we ask 



4690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

questions of the minister, of the minister and the officials, how 
can we have any confidence that they actually will have any 
meaning the next day? Because I tell you, I have to tell you, I 
think the minister and the officials were being straight and quite 
honest. They were talking to the best of their knowledge. But 
that knowledge clearly was different than the Premier’s and 
what happened in the next convening hours between 11 p.m. 
last night and, you know, 1:30 today. 
 
So we have lots of questions about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because we think that, as we go through this, we have to make 
sure . . . And this is a government that was elected, and it says 
they take great pride . . . They say they take great pride, but do 
they act with that great pride in transparency and accountability 
and consistency, all of that stuff? And now credibility, and now 
credibility that you should expect from a provincial government 
and from any ministry. Whether you call them a ministry or a 
department, it’s all the same, isn’t it? They should be 
transparent and accountable. And it doesn’t matter whether you 
change their name or whether you keep it with the old name. 
It’s all the same, isn’t it, when it comes to having any 
credibility in the eyes of the people of this province? 
 
So you know, and it talks about the kind of things, grant making 
and all of that. And I do want to talk a little bit about this last 
piece, about The Financial Administration Act as being 
amended to eliminate the Investment Board, and provide the 
treasury board so it can have non-ministerial members. 
 
And it would be, you know, I’ve found that interesting because 
it’s kind of a different practice the government has where they 
have non-Executive Council members. And maybe I’m wrong 
because this hasn’t really been explained well to . . . you know, 
that they do have non-executive members, Executive Council 
members as part of the treasury board. And typically, you 
know, from what I understand, you have Executive Council, 
then you have the backbenchers, and the backbenchers are there 
to support the Executive Council. 
 
And that’s how our democracy kind of works. You have the 
backbenchers, while technically not part of the Executive 
Council, can sort of say, you know, we want to keep you in line. 
That’s how a caucus meeting goes, right? That you have to 
make sure your work that you present has the support of the 
backbench, and if it doesn’t, then you’ve got a problem. 
 
But now you see the backbench is being brought into Executive 
Council. And I have a question about what does that really 
mean? It’s not really a separate role anymore. It’s kind of fuzzy, 
that backbenchers can be brought in and out. And whatever 
happened to the Executive Council concept? Because 
essentially they all can be part of the Executive Council. And I 
guess now they can be, and it’s been an experiment this 
government has tried for the last few years for a variety of 
reasons. But I think that I’m curious about that. That’s a 
significant change. 
 
So I want to take a minute now to reflect on what the minister 
had to say about this in terms of the intention of Bill 129, The 
Executive Government Administration Act. Of course the 
Minister of Justice has been very busy. He’s been bringing lots 
of things forward, and this just came forward just a few weeks 
ago. And it talks about the reason for this, and it reviews . . . 

And he says, it “. . . will remove any confusion about the 
organization of ministries and the assignment of ministerial 
responsibilities.” And these changes are made from the current 
legislation. 
 
And he talks about, and I talked about, the Legislative Secretary 
will not need to be reappointed every year. And this was just 
simply a way to get rid of unnecessary paperwork, and so that 
they will just continue forward. Now it will be interesting to see 
whether they actually continue into the election period or not. 
Like cabinet ministers continue past the election. I remember 
my own experience that once the, you know, in 2007, to 
continue the running of the government, cabinet continues until 
the next cabinet’s appointed. And so when does the Legislative 
Secretary appointments . . . Do they continue as well? 
 
We know that in practice that when a government is defeated, 
and this is what happened with us, that essentially it would be 
bad form for the old cabinet to do anything beyond the running 
of the government and not to initiate any new initiatives 
because they had lost their mandate. The only mandate they had 
was to make sure government ran and that there was not a 
breakdown of good services. And so I have a question about 
that. 
 
And again I think that when we have legislative secretaries that 
they’re . . . And I was one too. And I remember I was the 
Legislative Secretary for a few short, a few months of 
SchoolPlus. And I think the initiatives then were that we would 
see legislative secretaries do a lot of work. And I think about 
the member from Fairview and her work on bullying and there 
was actually a lot of profile and her work did create a lot of 
interest. 
 
[16:45] 
 
But many of the other legislative secretaries haven’t quite 
achieved the same level of profile in the public. And I think that 
it’s important that when we have people who are appointed 
legislative secretaries that they actually do get out there and 
create profile within the public and do some work on that. 
 
And as I say, the bullying one was a very interesting one. And 
the work came forward and there were consultations done, and 
now we await the government to see what will come out of that. 
And it’s only a few short days. We wait until next Wednesday, 
and we are hopeful that this government, at the larger level, will 
actually take some initiatives that were laid out. 
 
So I think there is a role for legislative secretaries, but they need 
to be much more active. And as I say, I think that very few of 
them actually do achieve that profile in the public, and so I 
wonder, why do you even have legislative secretaries? Now 
you’re getting rid of the idea that you have to reappoint them. I 
mean I think it would be good for them to show up maybe once 
a year to get their new contract. That would be at least showing 
that they are interested in their role. I mean I know some of 
them over there are legislative secretaries and we haven’t seen 
them. 
 
I have to say though I’ve heard about the . . . I have heard from 
the . . . One of the members from Moose Jaw is actually the 
Legislative Secretary for foster parents. And I have to say, I’m 



March 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4691 

looking forward to the report from that member around foster 
parents. So he’s achieving some. But some of the others, I don’t 
know what they’ve been doing. I don’t know what some of 
those others have been . . . So if they only show up once a year 
to get their reappointment, I think that would be a worthwhile 
exercise . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes. But others, I 
mean we don’t know what they do. So once a year to show up 
and get their reappointment would be a good thing. 
 
We await the report from the foster parents Legislative 
Secretary. I did read the thing in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 
Looking forward to big things there. Looking forward to great 
things there. That’s an important area. So he’s been out doing 
his work. I know what he’s doing. And I know what the 
member from Fairview did. 
 
But some of the others, I don’t know what they do. And now 
they don’t want to even get . . . They don’t want to show up for 
their once-a-year appointment. And now this has caused some 
interest on the other side. I don’t know if their legislative 
secretaries, who are feeling that they’re too busy, they’re too 
busy to show up once a year for their once-a-year contract, this 
is a big thing to the folks over there. This is a big thing. I can’t 
believe that I’ve hit a nerve talking about the once-a-year 
appointment. They really didn’t think they would have to show 
up again once they were appointed Legislative Secretary. 
 
So I’ve named two, and I have found their work interesting. But 
I don’t know who the other legislative secretaries are over there. 
And you know, I mean I really clearly, I think what they need to 
do is work harder in the public eye than in this House to make 
noise. I would say go out in the public, go into our 
communities, make some noise so people know what you’re 
doing, so people know what you’re doing. 
 
I have some real concerns about this, Mr. Speaker. And so this 
may be a big issue, and we should get a list of what actually 
they do, what they do. This is important. I think this is 
important work, you know. And so as I go through this, I think 
this is important. I do want to say actually there is the other, 
there’s at least one other. I want to recognize the Legislative 
Secretary for disabilities. I’m interested to see what his report 
looks like too. That’s very important as well. I think that’s 
important work too. 
 
So yes, we want to see what they do, what they do. So I don’t 
know if that’s the only three that there are. There may be more. 
There may be more. I don’t know. But those are the three that 
I’ve had some contact with. I don’t know if there’s more. But as 
I said, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have lots of questions about this in 
the House. 
 
And of course, you know, the minister went on to talk about the 
advisory committee, and that’s important. I think that again we 
will know . . . And this is essentially, this is an interesting thing 
because it really kind of ties in to that lobbying thing, doesn’t 
it? So now we know who the advisory committees are. And so 
this is interesting. And I would think the minister is spot on 
when he says this will provide more accountability and 
oversight because now we will know the names of who are on 
the advisory committees. And so from looking at that, I think 
that’s a good recommendation and a good piece of legislation. 
We’ll ask in committee more about that. 

But then he goes on, and this is where we will have some 
questions. We will have lots of questions about this, about the 
federal-provincial agreements that will not require cabinet 
approval unless they require an expenditure by the government 
of more than $50,000. And this is consistent with agreements 
under section 18 of the new Act. So apparently that’s the thing 
there. But again we’ll want to know about the accountability, 
how that works in terms of, is it just straight between the federal 
government and the provincial ministry or is it multi-ministry or 
is it multi-provincial? At what point . . . Is it the total cost of 
50,000, or can it be broken up and hidden away? Because again, 
as I said, this government really likes to talk a lot, likes the 
great talk about it being accountable and transparent, but are 
they really? Are they really? And this is how this is 
inconsistent, and I have some real questions about it. 
 
And again, you know, as I said, and I have some real questions 
about how lean this government . . . You know, this government 
came in and was going to do great things and was going to be 
efficient. And we’ve seen the fiasco with Linkin in Social 
Services, the cost overruns with that. We’ve seen all sorts of 
cost overruns, and here is one. And it’ll be very interesting to 
get a sense of what is this costing the government of 
Saskatchewan when they do this change from the word 
department, to removing all references from department, to 
minister or ministry and removing references like that in annual 
reports, seals, and staff. So I have some questions about that. 
 
Now the minister didn’t really talk about a couple of other 
things in his report. And I know that the minister tends to keep 
shorter comments, but we’ll have questions about this. And that 
is in terms of annual reports and laying documents before the 
Assembly. And I hope, I hope, and I don’t know how you feel 
about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or how some of the other 
members feel about this. But I find it difficult. Maybe one of 
the weaknesses of our new schedule is the fact that we’re not 
often in the House. We’re scheduled for 65 days, so that means 
we’re not here for 300 days, which often means things can be 
turned in, whether it’s the annual report or laying documents 
before the Assembly. And it’s inconsistent about which ones 
MLAs get notices that have been turned in to the Clerk. And I 
would like to see a better notification system. 
 
We don’t have to have the documents necessarily laid out but, 
in my case, I’m interested when the annual report for Sask 
Housing comes out, and I think — and I could be wrong — but 
I think it usually comes out in June, and we’re not here in June. 
So I have to make sure I ask for it or I go looking for it. I think 
if it was done in May, we may get it in the House. And I’m not 
quite sure about this, and this is one question I would have in 
committee. Is there a way for us to get notification that these 
important documents are being laid on the table or given to the 
Clerk on a consistent basis? 
 
The annual plans for each department, especially as a critic it’s 
important that we know what the annual plans are for each 
ministry. And unless you go looking for it . . . And somebody 
would say, well maybe that’s your responsibility. But, you 
know, if we can all make this work a little bit better, then that’s 
a good thing. The annual plans, the annual reports that come out 
. . . And I know the library has a . . . They send out a report 
every week or every month about documents that they receive, 
and I do check that. 



4692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2014 

But I think it’s important that these other documents . . . So this 
would be one thing that we may ask in the House, if there is 
some way to streamline that so that we actually do get those 
documents or access to those documents because it is a critical 
piece of how we do our work. And if we don’t have those 
documents or three or four months go by or if you’ve changed 
your critic roles, you may not realize that the documents 
actually are available and that you should be looking at them. 
 
And so if there was some way to make sure that when we have 
the annual documents or laying documents before the Assembly 
. . . I think this is an important piece that we shouldn’t just glide 
over. I know I take a look at these documents and they’re 
important. They’re an important piece of our accountability. It’s 
an important piece of us doing our work. It’s an important piece 
of the government doing their work. And a lot of people take a 
lot of time to make sure we do that. Does this fit into our new 
calendar? I don’t really think so. Is there a better way of doing 
it? 
 
And so I know that there’s lots of questions, and I just want to 
take a minute to review what I’ve said because I think this is 
really critical in terms of this piece of legislation, which is a 
significant piece, you know. And especially as I said earlier 
that, I mean you know, on one hand we see a government, you 
know, very short on ideas, and we’re seeing legislation that is a 
little late, and then they’ve been working on this about 
ministries. I don’t know if that’s an indication of lean initiatives 
within the departmentland  of Justice that it took them this long 
to bring this forward in terms of changing departments to 
ministries. Not a great thing, but it is what it is. 
 
But we do have a lot of questions. We have a lot of questions. 
And it will be interesting if all the legislative secretaries show 
up for committee. Maybe they’ll have some comments to make 
when we ask questions about why they should not have to be 
reappointed every year. 
 
I think that the idea of the advisory committee’s names being 
approved by committee, that’s very, very important and adds a 
lot to the accountability and transparency. And the minister has 
pointed that out, and that point I do agree to that. 
 
I do have questions about the $50,000. I have to be honest with 
that, and we’ll have to ask what does that look like. And if it’s 
just a one-off and that’s simply . . . But if it’s really, if it really 
is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now it seems to have hit a 
nerve over there. Somebody really wants to get in on this and 
really thinks that they should just be able to go wild on it, and 
they really can’t see what the problem is. I think people want to 
know a little bit more about this. There is this question of 
accountability, and when you have, you know, people who want 
to know what’s going on with the government, this is really, 
really important, you know, so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes, once they’re in order in council where all those camping 
fee rebates that we’re seeing . . . And of course that’s an 
interesting piece of work on that. So I think that there is a lot of 
questions that we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this issue. 
 
So while on one hand I think that there is merit, you always 
have to take a look. And as I said in my opening remarks about 
unintended consequences and intended consequences, and here 
where you have a government into its seventh year of mandate 

and still working out how it does its business . . . And we saw a 
fine case of mismanagement since last question period into this 
question period. The 24 hours really indicated that how this 
government can, you know, double down. They want to get a 
result, I guess, that’s the only . . . And they will do that, and 
we’ll see how that plays out in the days and weeks ahead. 
 
Yet, at the same time, at the same time they do not know how 
many homes are at risk right now or how many people are at 
risk, vulnerable people are at risk in those homes. They cannot 
answer that, but they can stay up all night writing regulations 
that really they didn’t need to do, that they didn’t really need to 
do. They prefer to do them. Fair enough. But they didn’t need to 
do it. And so we have a problem with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, and I know the hour is late and we want to make 
sure that we want to be able to adjourn for the day, I want to 
move adjournment for Bill No. 129, An Act respecting the 
Administration of the Executive Government of Saskatchewan, 
making consequential and related amendments to certain Acts 
and regulations and repealing certain other Acts. I do so move. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 129, The Executive 
Government Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. It being now the time 
of adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 
10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4661 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4661 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4662 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4662 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4662 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4662 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4663 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4663 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4663 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4663 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4664 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4664 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4664 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4664 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4664 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4665 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Entrepreneur Wins Just Watch Me! Contest 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4665 
 Ceremony Honours Contributions in Afghanistan 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4665 
 Estevan Police Chief Retires 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4665 
 Women With Disabilities Luncheon and Woman of Illumination Award 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4666 
 Land-based Learning Camp 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4666 
 Honouring Bill MacRae 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4666 
 Agricultural Safety Week 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4666 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Personal Care Homes 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4667 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4667 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4669 
 Care of Dementia Patients 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 
 Transfer of Community Pastures 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4671 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4675 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4672 
 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4672 
 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4673 
 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4673 
 



 

 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 
 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 
 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4674 
 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4675 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4675 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Support for Northern Gateway Pipeline 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4675 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4678 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4680 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4681 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4684 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4685 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4686 
 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4686 
 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4688 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




