
























































Hansard: October 27, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5489 
 October 27, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — It is my pleasure to introduce and welcome to 
the province of Saskatchewan and to the Legislative Assembly 
very special guests from Germany, seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. As part of a Partnership of Parliaments program with 
Germany, our members and legislative officials had the 
opportunity to travel to Germany in 2013 to study their system 
of government and economy. The Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan is now pleased to reciprocate that visit. Our 
guests arrived in Saskatchewan on October 25th and will depart 
on November the 1st. 
 
Please stand as I introduce you: the Hon. Beate Schlupp, MdL, 
Deputy Speaker of the Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania 
legislature; the Hon. Gerd Körner, head of the delegation, 
former deputy mayor of Weiterstadt, member of the city council 
of Weiterstadt; Ms. Maria Steinhagen, staff of the 
Mecklenburg-Pomerania legislature, department head, central 
services; and Mr. Janneck Herre, Partnership of Parliaments. I’d 
ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you, I’d like to take a moment to thank the 
members of the inter-ministerial committee on interpersonal 
violence and abuse who are seated in your gallery. With us 
today, Betty Ann Pottruff, Rod McKendrick, Frankie Jordan, 
Pamela Burkholder, all from the Ministry of Justice; Pat 
Faulconbridge and Betty Deis from the Ministry of Social 
Services; and Trish LaFontaine from the Ministry of 
Government Relations. Mr. Speaker, they are responsible for 
ensuring that when it comes to working to stop interpersonal 
violence against women, men, children, youth, and the elderly 
in Saskatchewan that our policies are coordinated and strategic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they do a terrific job, and I’m very proud of the 
work that they do. We’ll hear more about their good work 
shortly, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these dedicated individuals to their legislature 
today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the minister in 
welcoming the members of this team to the legislature. I 
appreciate the fact that some very experienced, capable people 
who have been capable servants of the province have been 
given this very, very important task to deal with violence issues. 
And so I join too with the welcome. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 
fixed-priced contracts. And we know that in September this 
year this government walked away from a new 48-unit, 
low-income affordable housing project in Regina, allowing a 
private developer to instead take control of and rent the units at 
full market price. Essentially this government allowed the 
private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without 
any penalty, setting a dangerous precedent for this type of 
default. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relations to default on fixed-price contracts for affordable 
housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions as it relates to the unacceptable danger on 
Dewdney Avenue created by that government, the failure of that 
government to address a problem, a safety concern that they’ve 
created, and call on that government to finally act in an 
immediate way to provide safety for those along Dewdney 
Avenue. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
Regina and Kenaston. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 
23rd, the 2014 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit were 
held at Government House here in Regina. 
 
A constituent of Saskatoon Centre, Sylvia Obrigewitsch was 
recognized for her many years of service with a Volunteer 



5490 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

Service Award. Sylvia has been involved in literacy education 
for 30 years, including establishing a tutoring program in 
Edmonton for the local John Howard Society, but she has now 
joined the Saskatchewan Literacy Network, tutoring students 
with Read Saskatoon and helping people advance themselves 
through the grade 12 GED [General Educational Development] 
program offered in schools. Sylvia is currently working with 
new arrivals to Saskatoon at the Global Gathering Place. 
 
Other winners included Ms. Carol Cundall, executive director 
of the Estevan Diversified Services Inc. who received the 
Professional Leadership in Literacy Award. The Gordon Retail 
Centre on the George Gordon First Nation won for Workplace 
Training Excellence. The workplace literacy program for 
newcomers at the Regina Food Bank won the Outstanding 
Literacy Project. And Mr. Lindsay Brittain, a youth worker and 
culture program coordinator at the Nipawin Oasis Community 
Centre, received the Cameco Literacy Learner Award and 
Bursary for all his hard work and achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating these hard-working people dedicated to 
improving literacy here in Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Saskatchewan Good for Entrepreneurs 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 20th, the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business, CFIB, released 
its rankings for the best places to start and grow a business in 
2014 in Canada. I’m excited to announce today, Mr. Speaker, 
that both Saskatoon and Regina ranked in the top 10 out of 
almost 120 cities and economic regions throughout Canada. In 
addition to this, Lloydminster ranked first in mid-size Canadian 
cities. 
 
CFIB’s report marks the start of the Small Business Week in 
Canada. Each city or region is ranked on a number of indicators 
across three major categories: presence, perspective, and policy. 
Saskatoon ranked third out of all major Canadian cities while 
Regina ranked fourth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is exciting to see that the Prairies, and indeed 
Saskatchewan, often sees higher economic activity because of 
many opportunities that our province holds for entrepreneurs. 
This report confirms what our government knows to be true. 
Not only is Saskatchewan still one of the top places to live in 
Canada, but it is also one of the top places to work in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
congratulating our entrepreneurs for the good work they 
continue to do while driving our economy. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Women’s History Month 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize Women’s History Month. In Canada, 
Women’s History Month is celebrated each year in October 
because it coincides with the anniversary of an important 
landmark in the history of the women’s movement in Canada 
— the Persons Case. 
 
Women’s History Month seeks to recognize the contributions of 
women in Canada and around the world. This year’s theme: 
Canadian Business Women — A Growing Economic Force. It 
highlights the significant contributions made by women in 
business, but acknowledges that there is still work to be done to 
remove the structural barriers that women still face in the 
workforce. Women are still paid less than men in the workplace 
and are still seen as less valuable or uncommitted by many 
employers. Even after all the progress made in the last 100 
years, there are only 26 women leading Fortune 500 companies 
today. Women are disproportionately found in precarious, 
low-paid positions, and women and girls continue to be the 
targets of violence. 
 
The education of women and girls must be a priority if 
inequality in the workplace is to be addressed in the future. The 
inspiring work of young women like Malala Yousafzai serves 
as an example of what we can all do to stand up and demand 
equality for women and girls. 
 
And finally on a political level, I encourage all members of this 
Legislative Assembly to continue to encourage women to 
become active in politics. We need our legislature to reflect our 
community, and we should not rest until we have gender parity 
in this Chamber. Now that would go down in the history books. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Autism Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. I’m very pleased to 
acknowledge that October is Autism Awareness Month. Autism 
spectrum disorder encompasses a continuum of complex 
neurodevelopmental impairments that affect many people to 
varying degrees. 
 
Increased attention to these disorders over the last decade has 
given us insight into its increasing prevalence. However even 
with improved detection, diagnosis, and awareness, research 
and support is continually needed to not only help the 
individuals who are affected but also their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we support a comprehensive 
approach and responsive system for individuals and families 
affected by autism. In 2014-15 we are investing a total of $7.55 
million toward targeted autism supports, a 1,400 per cent 
increase from ’07. This investment goes towards education and 
training, specialists and support workers, diagnostic assessment 
and intervention, and respite care. 
 
While we continue to make progress in helping and supporting 
individuals and families who live with ASD [autism spectrum 
disorder], we know that it touches an increasing number of 
people across the province. Our government, along with the 
health regions, works very closely with our community partners 
to build comprehensive autism services in Saskatchewan, and 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5491 

we will continue to do so. 
 
Earlier this month, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health 
raised the autism awareness flag at the legislature to bring 
awareness to this condition. Mr. Speaker, we all have 
responsibilities to raise awareness, to provide support, and to be 
involved in addressing autism. Please join me in recognizing 
Autism Awareness Month. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Agriculture Month 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this month the Minister of Agriculture proclaimed 
October as Agriculture Month in Saskatchewan. 
 
Agriculture is one of the largest economic engines in 
Saskatchewan, contributing 10 per cent to Saskatchewan’s 
gross domestic product and generating more than 50,000 jobs in 
the province. In fact last year we produced 96 per cent of 
Canada’s lentils, 82 per cent of Canada’s flax seed, and 87 per 
cent of Canada’s durum. We also exported more than $100 
million in sales to 16 different world markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme for agriculture month is Think 
Ag. We are focusing on the vast opportunities there are to offer 
in agriculture and are asking youth to think ag when 
considering a future career path. High schools throughout the 
province are holding speaker series where presentations are 
being given by dynamic young people who have launched their 
careers in agriculture. A new web presence has also been 
developed at saskatchewan.ca that profiles Saskatchewan 
people employed in the ag industry, interactive career features, 
ag scholarship information, and teacher resources. In addition to 
the website, a Think Ag Facebook page has been launched to 
give current and potential ag employees a forum to discuss 
careers in agriculture and what the industry has to offer. 
 
I ask all members of the legislature in the Assembly to join me 
in encouraging our youth to consider agriculture in their future 
career plans, and also to say thank you to our many farmers and 
ranchers for their hard work and commitment to the agriculture 
industry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Violence Prevention Week 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to speak to an issue that 
affects all of us, if not directly, then through our concern for our 
fellow citizens. Today marks the beginning of the province’s 
first Violence Prevention Week, a time we will use to focus on 
improving our provincial response to violence and reducing the 
harm it causes to individuals and communities. 
 
I would like to thank the University of Regina who came 
forward with this request. It too has dedicated this week to 
violence awareness. Working with our community partners, 
there will be important initiatives coming forward in the coming 
days in recognition of Violence Prevention Week. 

As announced in the Throne Speech, amendments will soon be 
introduced to The Victims of Domestic Violence Act to expand 
the ability of police and the justice system to protect victims of 
interpersonal violence and abuse. Regina’s Sexual Assault 
Response Team, also known as SART, will conduct a new pilot 
project in Regina to expand reporting options for victims of 
sexual assault. 
 
The CellArm program will be made available in more areas of 
the province, providing frequent victims of family violence 
quicker access to emergency responders. It also bears 
mentioning that earlier this month the victims compensation 
program underwent its largest enhancement since 1992 to better 
assist victims with the immediate costs associated with 
victimization. This is all thanks to the hard work of the 
Interministerial Committee on Interpersonal Violence and 
Abuse, some of who are in attendance today. 
 
Violence prevention is everyone’s responsibility. Through 
awareness we can work to minimize violence in this province 
and the harms that come with it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

United Nations International Day of the Girl 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
October the 11th was designated by the United Nations as 
International Day of the Girl. The member from Regina 
Wascana Plains and myself had the pleasure of hosting in 
Regina a screening for the documentary, Raising Ms. President. 
This amazing documentary is about raising the next generation 
of female leaders and encouraging them to think about the 
possibilities of political life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see capable, competent women seek 
public office. This documentary was shown in 50 states and 2 
provinces, including our own. It was viewed in hundreds of 
cities as a way to celebrate the Day of the Girl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our event was attended by over 150 women and 
girls in Regina and surrounding area. My colleague from 
Regina Wascana Plains and I were pleased to have the 
opportunity to host this event to share our own personal 
experiences in politics and in serving the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is so important that we encourage women and 
girls to engage in politics and to consider pursuing a career in 
public life. I would like to thank all the women and girls who 
attended our event to celebrate the International Day of the Girl. 
I ask that the members join me in encouraging women and girls 
to step off the sidelines, take an active role in leadership, and 
consider seeking public office. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 



5492 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

Leadership in Saskatoon Health Region 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
taxpayers have spent hundreds of thousands of dollars having 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Health 
Region certified as a lean leader — hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. 
 
But now the CEO of the health region has had her contract 
terminated, and she will receive a severance of $400,000 of 
taxpayers’ money. An explanation that has been given by the 
board Chair to date, Mr. Speaker, is completely, completely, not 
even remotely satisfactory. It does not add up. With $400,000 
being paid out in severance, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
deserve to know the real reason why her contract was 
terminated. To the Premier: what is the reason for the CEO’s 
termination and the massive $400,000 severance package? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as all of our regional health authorities do, is look at 
succession planning within their regional health authorities, 
within the senior leadership, and of course with the CEOs. 
There has been a discussion for some time between the board, 
the board Chair, and the CEO of Saskatoon Health Region 
regarding her future and the determination of when she would 
be leaving as the CEO of the health region. 
 
The board felt this was an opportunity to take advantage of 
renewing the leadership of that health region and therefore 
unanimously agreed that they would ask for her resignation. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what they did, and that resignation 
was tendered and was accepted by the board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the Premier. 
At least he normally answers at least one question that he 
doesn’t want to answer here, Mr. Speaker. But the story is not 
adding up in the least bit, Mr. Speaker. The minister says they 
took advantage. They are having to pay $400,000 in severance 
for what appears to be no good reason, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan families can’t stomach the $400,000 severance 
package. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region asked for 
38 care aids to start to improve the quality of care. What did 
this government give them? They gave them 19 care aids. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, $400,000 would pay for 8 more full-time care 
aids. The Saskatoon Health Region desperately needs more 
ceiling tracks for lifts for patients and residents, Mr. Speaker. 
$400,000 could pay for 27 desperately needed lifts. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why on earth would 
they pay a $400,000 severance? Why would they terminate the 
contract for the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region when the 
needs are so great in the health region, Mr. Speaker? The 
Premier needs to give a response. Why did they terminate the 
CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly Saskatoon Health Region, the board has 
followed all provisions, either within the contract of the CEO or 
within Saskatchewan labour and employment legislation, in 
determining what would be appropriate in this case, as she was 
the CEO, is the CEO, and has been for nearly 10 years. And I 
think that that is what has been deemed appropriate in this case. 
 
The region and the board and the board Chair have had 
conversations with the CEO regarding her future and what her 
plans were going to be. There has been some talk for some time 
about her decision to end her time as CEO. The board felt that 
they wanted to take advantage of an opportunity to move on in 
terms of finding a new CEO, and that’s what they decided to 
do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, why did this government then 
choose to invest hundreds of thousands of dollars into her lean 
certification, Mr. Speaker? I’ve seen the certificate. There’s 
been tons of so-called work that she went through, away from 
her regular job. Why on earth would they spend hundreds of 
thousands of dollars on that, Mr. Speaker, at the same time as 
there are the huge needs in the health region? 
 
Let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker: it is this government that triggered 
this. Presumably they would know what the severance would 
have to be paid out, Mr. Speaker. But it makes no sense. There 
was no need. But my question to the Premier is, why would 
they go through this? Why would they trigger this, especially 
when the needs are so great? 
 
We do know, Mr. Speaker, that Maura Davies was the first 
individual to effectively stand up to this government’s $40 
million American consultant. She was the first to take him on. 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, from last week that John Black and 
his team love to tattle. They love to tattle on leaders who would 
have the audacity to question the approach that John Black is 
suggesting through his dogma. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: did John Black’s 
team raise any concerns about Maura Davies, and is that why 
she was terminated and now will receive a $400,000 severance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m a little bit, I guess, confused by the Leader of the 
Opposition and his premise. I would take that to mean that the 
Leader of the Opposition believes that becoming a lean certified 
leader within the health region is good thing, which I believe it 
is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, what has been identified through 
Saskatoon Health Region is the fact that they are leaders within 
this province when it comes to the lean deployment. In fact, 
during the review of the contract and which led up to the 
contract, it was noted that Saskatoon Health Region is largely 
self-sufficient and has completed 87 lean events, many with 
very good results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an opportunity that the board decided to 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5493 

take to find a new CEO, new leadership for the Saskatoon 
Health Region. This is something that boards need to be 
mindful of, considering the fact that nearly half of our CEOs are 
nearing that retirement age over the next two to three years. 
And Saskatoon Health Region certainly was in that position. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question remains why this 
government would trigger her termination and be forced to pay 
out a $400,000 contract at a time when there are huge needs in 
health care throughout the province. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that Maura Davies was the first person 
to stand up to John Black, and we know this through internal 
documentation that we’ve obtained. But we also know, Mr. 
Speaker, that Maura Davies was increasingly critical of this 
government for its failure, for its inability to address the basics 
that are so needed. Here’s a quote that the CEO gave, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Since 2007, we’ve received approximately $10 million per 
year to maintain and repair our buildings. That is less than 
a fifth of what we need for routine maintenance. Virtually 
all the dollars are, of necessity, spent on emergency 
building failures. 

 
And she also called for “. . . a multi-year plan to address the 
current, unacceptable situation.” 
 
My question to the Premier: the fact that Maura Davies was 
raising concerns about this government’s failure to properly 
address infrastructure in health care, is that a reason why her 
contract was terminated and she will now receive $400,000 in 
severance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly the public, Mr. Speaker, will know that this 
government has invested record funding into regional health 
authorities, including Saskatoon Health Region, to the point 
where regional health authority budgets have nearly doubled 
over the last seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Leader of the Opposition wanted 
to bring up the issue of funding into the health regions for 
capital and for maintenance because here is the record. Over the 
last seven years, block funding for maintenance, the Saskatoon 
Health Region under this government is $48 million. Over the 
previous seven years under the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government, Saskatoon Health Region block funding for 
maintenance, $6.8 million. A 606 per cent increase under this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issues that we’re facing when it comes to 
maintaining capital would not be in the case that they are today 
had the members opposite not invested in health care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, with that kind of head-in-the-sand 
approach that we see from this government, it’s no wonder that 

they might be a little angry at Maura Davies for saying that she 
was only getting one-fifth of what was needed in order to 
properly maintain buildings. It’s no wonder that they might be 
agitated over that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that Maura Davies was the first person to actually 
stand up to John Black, someone who loves to tattle on leaders, 
who would have the audacity to say that he might be on the 
wrong track. We know, Mr. Speaker, that Maura Davies was 
saying she was only getting one-fifth of what was actually 
needed to properly do preventative maintenance and things on 
buildings. We also know, Mr. Speaker, that Maura Davies was 
also critical of this government for failing to address the things 
that actually would help seniors, would improve seniors’ care. 
 
Here’s a quote that she said: “. . . we know that the complexity 
of the residents in long term care is much higher than it used to 
be and our staffing levels haven’t kept up.” And “There are lots 
of unmet needs in this province. [So] we do not have adequate 
resources and programs to meet the needs of our seniors.” 
 
My question to the Premier: is it because Maura Davies was 
raising, highlighting the failure of this government to actually 
meet the senior care needs in this province, is that the reason 
why her contract was terminated and she’ll receive $400,000 in 
severance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Leader 
of the Opposition’s question, the answer is no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they have not come up with 
a good rationale, a good explanation as to why they would 
trigger the termination of the CEO of the health region, and at a 
time when there are huge needs in health care they would be 
happy to shovel out the door $400,000 in severance. Everything 
about this termination, Mr. Speaker, and the severance is 
bizarre, and the answers or the lack of answers in the 
transparency we see today only makes the situation more 
strange. 
 
What’s also bizarre is the government’s start to finding a 
replacement for Maura Davies. And they said, we want 
someone, the board Chair said, “We want someone that has 
depth and passion in our lean management system.” And I 
guess that’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, because we know how 
John Black and his team love to tattle and have created a 
completely toxic atmosphere when it comes to those in 
leadership and those on the front lines. So it’s not surprising 
that this government wouldn’t want a CEO with fresh insights, 
the ability to critically think, Mr. Speaker, or bring a new 
perspective to things. But it seems strange, Mr. Speaker, and it 
seems like it’s an unwise approach for finding a replacement. 
 
My question to the Premier: will John Black be consulted in any 
way in the hiring of a new CEO for the Saskatoon Health 
Region? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



5494 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again to the Leader of the Opposition, to his question, the 
answer is no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Agreement with Smart Meter Supplier 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, even the government’s 
own internal investigation shows this government didn’t 
undertake proper due diligence on the smart meter file. The 
procurement process was far from adequate. The government 
ignored advice to have it in a staged process which would have 
allowed problems to be better identified. 
 
And the biggest concern is that that government completely 
failed to even consider the safety of people and families. It 
didn’t even bother thinking about safety, despite the fact there 
had been major problems in Philadelphia and Alabama. 
 
To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how is it that this 
government didn’t even take into consideration the safety of 
families and homes? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the safety of people here in 
Saskatchewan is the highest priority of this government. That’s 
clear. Unfortunately SaskPower didn’t consider the safety of 
people to the same extent that the government does. We believe 
that this program was ill fated. We believe that it was simply 
not handled in the appropriate fashion, and that’s why it was 
shut down once the problems became apparent to the 
government. At that point we also undertook to initiate with 
Sensus, the company, to recover the taxpayers’ dollars, which 
we did. 
 
In addition to that, we wanted to get to the bottom of the 
problems with the contract as well as to look at the safety 
aspects of it, as well as look at the technical aspects of it also. 
That was undertaken. The report was released this morning, and 
as a result of that, the report, the CEO and president, Robert 
Watson, took full responsibility and resigned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there were warnings from 
Saskatchewan experts, and the government’s own internal 
investigation now exposes that this government received direct 
warnings about Sensus from a company with solid industry 
knowledge, a direct warning. But did that government listen, 
that Premier, that minister? Not a bit. As a result of that, we’ve 
had 18 meter failures and fires big enough to do real damage 
and devastate the lives of many. In total, there have 359 meter 
failures.  
 
To the minister: how could this government completely ignore 
direct warnings about this particular company and sell out 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — With respect, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
the failures that the member references, the member, I’m sure 
he had the representation at the review over there, the findings 
this morning. And the folks from Ritenburg made it very, very 
clear that there were eight incidents, and any incidents that there 
were in the testing phase were not related to fires. They were 
related to other problems with the smart meters — problems 
with the metering system, problems with other things totally 
and completely unrelated. And the member opposite would 
know that to be true, but he chooses to torque this issue rather 
than to present the facts as was found. 
 
What the report indicated, that there was no evidence to indicate 
the fires were the result of improper installation or hot sockets. 
That’s clearly what happened here. The meters themselves, they 
failed and, as a result, that there was some problems obviously 
with that. The government took the right actions at that point 
and stopped them right then. And now we’re going through the 
process of removing them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s a bit of a 
latecomer to accountability on this file when he’s been a big 
part of the failures every step of the way. The government’s 
own internal report shows that the procurement process needs to 
be significantly improved. But the next round of smart meters 
won’t even go through an improved procurement process 
because this government has tied the hands of Saskatchewan 
people with an $18 million store credit and a $5 million 
research credit to Sensus — a gift to Sensus on behalf of 
Saskatchewan ratepayers. 
 
To the minister: what kind of sense does it make to keep using 
this company especially after 359 meter failures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the installation 
of smart meters, if we ever do go down that path again here in 
Saskatchewan, it’ll only be under the most rigorous of testing 
under Saskatchewan climatic conditions. 
 
In addition to that, we would only go forward with any kind of 
smart meters in the future if an independent research firm like 
the CSA [Canadian Standards Association] or United 
Laboratories or independent firms like them were to approve 
them for their installation in Saskatchewan. That would be the 
only way that we would proceed with respect to meters in the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s sort of 
interesting to hear from the minister who has actually let a 
credit sit on the books of Sensus instead of getting the dollars 
back for Saskatchewan people. If Saskatchewan people 
purchase something and it turned out to be a complete failure 
and a safety risk, they’d demand a full refund and they’d work 
with likely a better company and a better product, Mr. Speaker. 
They certainly wouldn’t accept a store credit. They’d want and 
deserve their bucks back. 
 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5495 

To the minister: why on earth did this government fail to 
demand and secure a full refund on this horribly flawed and 
dangerous product? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as we have said on numerous 
occasions that people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this 
province will get their full refund if their full refund is due to 
them. We will continue to work with Sensus and look at the 
meters that they are manufacturing now. 
 
We will put them through rigorous testing here in 
Saskatchewan. If they meet the standards of CSA at that time, 
we may consider using them again. If, for example, if they are 
not able to meet the standards here in Saskatchewan, the rest of 
the money would be recovered by the taxpayers of our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s an incredibly weak 
position from that government with millions of dollars of 
ratepayers’ dollars. There has been warnings every step of the 
way: red flags that should have been listened to by this 
government, warnings from experts, direct warnings from a 
company with industry knowledge, failures of product in 
Philadelphia and Alabama. That should have been enough for 
that government to realize they shouldn’t have been inking 
contracts for $200 million with Grid One and millions of dollars 
with Sensus. But even if they rammed forward, you’d think 
they would have had the good sense, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
Saskatchewan people in that contract. 
 
Why did that government, why did that minister fail to protect 
Saskatchewan people in the contracts he entered into? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated, the people of 
Saskatchewan will recover all dollars with respect to this 
program. If Sensus is unable to come up with a meter that meets 
the needs of the people here in Saskatchewan, we will recover 
all of those dollars. 
 
And perhaps the member opposite would indicate to the people 
of Saskatchewan, when you people were in charge, when you 
people were in charge and there were problems, why didn’t you 
recover all of the money? In fact you recovered none of the 
money, Mr. Speaker. There are incident after incident after 
incident in this province where, when you people were in 
government, you received nothing back. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to remind both the government and 
the opposition to put their questions and responses through the 
Chair. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it seems the minister is a 
tad worked up. Maybe it’s because he had a scapegoat for 
lunch, Mr. Speaker. What part of Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower doesn’t that minister understand? The minister’s 
fingerprints are all over this file. For the minister to throw 
SaskPower under the bus but refuse to take responsibility 

himself is utterly shameful. The safety and property of 
Saskatchewan families were put at risk by this government. 
That minister failed to do his homework and sold out 
Saskatchewan people, their safety, and their hard-earned 
money.  
 
To the minister: why won’t he do the right thing finally here 
today, take responsibility, and submit his resignation as 
minister? And if not, will the Premier do the right thing and 
scrap that minister’s responsibilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
if I believe this warranted a ministerial resignation, and I do not, 
it was actually not this minister in place in terms of SaskPower 
responsibility at the outset when these decisions were taken 
over at SaskPower. 
 
Having said that, I do not believe this incident warrants a 
ministerial resignation or the call for a resignation. And here’s 
why, Mr. Speaker: I think Saskatchewan people want those in 
elected office to act in the interests of their safety. And as soon 
as there was a concern with respect of safety — Mr. Speaker, on 
the part of the minister, not SaskPower — on the part of the 
minister, action was taken to remove the meters. 
 
We would also, I think Saskatchewan people would expect that 
the ministers of the Crown would act to ensure the financial 
interests of the taxpayers. And in this case all the money will be 
recovered, all the interests are assured. I think Saskatchewan 
people would also want a minister of the Crown to act 
transparently. And in this case with the Minister of SaskPower 
and the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], a thorough review has been conducted that 
looked at the legal implications here, the technical aspects of it, 
and the financial aspects. And, Mr. Speaker, all of it was 
released to the public. 
 
That member called into question these three groups, Ritenburg 
& Associates, the law firm in PwC [PricewaterhouseCoopers], 
called into question their independence. Mr. Speaker, the fact of 
the matter is a full, independent report was done, released to the 
public. The transparency is there. That is exactly I think the 
actions that the people of this province expect on behalf of 
ministers of the Crown. And that’s exactly what happened in 
this case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Lloydminster Seniors’ Care Facility 
 
Ms. Chartier: — There’s a group in Lloydminster called 
Concerned Citizens for Senior Care, and they have a good plan 
to improve seniors’ care in their region. They want to save and 
refurbish the Dr. Cooke Extended Care Centre because of the 
tremendous need for more seniors’ care spaces and services in 
their community. But they say this government refuses to listen 
to them. Instead this government continues to be full of excuses 
and keeps hiding behind the fact that Lloydminster is a border 
city. But that excuse doesn’t fly, Mr. Speaker. 
 



5496 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

This government just updated the bi-provincial health 
agreement for that city, and the Dr. Cooke facility is officially 
listed as an asset of the Saskatchewan’s Prairie North Health 
Region. Why is this government ignoring the people of 
Lloydminster who have good ideas about how to improve 
seniors’ care in their community? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly we are responding to the health care needs of people 
of Lloydminster. That’s why we put together a committee that 
involved both Alberta Health Services, the Ministry of Health, 
Prairie North Health Region, members of the community. 
That’s why we now have a new MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] that will guide the actions of all of those 
agencies over the next number of years. That’s why we have 
put money into primary health care in terms of the Co-op Plaza 
Building, which thankfully Alberta has also put, invested 
dollars into that facility to bring primary care under one roof. 
 
We’ve also invested in Home First/Quick Response. 
Lloydminster is our fourth community to have that $750,000 
program to help those seniors in their own homes, stay in their 
own home longer, especially after an acute care episode where 
they do not need long-term care. Alberta has invested into that 
program, and we’re thankful for that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that Alberta has 
agreed to build a new 60-bed long-term care facility which will 
replace the 55 beds that have been called for to be demolished 
over the next number of years, and so we’ll actually have a net 
five-bed increase in Lloydminster. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the seniors in Lloydminster say 
they are sick and tired of falling through the cracks because 
they live in a border city. It is absolutely unacceptable for this 
government to pretend it can’t do anything to stop the closure of 
a major wing of the Dr. Cooke Extended Care Centre. This 
government has a bi-provincial health agreement with the 
Government of Alberta, and once again the Dr. Cooke facility is 
officially listed as an asset of Saskatchewan’s Prairie North 
Health Region. 
 
To the minister: when will he stop with the unbelievable 
excuses and start delivering for the seniors of Lloydminster? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Dr. 
Cooke building is operated by Prairie North Health Region but 
it is owned by the Government of Alberta. There have been two 
reports calling for that wing of the Dr. Cooke facility to be 
demolished — one written under this government, the first 
written when the NDP were the government. So this is a 
long-term . . . This has been something a long time coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Alberta, what they have decided to do, based on the fact that 
they own the Dr. Cooke facility, they’ve agreed to demolish the 

55-bed wing. But they’ve agreed to build a 60-bed facility that 
will be on the Alberta side of the border, but that will be 
operated by Prairie North Health Region, which means the 
people of Lloydminster not only will have Home First/Quick 
Response to help those seniors stay at home longer, but they’ll 
actually have five additional beds than what they currently have 
today in Lloydminster. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration and 
Tourism. 
 

Edible Oils Dispute 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to inform members of the Legislative Assembly 
about the latest developments in the internal trade dispute our 
government has with the Government of Quebec over edible 
oils. Members will recall that back in January we successfully 
challenged Quebec through an AIT [Agreement on Internal 
Trade] trade dispute resolution process. 
 
We challenged Quebec’s restrictions preventing the sale and 
marketing of certain margarines, coffee whiteners, and dessert 
toppings in their market. Those restrictions deny market 
opportunities to Western oilseed producers and processors and 
fly in the face of well-established internal trade rules. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Our challenge was supported by the governments of Alberta, 
British Columbia, and Manitoba. A dispute resolution panel 
established under the AIT came down with its decision on April 
30th ruling in our favour. The panel ruled that Quebec’s 
restrictions unfairly deny market opportunities for our Western 
oilseed farmers and processors and are contrary to Quebec’s 
trade obligations under the Agreement on Internal Trade. 
 
The panel instructed Quebec to bring its dairy regulations in 
line with its AIT obligations. Quebec decided to appeal the 
panel’s decision, which brings us to today and the public appeal 
panel hearing that’s taking place here in Regina. The Quebec 
government presented its case this morning and our lawyers 
have been arguing our case this afternoon before the panel. I 
should note that this is the first time that the appeal process has 
been used under the AIT, so we’re in new territory for the role 
of an appeal panel. The panel will make its ruling on the appeal 
within 90 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s confident that the panel will 
once again rule in favour of Saskatchewan and the other 
Western provinces that have supported our challenge. The 
challenge has also been backed by producers from the 
Vegetable Oil Industry of Canada. Saskatchewan’s committed 
to fighting for free trade within Canada, and Saskatchewan 
continues to stand up for our oilseed producers and processors 
in their quest to market and sell their products in all parts of 
Canada. 
 
I know that all members of this House will join with me in 
supporting our government’s principled stand in this fight for 
trade fairness in Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5497 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 
the minister as well for providing the statement, his statement in 
advance. And as I’ve said on this matter before, this is an 
important matter. It’s important to oilseed producers and 
farmers across our province and Western Canada, and certainly 
we support the efforts of that minister, this government on this 
front. We wish them well in the appeal process that they’re 
engaged with right now. We thank as well the other Western 
provinces for working together as allies on this important file 
— Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia. And certainly we’re 
looking forward to a favourable, a fair, an important ruling for 
Saskatchewan oilseed farmers and producers. Thank you so 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, governing and 
leadership is often thought to be different things, but they 
shouldn’t be. They can’t be, especially in times of trouble. Last 
Thursday as Her Honour read the Throne Speech, I listened and 
tried to put it in context, given the events in Ottawa earlier that 
day and the tragedy just days before in Quebec. 
 
We do not live unto ourselves here in this incredible place, in 
this building, in this Saskatchewan. We are part of a world that 
is changing, and far too often it is a troubled and violent place. I 
believe that it will and it must call up out of each one us a 
strength of character that we may not know that we possess. 
 
What we all admire about the men and women of the military 
and our first responders is their willingness to always walk 
towards the danger, to confront the unknown or the unexpected 
head on. And we must take a page from their book, because our 
best defence will be as a result of preparation and planning and 
focus and taking risks. It’s all about leadership. 
 
Too often politics is swayed by cable TV or political 
correctness. The water is tested or the political pulse is taken 
before there is action. Too often in politics we wait for a parade 
to form, and then we rush to the front to lead. But that’s not 
how my government operates. With preparation and focus we 
will continue to lead this province and, by example, our country 
forward. We will face challenges, and we’ll lead the parade of 
those who want freedom and democracy and pragmatic 
responses to very complicated issues. That’s how the new 
Saskatchewan works and that’s how our government leads. 
 

What happened in Ottawa and Quebec is despicable. Our hearts 
are with the families of those who lost their loved ones to 
senseless violence. But we will respond to terror with resolve. 
We will preserve our way of life. We will preserve our political 
freedoms. We will preserve our diversity and our tolerance. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will not be changed by these events, nor 
will we compromise our values or our freedoms. But we will 
resolve to look the bullies in the eye and say, not here, not now, 
not in Saskatchewan, not in Canada, not ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we love about our province and our country 
is that there are so many more Corporal Nathan Cirillos and 
Warrant Officer Vincents than there are cowards who do not 
deserve to be named. But we’ll respond. All of us as individuals 
will step up and we’ll be vigilant. We must. If we see 
something, we must say something. We cannot and we will not 
make excuses for those who seek to undermine us by abusing 
the very freedoms that gave them the right to do so in the first 
place, the very freedoms that have been so hard won. 
 
Remembrance Day is just around the corner. And lest we forget 
those who sacrificed so much so we can have our extraordinary 
fortune, we will in their honour and respect to their sacrifices 
not be changed by this. 
 
Our Throne Speech was delivered despite the violence. We 
gathered here in our institutions because they are strong. Our 
MPs [Member of Parliament] gathered in parliament and they 
carried on. We’re going to be more vigilant as citizens and as 
governments. But our values will prevail because they are the 
core of freedom and democracy and civility. Our security rules 
and the systems may change but our sense of self will never. As 
leaders, those of us who are charged with governing through 
uncertain times, our government will move forward on behalf 
of the people of this wonderful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message given by Her Honour last Thursday 
outlining the goals of our government in the next year blends 
the definition of leadership and governing. It outlines the 
preparation and focus on the huge responsibility we know we 
were given at the last election. The Throne Speech was planned 
and printed before the tragedy, but one could read it believing it 
was a result of the tragedy. 
 
The message, keeping Saskatchewan strong, is a promise of 
security for our citizens, security for all our citizens, knowing 
their government is aware and has plans for issues of 
government responsibility. Security in knowing things like 
health care, knowing that the Patient First Review will guide 
our goal of making the system more responsive, more effective, 
and more efficient. 
 
Security knowing that the education system will work with all 
of its partners to develop a system that truly puts students first, 
whether it’s in our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system or 
in the post-secondary system. The education providers and the 
bricks and mortar around them play a vital role in training the 
leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Security knowing that agriculture is a huge contributing factor 
to our economy today and into the future. It’s always been the 
backbone of rural communities, but additionally we know that 
the value-added opportunities in agriculture is a huge part of the 



5498 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

growth plan in the future. 
 
There is security knowing that environmental issues are not at 
odds with economic objectives. 
 
There is securities for First Nations, knowing they must be and 
they are an integral part of our province’s future. 
 
There’s security for those planning to invest in businesses that 
want to look beyond the borders of Saskatchewan with a 
new-growth tax incentive to create new corporate offices and 
head offices here in our province. There’s a new-growth tax 
incentive tied to the creation of new jobs by manufacturers and 
processors as they expand their sales outside the province. 
There’s security for business and investors, knowing this 
government understands the need for new markets and free 
trade and the need for leadership and dispute resolution. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, there’s security for all of 
our citizens knowing they are the heart of our province, that 
enabling them to meet their personal goals and expectations is 
the key to Saskatchewan being the best place in the world to 
live, and through immigration, perhaps the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key is being able to meet personal . . . is to 
meet the personal goals through education and training to 
contribute to the economy so the economy can contribute to the 
personal life of each of us. There is security in knowing that 
you can provide for the people you love. 
 
Business has told our government that the biggest obstacle to 
growth is the lack of skilled labour. We acknowledge that there 
are hundreds of people who want to fully engage in our 
economy but they’re not ready. Therefore there is a great need 
for adult basic education services, and it remains a huge priority 
for our government. I know that even within the education seats 
there’s even more need for life skill classes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the child and family committee members know 
that to address the issues facing very many of our vulnerable 
individuals, the adult basic education services are vital. That’s 
why there’s an 86 per cent increase in the number of seats since 
2007. 
 
Additionally our government recognizes that too many of our 
citizens, through no fault of their own, have involvement with 
more than one of our human service ministries. Health, Social 
Services, Corrections, Policing, Education, Justice have clients 
that need or are involved as high users of all of these ministries. 
Our Premier recognized this sad reality more than two years 
ago and created the child and family committee. 
 
For too many years, programs have been reactive and not 
proactive. All governments wrestle with the outcomes of low 
education attainment, high crime rates, high incarceration 
numbers, poor health outcomes, and issues surrounding 
disability, mental health, and addictions, but always with 
reactive programming. Born from the stark reality of the needs 
of vulnerable people, the child and family committee has been 
part of initiating changes to break this cycle of despair and 
hopelessness. 
 
The social innovation work is starting to make a difference. The 

Hub model of crime prevention will be expanded to include 13 
communities. The model is being studied in other jurisdictions 
in Canada and in the United States. Professional people are 
working together to address the specific needs of single 
individuals. Individuals leaving correctional facilities without 
having boots so they can go to work, without having a house for 
them to stay, and they’re going to end up back in the system if 
we don’t make some changes. Mr. Speaker, the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program and the 
disability strategy will be addressing those whose needs are 
beyond their own control. 
 
We also recognize that the child welfare system is not about 
apprehending children but supporting families. It’s making a 
difference in the lives of so many families in our province. The 
work of ministries and CBOs [community-based organization] 
like SIGN [Society for the Involvement of Good Neighbours] 
and 601 Outreach and Prairie Spirit Connections, Kate’s Place, 
and numerous others are making the feeling of family a reality. 
We have family resource centres in Yorkton and Sandy Bay 
that are making a huge difference. 
 
We have a housing strategy with a commitment of over $340 
million. We have rental housing starts 34 times higher than they 
were in 2006, and Habitat for Humanity is giving people a 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s very first social impact bond, Sweet 
Dreams, is providing at-risk moms with affordable housing and 
support while they complete their education. This innovative 
idea is making a difference. This government believes there is a 
social conscience in their citizens, and they have the desire to 
help government make some changes. I want to thank Wally 
and Colleen Mah at Conexus Credit Union for their support for 
this very important social impact bond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe we can be leaders without trying 
different approaches. Obviously what was done in the past 
wasn’t working. The number of children in care was increasing. 
The number of people on social services was increasing. The 
number of people needing adult basic education and job training 
was increasing. And government continued to do things the 
same way. The leadership promise in the Throne Speech 
regarding social impact bond opportunities is, in my opinion, 
the innovation that’s going to make the biggest difference in the 
operation of government human services. 
 
Within the next few months, the Minister of Health will be 
releasing the mental health and addiction strategy that will 
discuss one of the biggest gaps we have in health care in our 
province. It’s an issue facing very, very many vulnerable 
people. And I want to publicly thank him for this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also been much attention and discussion 
around a poverty reduction strategy. I congratulate the Minister 
of Social Services for announcing the development of this 
strategy. This support is enormous right across the entire 
political spectrum, and it’s got to be evident even to the 
members opposite. The cross-ministry work already under way 
already has placed Saskatchewan at the second-lowest poverty 
level in Canada. We will continue to build on successes and 
work even harder to show Canada and the world that our very 
biggest natural resources are people, that citizens matter to all 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5499 

of us in our government, and the strategy announcement will 
pull together the work across government to make us leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we already have adult basic education, the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada, the SAID program, the disability 
strategy, a housing strategy, a soon mental health and addictions 
strategy, the Hub, family centres. Mr. Speaker, we’re pulling all 
of this work together under the ministry, and we’re so very 
proud of the work they’re doing. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d also like to thank the Minister of 
Government Relations for his help in my town of Clair when 
there was a train derailment. There’s a lot of people that work in 
emergency response that have made a difference and know that 
the safety feeling is so important to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the minute the people of Saskatchewan 
handed the responsibility of government to our party, we have 
always acknowledged that any success came not from 
government but from the people, the more than 1.125 million 
people who call Saskatchewan home. 
 
Our government recognizes the responsibility that comes with 
leadership, the areas where government should be involved, and 
the areas where they just shouldn’t. The Throne Speech stated 
clearly that our government will not spend one more taxpayer 
dollar on building liquor stores, Mr. Speaker, but we will invest 
money in highways, on infrastructure, schools, hospitals, 
long-term care facilities, water and sewer plants — the 
government responsibility that was handed to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to balance the budget. 
We’ll continue to use innovation — be it through lean projects, 
partnerships with the private sector, community-based 
organizations, and taxpayers — to grow our province. We are 
going to continue to lead, to listen to our citizens, to keep 
Saskatchewan strong, and to build a future. 
 
But if all remember, Her Honour’s last words at the end of this 
speech was about honouring those who served. Mr. Speaker, 
recognizing the sacrifices made by men and women who choose 
to serve our country is so very important. As a 30-year associate 
member of the Legion, I’m going to ask that you repeat with me 
at the end. 
 

They shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old: 
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn. 
At the going down of the sun and in the morning 
We will remember them. 

 
We will remember them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — We will remember them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak, to respond to the Throne Speech. And in 
doing so, I’d just like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, and 
touch on my own constituency who . . . The theme of this 

Throne Speech is keeping Saskatchewan strong. And I know 
when I go home and go into any of the communities in my 
constituency, you can certainly see those strengths that are out 
there now, and I think it’s very important that we keep building 
on those strengths and helping the people and assisting them in 
those communities to carry on with the good work that they’re 
doing and creating what’s created in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the good things that are happening out 
there in my constituency is, the community of Langenburg, who 
has been long in need of a brand new school out there, have put 
out tenders the other day. And guess what? We’re getting a 
brand new school in the community of Langenburg. And I 
know the people of that community and the kids and the 
families of that community are certainly looking forward to a 
new school, and it’ll certainly help to build the community of 
Langenburg going forward. 
 
The community of Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker, has built a 
brand new pool. A couple of years ago, a number of community 
members had a building committee and a fundraising 
committee out there, and through their hard work, they have got 
together and built, I would say, a state-of-the-art community 
pool in the community of Churchbridge. And those types of 
endeavours help to bring people to their community, help young 
families to attract them to that community and build. And the 
numbers, I think we see the population jumping in all the small 
communities around. 
 
Melville’s another good example, which was a small city. And 
actually the numbers were below city status for a while under 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker, but now those numbers have grown 
again. Mr. Speaker, we saw the AgStability through Crop 
Insurance expansion out in the city of Melville, which has 
created a number of jobs in that community and surrounding 
area. And for that matter — my colleague from Yorkton will I 
think back me on this — there’s a number of people from the 
city of Yorkton that actually work over in Crop Insurance 
through the AgStability program or the crop insurance program. 
 
The city of Melville, again, as community members got 
together and had fundraising and building committees out there, 
built a brand new stadium out there. And there’s a number of 
features to the new stadium. It’s not just strictly hockey, Mr. 
Speaker, for the Melville Millionaires junior hockey club but 
for all the younger kids and all the minor hockey that goes on in 
that community, but seniors. There’s a part of it is for seniors in 
that community, and there’s a convention centre that’s been 
utilized. There have been a number of occasions I had the good 
fortune to go to functions in the part that’s a convention centre. 
And it holds I believe around 400, 450 people if it’s full, Mr. 
Speaker, and just a good draw to the communities of Melville. 
 
So many good things happening out there, Mr. Speaker. I think, 
as we all know, there’s been mine expansions. I have the luxury 
of having a number of mines in my constituency, and those 
mine expansions have drew many young families into our area 
and again added to the population growth within this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I spent a number of years in this 
legislature under the NDP government, and we were of course 
in opposition. And I remember in our small communities — and 
I think everyone from a small community that’s a represented 



5500 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

constituency in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, would back me on 
this — when you went into town or you went to get your mail 
or you went to coffee row, most of us knew everybody in town. 
In fact most of them you knew by their first name. And the 
reason for that, Mr. Speaker, was because there was no new 
people coming into these communities. In fact one of the 
biggest events we used to have in our communities was 
going-away parties because many of the people in our 
communities were leaving for Alberta or Ontario or greener 
pastures somewhere, under an NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think some of the key things that happened in 
those communities many of us will never forget. If you had a 
house to sell, in fact some of these people that were moving out 
for greener pastures, Mr. Speaker, and they had a house and 
they were trying to sell it, in some cases you couldn’t give it 
away. And there was nothing wrong with the houses. There was 
no one moving in or that would move in to rural Saskatchewan 
to buy it because there was no jobs. There was no optimism 
under the NDP, and there was really nothing drawing people 
back into the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that has changed. I think every member from a 
rural constituency riding in this place will say one of the best 
signs we see at home is that we don’t know half of the people in 
our communities. It’s young families, young kids. And it’s a 
growing province, and it’s getting better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to talk on the Throne 
Speech in a minute when I get to it, but I’m a little busy right 
now. Tough times to be a member of the NDP. You know, I’ve 
been listening out there. Since I’ve not been in cabinet, I have a 
bit more time to follow up on some of the things that are 
happening in here, especially when session’s not on. You know, 
I follow Murray Mandryk of course — I couldn’t miss — and 
some of the other columnists that write. 
 
But I also listen to the members in the opposition, and I think, 
well, directly of the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
for Rosemont. I find it amazing, as I’m sure some of my 
colleagues do, that when any of the media or anyone asks them 
about something they did under their 16 years of government, 
they’re getting to the point where they’re almost saying it right 
out loud that we weren’t here then, so you can’t blame us for 
this. Well those of us that have been here for a number of years 
find that really amazing because for 16 years the NDP, under 
Roy Romanow and Lorne Calvert, their main excuse was it was 
Grant Devine’s fault. Everything was Grant Devine’s fault, 
whether it was SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] or Navigata, whatever, you know, 
whatever ball they dropped that day, whether it was closing of 
52 hospitals or the school closures. 
 
I know they get up in question period and they’ll say, well we 
need a new long-term care home here or we need a new school 
here. But I remember under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the biggest 
thing they did to schools in rural Saskatchewan was close them. 
How many times did we have meetings where people from 
small communities would call us as MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] and say, can you help us out? They’re 
going to close our school. Well that problem has changed 
dramatically now, Mr. Speaker. In fact they invite us now to 
meetings where they are actually planning for a new school and 

meeting with the Minister of Education or the Finance minister 
or people like that, and progress is happening out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that the Leader of the Opposition 
and the member for Rosemont are trying to distance themselves 
from the NDP. I actually wonder what the other members on 
the opposite side think of that because it’s the NDP party that’s 
got them here. They were elected by diehard members of the 
NDP, be it that there’s only nine of them left, but there’s still a 
few out there that are strong supporters. They must really frown 
on the Leader of the Opposition especially saying that I can’t be 
blamed for Roy Romanow’s record, or I can’t be blamed for 
Lorne Calvert’s record or Eldon Lautermilch. 
 
Or I think of Clay Serby, who used to come from Yorkton. 
Remember Mr. Serby? He was going to do all these wonderful 
things. The member for Yorkton I know knows exactly what I 
say. He would go home and say one thing. He’s going to do all 
this. I remember when he was in Agriculture, I couldn’t believe 
what this guy was going to do. He was going to buy all the hog 
barns in the province and raise pigs. We know how that turned 
out. That wasn’t a great venture. God help me, I was a cattle 
farmer. I’m glad he left cattle alone. Mr. Speaker, there was so 
many I can think of. 
 
My brother-in-law, Mr. Upshall, he was Ag minister for a 
while. It wasn’t Highways. I can’t blame him for that, but I can 
sure blame him for the Agriculture portfolio. 
 
But I remember the member for Athabasca was Highways 
minister. And now that same member, Mr. Speaker, gets up and 
says, you should be building this road up north, or you should 
be doing this to the highways. Mr. Speaker, that member was 
minister of Highways, who did absolutely nothing. And I know 
well, Mr. Speaker, about that member because I used to sit with 
him as a Liberal in this legislature. And that’s one of the 
reasons that we’re on this side in government and he’s still on 
that side in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be too critical of the 
members opposite. I remember from this side of the House, 
when we were over there in opposition and there was only eight 
of us, it’s a big job, Mr. Speaker. But the problem is, the 
members of the opposition seem to have is that they’re critical 
of everything that’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier will be 
the first one to say that it’s not all the Government of 
Saskatchewan that’s creating all the prosperity in this province. 
It’s the people of Saskatchewan. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? Before that party opposite, before those members on 
the other side of this House ever get an opportunity to get over 
here, they have to understand that, that it’s the people . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the member from Athabasca 
to come to order. Currently the member from Saltcoats-Melville 
has the floor. Other members will have their opportunity to 
enter into the debate. I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope it’s 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5501 

nothing I said, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s so many good 
things happening in this province. I guess it’s a waste of time to 
really talk about the members opposite record. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in June employment hit a record high of 
577,000 people working in our province. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
just a tremendous sign of what’s to come, and that’s why the 
Throne Speech talked about keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
In July, Mr. Speaker, unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per 
cent — the lowest unemployment rate ever recorded. Mr. 
Speaker, a short seven or eight years ago, this was unheard of, 
stats like this, where we’re either leading the country or right 
along, right with Alberta, the top in most categories, right 
across the country of Canada. Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate and the fastest 
rate of job creation anywhere in the country of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these things are happening with a balanced 
budget, and we want to thank the Minister of Finance and 
treasury board and all of those members that put in many, many 
hours to make sure that the budget is balanced, as well as 
helping to promote the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008, ministries and Crown corporations 
have spent $16 billion on a range of capital projects including 
hospitals, highways, schools, and power plants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch in a minute, and just before 
the member from Athabasca got a little riled up on the other 
side, I was talking about highways and how he was minister and 
things didn’t seem to improve much. But I have to commend 
our Minister of Highways, Mr. Speaker. And one of the areas 
specifically is the passing lanes where I go when I go home and 
back and forth into Regina, is the passing lanes from Balgonie 
to Fort Qu’Appelle. And, Mr. Speaker, from all the people that 
I’ve talked to, and many of them travel for health care or 
whatever it is where they come into the city, they say this is one 
of the most positive things out there. Even from a safety aspect 
when people that would normally, in some cases, be in a bit of a 
hurry and pull out to pass when it wasn’t safe or when it was 
storming, well, Mr. Speaker, now I’ve noticed that pretty well 
all of the traffic, maybe with the odd exception, waits for the 
passing lanes, takes their opportunity and passes, and that 
congestion has certainly been relieved to a great extent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of projects happening under 
Highways. On Highway 16 of course, the work is beginning on 
the twinning project from Saskatoon to Clavet for the expansion 
and the twinned highway there. On Highway 7, new passing 
lanes between Delisle and Rosetown are under construction. 
And I was by there the other day, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure 
they’re going to be appreciated every bit as much as they are 
from Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle. Mr. Speaker, also 
pre-construction work continues on the twinning of Highway 7 
from Vanscoy to Delisle and Highway 6 and 39 from Regina 
south to Estevan. 
 
All these communities of course know the need of these 
highways and how urgently it’s needed and these things, thanks 
to the Minister of Highways and the government of the day, 
these things are beginning to happen. So certainly every time I 
come by those passing lanes in Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle, I 

thank our Minister of Highways for those changes and that 
efficiency that he’s helped bring out there. 
 
Mr. Minister, over the last seven years, our government has 
spent more than 700 million on education infrastructure — a 
268 per cent increase. Forty new schools have been built or else 
are in the planning stage. This year, new schools have opened 
or will open soon in Swift Current, Lloydminster, White City, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. And again, Mr. Speaker, I mention the 
one in Langenburg in my community that’s starting to be built 
very quickly and hopefully by the fall of 2016 is ready for 
students. Also, Mr. Speaker, I should mention schools in La 
Ronge and Lumsden have overgone major renovations. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province, and I know the municipalities 
especially because I have had some experience out there and I 
had it under the NDP — in fact it’s one of the reasons I actually 
got into politics — but are very appreciative about the funding 
and the revenue sharing coming from this government in the 
last seven years. The 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales 
tax], Mr. Speaker, is a reliable part of the funding that they 
know every year ahead of time what they’re going to get. It was 
something that we didn’t know before. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
went through the ’90s under the NDP government where 
municipalities of all sizes were cut in funding dramatically out 
there, at a time when we needed, if we were ever going to grow, 
we needed that expansion of funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the ag sector. I 
might mention, Mr. Speaker, a large part of the ag sector, Mr. 
Speaker, has had one of the best crops they’ve ever had last 
year in 2014. But also this year, we’ve had flooding out there 
again. From last year, Mr. Speaker, to maybe what would be an 
average crop out there and, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
raised a point of order. I would ask him to make his point of 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Just moments ago the member from Athabasca was heard by 
many members, I believe on both sides of the House, uttering a 
phrase of profanity and unparliamentary language. Again, it 
was heard by various members in the legislature. We would ask 
at this time that he do the honourable thing, withdraw and 
apologize for that remark. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
guess we’ll take the point of order under advisement from our 
side. But given the inability of members to comment on the 
presence or absence of members, I’m a bit constrained in the 
remarks I’m able to make at this time. But in that case, Mr. 
Speaker, I think I’ll turn the floor over to my colleague, the 



5502 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

member from Athabasca. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Having 
got caught up in the moment, I find that the comments I made 
were not appropriate. So therefore I apologize and I withdraw. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I was 
saying, I think I’d be remiss in replying to this Throne Speech 
about agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and the large part that 
agriculture plays in the province of Saskatchewan. As we all 
know, Mr. Speaker, last year was a record crop in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, yourself included, and many on 
this side of the House that are involved in the farming 
community out there yet, I think we had a crop last year that we 
can only envy probably for many years. And hopefully though 
we get the opportunity to have more like that. 
 
This year, not quite so good, Mr. Speaker: probably on average, 
an average crop right across the province. But on my side on the 
east side of the province, Mr. Speaker, and I know right down 
to the US [United States] border, very, very wet again this 
summer. A number of areas flooded out there. So the crops and 
the production and the grades will not be probably as good as 
we would like to see them, Mr. Speaker. But on the other hand, 
I think it’s one of those crops, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been 
there before. We’ve actually had a lot worse than this. And I 
think the grades have probably been lower in some cases other 
years, but we’ll certainly get through. 
 
But I think why I mention this, Mr. Speaker, is once again we 
want to thank the farming community for the part that they play 
in this province, the part that they help to the growth of this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the pluses, and I 
think we all many of us that are getting a little grey hair or 
maybe no hair left at all, remember very well where agriculture 
was the main engine of this province and when agriculture 
didn’t go, the whole province was in trouble. 
 
Well now with the diversity that’s coming in our economy right 
across, whether it’s oil and gas or potash or uranium or so many 
other things, Mr. Speaker, with the growth that we’re seeing in 
our cities, it’s almost a mushrooming effect.  
 
You know I can think of the city of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, 
where I do a lot of our business, a lot of people from my 
community either in Melville or in Yorkton go. And I know my 
colleague from Yorkton will back me on this: it’s so good to see 
up there, whether it’s new immigrants that have moved into our 
cities and towns out there, but that are filling jobs out there that 
are very, very much needed in those communities. And I know 
a lot of businesses out there without these immigrants would 
have a very, very hard time running their business and having 
the service provided. And we very much appreciate that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, being that I’ve taken probably more than my 
fair share of time, I would just like to thank the people of the 
Melville-Saltcoats constituency, Mr. Speaker, and appreciate 

the opportunity to respond to the Throne Speech. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am delighted and honoured to be able to 
stand and speak in support of the 2014 Speech from the Throne 
which opened this, the fourth session of the twenty-seventh 
legislature of Saskatchewan. And while the speech will focus 
and give due attention to the Speech from the Throne, I have 
some initial comments, perhaps not surprisingly, on themes that 
warrant some attention at this time. 
 
First, and again not surprisingly given the events of the day, that 
is the events of October 22nd, the first relates to the 
indefensible, senseless, cowardly, and indeed craven attack on 
Corporal Nathan Cirillo, which itself, we saw that attack 
preceded by a couple of days in the hit-and-run death of 
Warrant Officer Vincent in Quebec. We know that these attacks 
— and in fact the subsequent attack, the armed assault in fact on 
the Parliament of Canada which highlighted key areas of 
courage and unique capacity of the Sergeant-at-Arms, among 
many others — when we see attacks like this on prized 
Canadian institutions, we know that in a combined, collective, 
and civic sense of clarity, there is much to be thankful for as we 
live in the democratic state that we do in the Western world. 
 
Within this Legislative Assembly, decisions were made. 
Appropriate decisions were made. Timely decisions were made: 
first to move the ceremonies inside, thereby ensuring the safety 
and security of members of our armed forces, and secondly, and 
importantly, to carry on among the most basic, fundamental, 
and foundational aspects of our democracy, especially as we 
know it within the parliamentary system, our Throne Speech. 
That speech on that day, under those circumstances, 
demonstrated that even — or perhaps most especially — on a 
Canadian day of infamy, that our freedom to assemble and to 
deliberate and to take decisions on behalf of citizens and 
constituents would not be deterred nor denied. 
 
There are a number of thanks to those who participated in those 
decisions: to our Speaker, to our own Sergeant-at-Arms, and to 
leaders here within the Assembly, but most especially in a 
number of security forces that ensured the safety of the 
endeavour of that day. 
 
As I prepared aspects of my remarks, I thought it would be 
relevant to look at what a Throne Speech was in the past. And 
so I thought perhaps most fittingly a century in the past, and I 
went back to 1914, to the opening months of the First World 
War. And there on page 10 of Hansard from September 15th, 
1914, there are some phrases that both resonate and indeed offer 
reassurance even today. 
 
The first from 1914 is a notion of a unity of sentiment, which 
certainly we see in Saskatchewan and across Canada in the 
subsequent days after these attacks. The second phrase is the 
notion of “. . . a steady determination and calm confidence 
regarding an honourable outcome.” This notion of a unity of 
sentiment combined with steady determination, they offer clear 
messages for all of us as we reflect on more recent events about 
the role of our institutions, our communities, in fact the very 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5503 

nature of citizenship in both Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
The second set of preliminary remarks will simply and sincerely 
offer a thanks to the people of Saskatoon Greystone, my 
legislative colleagues, and of course friends and family 
members that have supported, enabled, encouraged, and on 
occasion endured my presence and service in this Assembly. 
There are not many more occasions that I will have to stand and 
speak to this Assembly, and so I will simply offer my sincere 
thanks with great humility and a sense of honour at the 
opportunity at having been allowed to serve in the capacities 
that I have. 
 
And now to the topic of this day, of our deliberations and the 
Speech from the Throne. There are several themes that stand 
out. One has been mentioned and highlighted by others, the 
notion of keeping Saskatchewan strong. And when we think 
about that strength, we think about the number of people 
working. That really helps reflect the number of families that 
are prospering.  
 
So when we think about in June employment hitting a record of 
more than 577,000 people working in our province; or in July 
where the unemployment rate hit a record low of 3.2 per cent, 
the best unemployment rate ever recorded; or in September, 
where Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate and the 
fastest rate of job creation anywhere in Canada — all this as 
Saskatchewan has another balanced budget, all of this while 
Moody’s upgraded Saskatchewan’s credit rating to a AAA, the 
highest possible credit rating — this is significant in an era that 
has seen credit ratings put in question and jeopardy around the 
world. For the first time in our history, we see AAA credit 
ratings. 
 
So if we are seeing a Saskatchewan that is strong, we also see a 
province that’s on the move. Indeed Saskatchewan’s population 
today is more than 1,125,000 people, representing an increase 
of more than 120,000 people in the last seven years: (a) it sets a 
very, very clear pattern of growth that’s being sustained and 
continued, (b) it highlights in stark contrast seven years since 
the 2007 election versus those preceding the 2007 election 
when population was on the decline. 
 
And if we think of Tony Blair’s simple, straightforward 
measure for a jurisdiction, it goes something like this: “Are 
people moving in or are people moving out?” And today in 
Saskatchewan, people are staying in Saskatchewan and moving 
to Saskatchewan because of the strength and momentum that is 
under way within this province, in large measure due to people 
right across this province, people right across this province who 
believe in investing in Saskatchewan and helping to grow the 
economy in communities of this province. 
 
So if we think about a strong Saskatchewan, a province on the 
move, then we can also think about momentum. We can think 
about for example the first new potash mine to be built in the 
province in over 40 years, not far from Regina, the K+S Legacy 
project near Bethune. And we can think of additional 
employment opportunities that come from that kind of 
initiative. 
 
We also see, if we look to the North — and we know how 
important the North is within our province — uranium 

production is also on the rise in fact with the opening of 
Cameco’s Cigar Lake mine, the first new uranium mine to be 
built in Saskatchewan in over a decade. And not so long ago we 
saw Saskatchewan uranium being unloaded, thanks to new 
export opportunities in China. We know how important this is, 
especially for northern communities and especially as it relates 
to First Nations and Métis employment opportunities. 
 
We also are going to continue to focus on setting goals to help 
sustain and maintain the momentum that’s under way. To meet 
a goal for example of doubling exports by 2020, we’re going to 
introduce and see a movement on a new-growth tax incentive 
tied to the creation of new jobs by manufacturers and 
processors as they expand their sales outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And indeed we’re going to continue to see trade missions 
undertaken with the assistance of the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership. This is vitally important and in fact we’re 
delighted to help welcome Chad Fleck, the new CEO. He grew 
up in Saskatchewan, went to the University of Saskatchewan’s 
Edwards School of Business, achieved an M.B.A. [Master of 
Business Administration], and was able to undertake some 
additional studies at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology]. He has a distinguished foreign service record in 
both the Americas and in Asia and now he has moved back to 
Saskatchewan — one of our expats that is helping to ensure that 
we are better connected with trade opportunities, investment 
opportunities, and career prospects for Saskatchewan people. 
 
When we think about what that looks like, we can also highlight 
that spirit of global engagement. In fact that’s why we’re 
supporting the comprehensive European trade agreement or 
CETA [comprehensive economic and trade agreement] which 
will open many new markets for Saskatchewan exports. We’re 
also supportive of the Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement 
which will give Saskatchewan exporters equal footing with 
their European and American counterparts in South Korea. That 
economy alone is a $1.3 trillion economy and a real opportunity 
for Saskatchewan exporters to continue to ensure that our 
record exports continue with momentum. 
 
It’s not enough to simply look outside of Canada for 
opportunities. Our Premier and our government understands 
that there’s a leadership role to play to help ensure that we’re 
strengthening Canada’s Agreement on Internal Trade because 
barriers remain in place between provinces, and we know that 
we must continue to work on lowering and removing these 
barriers. 
 
When we think about that sense of a strong Saskatchewan — 
Saskatchewan on the move and of a Saskatchewan that has 
momentum, where we’re globally engaged and also focused on 
ways to enhance confederation — we understand the value of 
our most precious resource, that is, our human resource, our 
neighbours. That’s why our province continues to invest in key 
areas of post-secondary education and skills training. In fact 
what we’re going to see is, in the upcoming fiscal year we will 
increase the number of adult basic education seats by 775. We 
know how important these seats are. And in fact that will help 
bring the total number of seats to more than 9,300 which is an 
increase of 60 per cent since 2007. We’re also going to see our 



5504 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

government boost the number of apprenticeship seats by 300, 
bringing the total number of seats to 7,000, an 86 per cent 
increase since 2007. 
 
This marks and continues the progress that we’ve been able to 
demonstrate, that is investing in Saskatchewan young people, 
especially with an emphasis on First Nations and Métis young 
people to help ensure that we’re bridging and eliminating the 
education and employment gaps that for too long have offered 
barriers to too many within our Saskatchewan. We’re investing 
in our young people. We’re attracting back our expats, and 
we’re welcoming newcomers from across the country and 
around the world. 
 
This sense of a strong Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan that is 
on the move, that is a Saskatchewan that has real momentum, a 
Saskatchewan that’s investing more in our young people to 
ensure that more families have more opportunities right here in 
the province is also complemented by our investment in 
infrastructure, in the needs of communities. In fact since 2008, 
ministries and Crown corporations have invested close to $16 
billion on a range of capital projects including hospitals, 
highways, schools, and power plants. 
 
Not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, we had an opportunity to see 
the value in this kind of investment as people gathered in 
Saskatoon for the official opening of the construction for our 
children’s hospital. That’s not simply about Saskatoon. That’s 
about serving the needs of a growing Saskatchewan, especially 
the needs of our kids and our young families. We are making 
and we are overseeing an investment, a record investment that’s 
helping to build the new Saskatchewan. 
 
Speaking directly within Saskatoon Greystone, we can see that 
kind of progress highlighted by the construction that’s under 
way at St. Matt’s, at a school that continues to see increasing 
enrolments, needed more capacity, and now we see the 
construction well under way.  
 
Another example of these kind of investments relates to the 
brand new school that I just had a tour of in La Ronge that, 
thanks to the vision that was offered by this side of the House, 
by our government, of providing more opportunities for more 
students, in this case in and around La Ronge and Air Ronge 
and to those that come in from the Lac La Ronge First Nation. 
 
When we think about other aspects of the work that’s 
highlighted in the Speech from the Throne, I think it’s 
important that we highlight that our government is set to amend 
The Human Tissue Gift Act to help modernize Saskatchewan’s 
organ donation and transplant process to reduce wait times for 
people who need organ transplants. Among those who will 
benefit are 100 people who have waited up to two years for a 
cornea transplant, a straightforward initiative that’s going to 
enhance the quality of life for people right here in the province 
by taking this important action and moving forward on it. 
 
When we look at other initiatives that have been highlighted, 
we see that we continue to support communities. In fact as a 
result of the province’s predictable and sustainable 
revenue-sharing program, municipalities already know that they 
will receive record revenue sharing, in fact in the order of about 
$265 million in next year’s budget — more than double what it 

was when our government took office. And we know how 
important those dollars are regarding the quality of life for 
people across Saskatchewan. 
 
We can also see continued investments in post-secondary 
education. Programs like the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings, and the graduate retention program are all helping to 
ensure that post-secondary education continues to be 
increasingly affordable and accessible but is also defined by 
that spirit of excellence. In fact for the graduate retention 
program, we anticipate that this year there will be between 50 
and 60,000 graduates who are participating in and benefiting 
from this remarkable program, remarkable because it’s helping 
to ensure that Saskatchewan’s young people are staying right 
here and contributing to the growth and success of their 
province. 
 
We’ve also seen that through recent legislation and other 
initiatives that the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology has officially become known as Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic. This offers that institution an opportunity to 
modernize as it provides a broader array of programs serving 
the needs of more Saskatchewan students but also more 
Saskatchewan employers. 
 
When we think about key areas of innovation, obviously the 
recent launch of Boundary dam 3 offers the world with a fully 
integrated post-combustion carbon capture system, the likes of 
which is unique. This is a leading initiative for the world. It’s a 
defining feature that will help to remove the equivalent of more 
than 250,000 vehicles off Saskatchewan roads each year. And 
we know that this kind of initiative is going to help to ensure 
that we in Saskatchewan can continue to rely upon our coal 
reserves and at the same time help clean up that coal and help 
pay greater attention to our environment. 
 
We also see that through the construction of Saskatchewan’s 
cyclotron and radioisotope facility at the University of 
Saskatchewan, this laboratory, which I have had the opportunity 
to have a tour of, offers a unique partnership between the 
federal government and the province and the university with 
real outcomes. That is providing Saskatchewan researchers with 
the resources they require to develop radiopharmaceuticals, that 
is drugs containing radioactive materials that will help in both 
the diagnosis and treatment for people in this province. And 
these drugs can be utilized to detect, diagnose, and treat 
diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and MS 
[multiple sclerosis]. 
 
These are the kind of initiatives and innovations that are helping 
to enhance the quality of life for people in Saskatchewan, while 
also helping to ensure that we’re adding value to value change 
that reach all the way back to our natural resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that I think warrants specific mention 
relates to an initiative that is public and private in its character. 
It focuses on providing more opportunities for young mothers 
and their kids. It makes sense, and it’s going to help make a real 
difference. And that is, our government was pleased to 
announce earlier this year the opening of Sweet Dreams, the 
new home in Saskatoon that’s going to provide at-risk single 
mothers with affordable housing and support while they 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5505 

complete their education and learn life and parenting skills. 
 
This project — and this is important — this project was made 
possible through a social impact bond funding model, the first 
of its kind in Canada, with key private partners including 
Colleen and Wally Mah as they stepped forward and said, let’s 
use social innovation to help families, to help our kids, and to 
help our communities. 
 
During the Banff Forum, which was held in Saskatoon in 
September, this very model was drawn upon by a speaker from 
outside of Canada to highlight the progress that Saskatchewan 
and Canada continue to make in key areas of social innovation 
that is helping to address the endemic causes of poverty and 
disadvantage through new, creative, and courageous ways of 
moving forward. 
 
In that same spirit, the Speech from the Throne consisted of a 
living document, as the minister has now come to characterize 
it, a living document that relates to a poverty reduction strategy. 
And we want to thank the organization of Poverty Costs for its 
work on this important issue. And we also want to highlight the 
work of individuals like Alison Robertson, Dr. Ryan Meili, and 
Dr. Cory Neudorf who have stepped forward, along with others, 
to ensure that we focus on reducing poverty and really 
providing more opportunities for more people to reach their full 
potential here within Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the speech drew to a close and indeed as my 
comments draw to a close, there was an opportunity to honour 
those who serve, which seems most fitting especially in this 
time where we reflect on events of last week. We were able to 
see that within the Speech from the Throne the Saskatchewan 
Scholarship of Honour was highlighted. This is an initiative that 
since 2009, when we established it, continues to provide a 
$5,000 scholarship available to returning military personnel and 
to those severely injured or those that have paid the ultimate 
price in their service. We think this is an important gesture, a 
sincere gesture of our eternal thanks for service to this great 
country of Canada. 
 
So as I look back 100 years to the Speech from the Throne from 
1914, I found that there was another phrase that captures 
something that’s permanent within Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan’s contribution to Canada: that is, a notion of a 
direct contribution. Then there was a notion of direct 
contribution to a war effort that was beginning. In this sense, we 
hope there’s a direct contribution and sincere sign of 
appreciation for those that have served their country so ably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these themes in mind, and with great 
appreciation for the opportunity to be able to speak in this 
Assembly this afternoon, I’m very pleased to be supporting this 
Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as we round the 
corner to Remembrance Day, and before I get into my formal 
reply to the Throne Speech, I want to add condolences on 

behalf of my constituents, my family, and my friends to the 
families of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal 
Nathan Cirillo. 
 
There is no greater sacrifice than one’s life to stand up for the 
values that all Canadians believe in. I also want to add my 
personal thank you to these officers and to all military officers 
for their continuing vigilance, courageousness, and willingness 
to stand guard to defend our democracy. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to formally thank all our security 
personnel, those that protect all who enter into our Legislative 
Assembly, and the police and the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] officers that so quickly came last week to help 
us provide a safe venue for all our guests, our staff, and 
parliamentarians. 
 
Last week our province hosted heads of mission from Ottawa’s 
foreign diplomatic corps from more than 50 countries around 
the world. These ambassadors shared with me their admiration 
for our great country of Canada. They were very interested in 
the opportunities that Saskatchewan has to offer. Despite the 
horrific and tragic events of the past week, they saw how our 
country rallied together, how our province refused to let 
democracy be thwarted. We went ahead with the Speech from 
the Throne. This Speech from the Throne highlighted our 
strong, growing province, the strength and determination of our 
people, and outlined our government’s plan to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will also take a few moments to thank my 
dedicated team back home that help to keep my constituents 
apprised of what is happening in Prince Albert Northcote. They 
help me to get the answers that the constituents need. That team 
is Trudy Deranger, Brent Gerlach, Pam Sukut, and Donna Barr. 
I will also take a few minutes to thank the team of hard-working 
individuals behind the scenes right here in this building that 
help MLAs and ministers alike. Mr. Speaker, I won’t name 
them all as that would take up the rest of my time. So thank you 
from the bottom of my heart to all the behind-the-scenes people 
for all that you do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one very special person that keeps me 
grounded and provides me with an unbiased perspective on the 
work that I do. He is my greatest supporter and strongest critic. 
Mr. Speaker, that man is my husband, Allan Jurgens, and he 
just quite possibly might be a saint in the making. You see, Mr. 
Speaker, Al and I celebrated our 40th wedding anniversary 
earlier this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my extended family is a hard-working family, a 
family with many, many members. This summer three aunts 
and uncles on my father’s side have died, all in their 90s. Each 
of these people had nearly a century of wisdom. Through the 
years I visited with these wise ancestors, with eight and nine 
decades of wisdom, and I learned how much better life in 
Saskatchewan is now, in the past seven years, than what it was 
in the past when the NDP were in power. 
 
Here is one fine example of this. Peter Froess — my paternal 
uncle; bless his soul — was 92 years old when he died a couple 
of weeks ago. He comes from a family that were, and still are, a 
very gentle lot. Uncle Pete lived with my family and holds a 



5506 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

special place in my family’s heart. Over 92 years Uncle Pete 
experienced many hardships, including when he was about 10 
years of age when his shoes were put onto the door of the oven 
of the wood stove to dry. Well lo and behold, someone came 
along and closed the oven door and those shoes got dried up 
and burnt, rendered them useless. There was no money for a 
new pair. Now sometime in the past seven years, Uncle Pete felt 
fortunate enough to buy a frivolous item, a teddy bear for Peter, 
because as Uncle Pete said, he never ever had a teddy bear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might seem like an insignificant event, but it is 
not. This man was born in 1922 and experienced first-hand 
many hardships the dirty thirties provided. There was no money 
for anything but the basic necessities. It is easy to see how our 
wise seniors find it very difficult to spend on frivolous items. 
This story gives us a powerful example of how much better our 
province is doing now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the other side of my family is a long line of 
strong, hard-working, family-oriented women, women of 
courage. One of these women was my great grandma Elizabeth 
Bendig, bless her soul, who lived to be 101 years. She was our 
nah nah grandma. You see, Mr. Speaker, every time we went to 
see her she would say, “Nah, nah, nah, look who’s come to see 
me.” She was my maternal grandmother to my mother. I never 
did know my mother’s mother. Elizabeth’s daughter Matilda 
died when my mother was a wee child. 
 
Great grandma Bendig was born in 1880 in another country. At 
the turn of the last century, Elizabeth was one of the many 
immigrants that left her home and everything she knew to come 
to this country seeking opportunity. There is not enough time to 
share the many trials, tribulations, and triumphs this woman 
had, but I will tell you that the impact and influence on our 
family was very strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another strong woman in our family, our 
daughter-in-law Jarilyn who is married to our son Tyler. Jarilyn 
is a strong, hard-working, and courageous woman. She too was 
born in another country and left her home and everything she 
knew to come to Canada because of opportunity. I am 
witnessing first-hand the strong impact and influence Jarilyn 
has. Tyler and Jarilyn’s daughter Jasmine Victoria is our newest 
granddaughter. As we witnessed Jasmine’s baptism earlier this 
month, I wondered what Jasmine’s future might be like if she 
lives to be 100. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a peek into three centuries: past, present, 
and future. It is a privileged perspective. These women give life 
to Saskatchewan’s motto, our motto, “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
At the turn of the last century, there was no Internet, no 
technology that would support the instant transmission of 
information. Today there is: technology that helps our province 
connect with each other and with the world, technology that 
allows and indeed encourages our citizens to provide feedback 
and suggestions for important initiatives such as the 
student-first consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 1,500 online submissions were received 
for this consultation alone. Our ability to connect with each 
other will be made stronger with upgrades to Internet access 

and speed at regional colleges throughout the province and with 
improvements to high-speed Internet and cellphone services in 
hundreds of Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the turn of the last century there was enthusiasm 
and excitement in this province. The population was growing. 
At the turn of this century, under NDP rule, there was doom and 
gloom. Our population was declining. People were leaving for 
opportunities elsewhere. Saskatchewan was a place to be from. 
 
Today under the governance of the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Saskatchewan’s population is at an all-time high. 
Over 1.125 million people now call Saskatchewan home. Our 
province remains on track to reach the population target our 
Saskatchewan Party government set, and that is to have 1.2 
million people that call Saskatchewan home by the year 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to work hard to 
keep Saskatchewan strong. A strong economy is the foundation 
of a strong province with an excellent quality of life for all our 
people. It is how we are able to spend money on health care, 
housing, education, and infrastructure, infrastructure that fosters 
innovation. Infrastructure such as Saskatchewan’s cyclotron and 
radioisotope facility at the University of Saskatchewan that is in 
its final stages of construction. This $25.5 million laboratory is 
a partnership between the federal government, the province, and 
the university. It is a laboratory that will provide Saskatchewan 
researchers with the resources they require to develop 
radiopharmaceutical drugs containing radioactive materials. 
These drugs can be used to detect, diagnose, and treat diseases 
such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and multiple 
sclerosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is rich with uranium deposits, 
uranium that is needed to produce the radioactive materials 
necessary to develop the radiopharmaceuticals needed to detect, 
diagnose, and treat these many diseases. Uranium production is 
increasing with the opening of Cameco’s Cigar Lake mine, the 
first new uranium mine to be built in Saskatchewan in over a 
decade. This mining is an important source of employment for 
our northern residents. As of December 2013, there were 1,669 
out of the 3,570 employees that are residents of Saskatchewan’s 
North that are employed at northern mines. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems like many of the rest of them live in Prince Albert. Our 
airport has very large, dedicated parking lots for employees 
flying into our North to work in the mines. People that have 
First Nations and Métis heritage make up about 40 per cent of 
all mine workers employed in northern mines. 
 
Employment at northern mines requires advanced skills and 
training. Potential employees told our government that they 
could not get that advanced training because there was this huge 
wait-list for adult basic education. We listened. We heard. We 
took action. In the upcoming fiscal year, our Saskatchewan 
Party government will increase the number of adult basic 
education training seats by 775, which will bring the total 
number of seats to 9,355. As well our government will boost the 
number of apprenticeship seats by 300, bringing the total 
number of seats to 7,000. That is an 86 per cent increase since 
2007. 
 
Saskatchewan’s apprenticeship system is one of the strongest in 
Canada and a powerful tool in addressing the labour force 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5507 

challenges we are facing. Thanks to the hard work of the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission and the many teachers, mentors, and employers 
involved in the apprenticeship process, our people are gaining 
the skills and training needed to help keep Saskatchewan’s 
economy strong. It is another way that we are working to ensure 
that all people in Saskatchewan have opportunities to 
participate in our strong economy, that all people have the 
opportunity to reach their full potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency is rich with diversity — a 
diversity of people, educational institutions, businesses, and 
historical buildings, to name just a few. Nearly half of Prince 
Albert Northcote constituents have relatives living in our North, 
are from the North, or work in the North. This makes for very 
strong ties to Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could not have been more pleased when our 
Premier asked me to be Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 
Government Relations, Northern Saskatchewan. Our Minister 
of Government Relations, the MLA from Rosetown-Elrose, and 
his ministry have been doing great work in our North. 
 
The 2013 northern benefit summary gives an appreciation of 
how Saskatchewan and its people benefit from mine and mill 
operations located throughout the northern half of our province. 
Over 3,500 people are employed on site and over 40 per cent of 
the northerners that are employed as mine workers have a First 
Nations and Métis heritage. Many socio-economic benefits are 
provided by mining and mill operations such as scholarships 
and awards to northern students. The $558 million in goods and 
services purchased from northern companies and the $92 
million in wages paid to northern employees goes a long way in 
creating a high quality of life for our northerners and the 
communities and their families. 
 
[15:30] 
 
As MLA for Prince Albert Northcote, I have listened to and 
welcomed the many discussions we have had on moving our 
province forward, of ways to keep Saskatchewan strong. As 
Legislative Secretary to Government Relations, northern 
Saskatchewan, I have listened to and welcomed the many 
discussions I’ve had with our northerners, from First Nations 
senators and leaders to mayors and councillors of northern 
towns, from fire chiefs to educators, from those that work with 
economic development to those that are working on the 
Community Mobilization initiative, or we call it the Hub. 
 
Many people from the constituencies of Athabasca and 
Cumberland have shared with me their thanks to our 
government for helping our North prosper. They are excited 
about the new future of Saskatchewan. Their relatives and 
friends and business partners from the constituencies of Prince 
Albert Carlton and Prince Albert Northcote have also thanked 
me and our government for remembering all people in this great 
province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is so different from the doom and gloom the 
tired, old NDP keep espousing. Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Athabasca says the NDP will make a commitment to the second 
bridge in P.A. [Prince Albert]. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 
member’s promise rings hollow. The record shows that when 

the NDP were in power for 16 years, including the time when 
the member from Athabasca was Highways minister, the NDP 
reneged on all promises about our Diefenbaker bridge. The 
NDP refused to repair the bridge stating it’s not their 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our record is clear. Our promises are followed 
through on. Our commitment is strong. When our Diefenbaker 
bridge needed $4.2 million worth of repairs to bring it back to 
primary weight standards, we, our Saskatchewan Party 
government, paid all costs. We stand behind our commitment to 
Prince Albert, to our North, and to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has partnered with the city of 
Saskatoon and the federal government on a P3 [public-private 
partnership] project to build the north commuter parkway 
bridge, and we have offered to enter into a similar partnership 
for a second bridge in Prince Albert. 
 
We have invested $2.5 million to raise the grade on three 
flood-prone sections of Highway 123 to Cumberland House, 
which is now completed. The new St. Louis bridge, located on 
Highway 2 over the South Saskatchewan River that we just 
opened this past weekend, replaces the century-old St. Louis 
Bridge. The new bridge will better serve the regional economy 
and create a safer and more efficient transportation corridor for 
shippers. It completes the final link in a 683-kilometre-long 
primary weight corridor on Highway 2 from Assiniboia in the 
South all the way to La Ronge in the North. These are but a few 
examples of how our government is committed to tackling our 
province’s infrastructure deficit. 
 
Since 2008 nearly $16 billion has been spent on capital projects 
that include hospitals, highways, schools, and power plants. 
This year alone nearly $3 billion has been committed to renew 
and expand infrastructure, but there is still more work to do. 
 
To meet those challenges, we are leveraging the forces of 
innovation and competition through the use of public-private 
partnerships, or P3s. SaskBuilds has already initiated a number 
of P3s that will save millions of dollars. Our government is 
working to ensure opportunities for local businesses are 
maximized within existing trade agreements. Priority 
Saskatchewan, a new agency, is leading a cross-government 
review of current tendering practices. We have also launched a 
new SaskTenders website which will serve as the primary 
gateway to public sector procurement opportunities. 
 
Yes, our focus is on the economy. When our economy is strong, 
our province and its people are strong. A strong economy gives 
us a broader tax base and more resources to invest in health 
care, housing, education, infrastructure, and a better quality of 
life for individuals and for families. In short, Mr. Speaker, we 
are investing in our people. 
 
There will also be legislative changes to help police officers and 
the justice system better protect victims of domestic violence. 
There’ll be an expansion of the Hub crime reduction model, a 
comprehensive review of child welfare legislation that will lead 
to improvements in laws that protect children, and a 
development of a poverty reduction strategy that builds on the 
government’s significant effort to reduce poverty. These are 
among the many ways in which we are looking to keep 



5508 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Our strength comes from our people — their hard work, their 
determination, their ingenuity, and their generosity. These 
values will keep Saskatchewan strong and moving forward. 
 
Our Premier is the first to say our province has what the world 
needs. We welcomed the comprehensive European trade 
agreement as it opens many new markets for Saskatchewan 
exports. The Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement will give 
Saskatchewan exporters equal footing with their European and 
American counterparts in South Korea’s $1.3 trillion economy. 
 
The Speech from the Throne 2014 highlighted our strong, 
growing province, the strength and determination of our people, 
and outlined our plan to keep Saskatchewan strong. Mr. 
Speaker, our people are excited about the new Saskatchewan, 
about the opportunities to provide for our families and 
communities and about providing goods and services to the rest 
of the world. We are proud to be in Saskatchewan, the place to 
be. Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to do what many of our colleagues have 
done, and I certainly want to thank our men and women of the 
armed services, our police, our security service within this 
building. These people are to be commended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The actions last week of terrorists against our democracy — 
and mark my words, Mr. Speaker, these people are terrorist 
thugs — will not deter or intimidate our democracy. Canada 
and the Western world has taken a blow but, Mr. Speaker, this 
has increased our resolve. And one thing these terrorists haven’t 
grasped, Canadians have always been laid back and polite, but 
when we get mad, sir, we get even. These forces of evil don’t 
realize the can of worms they have opened up. We have proved 
that at any war we have ever been in, Canadians will protect 
democracy and freedom until our last breath, and these 
terrorists had better watch their back because they just made us 
mad, Mr. Speaker. God bless Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess everybody wants to talk about their 
constituency, and I want to say a few things. First thing, I would 
like to thank the constituency of Carrot River Valley for the 
honour and the privilege of serving them for the last seven 
years. And it’s a great constituency and I’ve said it many times. 
I know everybody in here says it. They think that they’ve got 
the best constituency in all of Saskatchewan. 
 
A Member: — We do. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — But my member from P.A. would probably 
argue with me on this, but I still think that Carrot River Valley 
has to be the nicest. Like I mean, we just got everything going 
for us there. We’ve got the forest. We’ve got the land. We’ve 
got the people. But it’s really great, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I’m getting to that. One of my colleagues 
mentioned Carrot River also has the Wildcat football team. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will say that our team has run through this 
year. They had a bye this week. And the reason they had a bye 

was because they finished first in their division, and their first 
playoff game is going to be this weekend, Mr. Speaker. And I 
will be there with my siren and my horn cheering them on as 
I’m almost positive that this year they will be going for another 
provincial championship. And I fully expect to see them in 
another provincial championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Cindy Warner and Shelley Meyer 
and Charlene Enns who are the constituency assistants in Carrot 
River Valley. And as we well know and everybody knows that 
the constituency assistants do yeomen jobs while we’re out here 
doing our business within the House and whatnot. They’re the 
ones that take care of things going back there and they do great 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank the Premier for an outstanding Throne 
Speech. It’s a building block, a moving forward to our vision 
for 2020, Mr. Speaker. And yes, I even want to thank the 
opposition even though I don’t agree with them very often. 
Come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t recall the last time 
I ever did agree with them but, you know, that’s democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the member from Athabasca was 
saying, Mr. Speaker, I think the people from Carrot River 
Valley are quite content with how things are transpiring in 
Saskatchewan. And the reason I am saying that, well there’s 
quite a few reasons, but our office has been very, very quiet. 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s a good sign when your 
office is quiet because you don’t have people coming up and 
complaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to go back to Carrot River Valley and 
just let you know some of the things that have happened in the 
Carrot River Valley this year. One, we have a new school being 
built in Hudson Bay. It’ll be coming on board next year. This is 
in contrast to, under the previous administration when they, 16 
years, they closed down, I believe it was 176 schools, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the other thing is in rural Saskatchewan when I was first 
elected, our office was inundated with calls about health 
problems and people on waiting lists. You remember when we 
used to have the longest waiting lists in Saskatchewan. That 
wasn’t very long ago, Mr. Speaker, and yes, there is work to be 
done on it but we are working on it contrary to what happened 
under the NDP. So that’s a good thing. 
 
At Cumberland College that this government built, a brand new 
building in Nipawin just a few years ago, you know that place is 
just about full. First off, they’re doing a university course for 
nurses there at the present time. They’re doing electrical 
courses. They’re doing all sorts of different courses. They’re 
helping out our Aboriginal community. We have Red Earth and 
Shoal Lake which are two reserves in Carrot River Valley 
constituency. These people can go and take their training and 
they can go and get their grade 12. They can go into a trade; 
they can even take university classes there. It helps them move 
forward, Mr. Speaker. And these are great things that we can 
see happening within Carrot River Valley. 
 
I wanted to just go back to the health end just a little bit to show 
you how much things have improved, and I have a very 
personal story because it involved my wife, Terry, this year. 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5509 

Now Terry had been having problems for quite some time that 
her back was bothering her and she just didn’t quite know what 
was wrong. So consequently she was getting a massage over in 
Melfort and the person who was doing the massage said, you 
know, there’s some kind of solidness within your abdomen, and 
she said, I want to send you for an ultrasound. 
 
So Terry went and had an ultrasound and she had that 
ultrasound on July 15th. On July 17th they called her in and 
they said, you have a big problem. We don’t know for sure 
what it is but we think it might be ovarian cancer, which was 
very, very scary for us. But they said, we’re going to make an 
appointment with a gynecologist. On July 21st we had an 
appointment in Saskatoon with a gynecologist, went in, and he 
gave us great news. He said, yes, he said, you have a growth. 
He said, I believe it’s a cyst but, he said, I don’t believe it’s 
cancerous. So that made us very happy. On the other hand, he 
said, it’s going to be a pretty mean operation. So that was fine. 
But he said, I want to do a CT [computerized tomography] scan 
before we can even set up a date for an operation. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So they called back the following Monday. That happened to be 
on a Friday. On Monday they called back, and that was on the 
25th I believe it was. And they said, we have you booked for 
the 28th for a CT scan. Or no, excuse me. I got my figures 
mixed up there just a little bit. On the 21st she was in to see the 
. . . she had the CT scan. On the 25th they called back up and 
said to have an appointment. That was on the 28th then, she had 
an appointment, and booked the operation for August the 8th. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s less than a month from the time that they 
first discovered this, from the time that they did the ultrasound, 
until she went in and had her operation. 
 
And it was non-cancerous, so the surgeon was right. So you 
know, this was great news for us and a very scary thing for 
something like that to happen. But, Mr. Speaker, needless to say 
it was a very large operation, and she’s been off work. Actually 
she just starts work this coming week again. And she can’t lift 
all that much, but I’m quite sure that, you know, by the time we 
start getting heavy snowfall that she’ll be ready to go out and 
start shovelling the driveway again. So I’m really happy about 
that part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just can’t help, when I’m standing up here 
speaking on, talking about our member from Athabasca across 
the way because, Mr. Speaker, he always gives me lots of 
ammunition. And I happened to pick up Hansard, and I’ve got a 
few things that he’s said that I, you know, I’d just like to kind 
of bring up, and different things that he talked about. He said — 
and I’m going to quote out of Hansard — when he’s talking 
about the Saskatchewan Party government he said, “They’ve 
worked hard to get rid of a lot of teachers.” 
 
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. It was that government that shut down 
176 schools. It was that government, that previous, that NDP 
government who were sending all of our kids out to Alberta to 
go to work. It was that government that had no vision, no vision 
for an increase in population in Saskatchewan. And he said, and 
I want to quote again, “They’ve worked hard to get rid of a lot 
of teachers.” We’re the building schools, Mr. Speaker. When 
you’re building schools, you have to have teachers. You know, 

it just kind of goes hand in hand. So consequently there’s more 
and more teachers going to work. And I am very happy about 
that because my daughter finished university in education and 
she is working, not part-time work, not just here and there, be 
whatever. She’s not working in Alberta. She’s not working in 
British Columbia. She’s working right here in Saskatchewan in 
one of the schools. She is a school teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s other things that he said in here, and I want 
to quote again, “And then people in northern Saskatchewan see 
all this, and they ask questions of, why aren’t they addressing 
the agriculture issues?” Mr. Speaker, you know, if I was 
somebody from the other side, I would be embarrassed to even 
bring up anything about agriculture, like, coming from a 
government that basically tried to shut down rural 
Saskatchewan, shut down 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Think of it. Ripped up the GRIP [gross revenue insurance 
program] contract that the farmers signed in good faith, just 
went and ripped it up. What did they ever do? Sat there and 
argued every year about how to fund crop insurance, kept the 
crop insurance people over in Winnipeg. That was really handy. 
Fortunately our original Ag minister saw light to that right away 
and said, we’re going to fund, we’re going to fund crop 
insurance, and we’re not going to sit there and argue about it. 
And we’re going to put increases on it when it needs to be 
increased. And by the way, we’re going to move the agriculture 
people back over to Saskatchewan where they should be 
because this is where the agriculture area is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that the member from Athabasca 
brought up . . . Well there’s just so many things in here that . . . 
He brought up about highways. Now this member from 
Athabasca was the Highways minister. And you know, he 
brought up and kept on talking about these highways. But I just 
don’t know why he didn’t fix them when he was Highways 
minister. You know, because he went on a little later on, and I 
want to quote again, of what he said, “And again to point out to 
the Minister of Finance, chirping from his chair again, you were 
left with billions in the bank. Share the wealth.” Well if there 
was billions in the bank when he was Highways minister, why 
didn’t he go out and fix the highways? Why did he shut down 
the hospitals? Why did they shut down the schools? They didn’t 
build schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the boondoggle ended up, but 
when he said that there was just these billions of dollars . . . 
And let’s face it. He’s not very good at math. He admits that. 
But I think it’s absolutely terrible the way it was going. Mind 
you he was pretty good at spending $36 million on SPUDCO. I 
guess that’s agriculture. But you know, Mr. Speaker, I just 
really question as to where and how he comes up with these 
things. But that’s the member from Athabasca and, you know, 
that’s just the way he is at times, so we can let that one go. 
 
But I want to tell you just a little bit more about Carrot River 
Valley, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one thing about, we have a 
large agriculture base there, and we have probably some of the 
most productive and advanced farmers in all of Saskatchewan. 
Basically we were the ones who invented no-till farming up 
there. And fortunately this year, the way the weather worked 
out, we actually had some pretty good crops up there. There 



5510 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

were pockets that was a little too wet, but we had some very 
decent crops, so the people there are quite happy. 
 
And the other thing that we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re 
seeing our highways improved at all times up there. One of the 
reasons we have to keep our highways in pretty good shape up 
there is because our forest industry has now taken off again. 
And we have our lumber mills of Weyerhaeuser and Hudson 
Bay and Edgewood working over in Carrot River and 
consequently we have log trucks running up and down the road 
on a regular basis. So not only did we have some pretty decent 
crops, well we’ve got a lot of log trucks running up and down 
the road, so we do need our highways worked on. And the 
highways, everybody has said how great a shape the highways 
are now compared to the way that they used to be back when 
you-know-who was in power. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is going out and we’re putting literally billions of 
dollars into the highways to improve our transportation system 
which is so necessary in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP would actually have you believe that this 
province is going downhill. This province is not going to make 
it. But yet where do you think all these people are . . . How 
come all these people want to move to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? How come? How come we’re up to, what, 1.125 
million people right now? And we want to see 1.2 million 
people by 2020, a far difference from under the NDP when they 
used to just say, well you know, when you’re done school . . . 
And I think the member from Melville-Saltcoats mentioned it 
when he said we used to have going-away parties for all these 
people. When they got out of school, they moved out. 
 
And he’s totally right. He was totally right when he started 
talking about the housing. The housing there, it’s been the same 
thing in Carrot River Valley. A few years ago you couldn’t sell 
a house. Now we have people asking what I consider exorbitant 
prices for houses. But let’s face it. The houses are moving. The 
people are moving in, and we have great areas all over rural 
Saskatchewan. And it’s not just rural Saskatchewan. Obviously 
it’s in the cities too. But me being from the rural end, I’m just a 
little on the biased side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing about it, we are continuing to move 
forward. And as I said before, this Throne Speech is a building 
block, a building block on moving this province forward 
because we have a vision of what we want to see happen out 
here in 2020. 
 
Some of the things that the NDP brought up that they wanted to 
see in the Throne Speech or demanded to see in this Throne 
Speech was to work on the health care system. Mr. Speaker, 
health care is a big issue and we have been working on it. You 
know, we’ve gone from the longest waiting times in 
Saskatchewan now to about middle-of-the-road. But you know, 
Mr. Speaker, what we want to do is we want to be number one 
on the waiting list. We want to have the best health system here 
in Saskatchewan of anywhere in all of Canada. And we are 
working our way towards that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that they talked about, or on their 
wish list, was having new schools. Well you know, we’ve 
already announced we’re building new schools. I’ve got one in 
my constituency. The member from Melville-Saltcoats said he 

had one going up over in his constituency, and of course we’ve 
got more new schools going up in the cities where they’re 
desperately needed. Forty new schools have been built or are in 
the planning stage in Saskatchewan. That’s a far, far cry from 
shutting down 176 schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, on their wish list had talked, they 
wanted to see in the Throne Speech about diversifying the 
economy. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have diversified the economy 
in Saskatchewan. I shouldn’t say we. The people of 
Saskatchewan have diversified the economy. But with the help 
of this government making things a little bit simpler and being a 
little bit more business friendly, now we are seeing potash 
mines, first new potash mine in Saskatchewan in, what, 40 
years? I don’t know. The member from . . . or the member of 
the Economy, 45 years. First new potash mine in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have the lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada. Our 
oil business is doing quite well. The forestry business is going. 
Agriculture is going. Mr. Speaker, our economy is diversified 
and we’re very fortunate for that because, you know, it’s not 
quite the same as Alberta who basically lives and dies on oil. 
Saskatchewan has a very diversified economy and is being 
diversified even more with the influx of people we have coming 
in here. A lot of expats are moving back here. Saskatchewan 
didn’t use to be known anywhere. It is now. 
 
They talked about we weren’t doing anything for the 
environment, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Boundary dam is a 
game changer. Boundary dam is something. When we had the 
opening, people from 20 countries came to the Boundary dam, 
the first post carbon capture plant in the world. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the same as taking off . . . 225,000 vehicles off of the 
road every year is the amount of CO2 that that Boundary dam 
will capture. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, it also enhances 
our heavy oil recovery. So it is a win-win situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that are going on here in 
Saskatchewan, and this Throne Speech just helps this province 
move forward. We have new long-term care beds. We’ve got 
new hospitals. We’ve got new schools. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
doing a great job of working on our roads, thanks to the 
Highways minister, and everything is coming together. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca also brought up 
how everybody is quitting the Saskatchewan Party. And I think 
if I remember right . . . I’d have to go back to Hansard here 
again for a second. I know I’m spending too long on this, Mr. 
Speaker. But he said, and I quote again: 
 

They know what they’re failing to do. One-third of their 
caucus is done. They’ve quit. [They’re] . . . not going to 
run anymore; [they’re] . . . out of here. They’ve lost one 
member from Lloydminster already and maybe another 
two-thirds, [I don’t quite know how he gets that, but 
anyway] they’re ready to go out in the next two or three 
years. So they’re 80, 90 per cent done on the other side of 
the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I said his math wasn’t that terribly great. I 
really don’t think that’s going to happen. Yes, we do have some 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5511 

of the old guard is moving on, and we appreciate everything 
that they’ve done. But, Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee you that 
the new people coming on are going to be great people. And I 
know one thing: they are going to keep that operation across the 
way in opposition for a long, long, long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of that being said, Mr. Speaker, I will happily be supporting 
the Speech from the Throne, and I will not be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise today and join in the debate on the Throne 
Speech. It’s an important occasion. We reflect on the vision and 
the purpose of our government and our House here and how we 
should conduct the business of our province. 
 
And I always enjoy the member before me from Nipawin. He’s 
not a stranger to hyperbole. I reflect often back when the quote, 
the best budget in the universe, and added so many different 
layers to it in terms of mathematics, knowing your facts. So it’s 
always interesting when the member reflects on other people in 
the House and their mathematical skills and their hyperbole. So 
to the member, it’s always interesting hearing your thoughts. 
 
But I too want to reflect on the tragic events of last week. It was 
something that struck us all very deeply. And I want to offer my 
condolences to the families involved and my own thanks to all 
the people that were involved: our own people here in this 
building, our own Sergeant-at-Arms, right up to the federal 
folks. It’s such a sacred duty to make sure that our democratic 
institutions are secure and safe and that the purpose for what 
they are built for continue on, and that’s the full participation of 
all citizens, of all people, and that people can be heard, and they 
can be seen to be in action and doing the work that they’ve been 
elected to do. 
 
So I think this is an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for us all to 
reflect, especially those who are elected, to take a moment, to 
gather all the information possible and continue to be in that 
information-gathering process, and reflect on how we can 
ensure that our democratic institutions continue and in fact 
flourish. That we flourish: that we do become the country that 
has been well known in many decades past as a beacon for 
democracy and a beacon of tolerance and a beacon of hope, that 
in fact that our purpose is not lost and that we maintain that. 
Because it is the Canadian way and it’s the Saskatchewan way 
to support that. 
 
And we see that daily, whether it’s through how we strengthen 
our human rights, how we strengthen the participation of 
citizens. That’s hugely, hugely important. So I do want to make 
sure that we do take this opportunity to reflect on that. 
 
So also the traditional, I do want to give thanks to many people, 
my own constituency assistant. It was interesting. She’s a very 
busy person. As the member from Nipawin reflected, that 
maybe he’s not so busy or his office is not busy, but I can tell 
you over on our side, it’s very busy. And the people are coming 
from all over the province. If he wants a list of people who are 
visiting our offices to get assistance, it’s not a quiet time in 
Saskatchewan, who are looking for help. And my assistant does 

a stellar job, and I want to thank her for that. 
 
And I want to thank my constituents. Saskatoon Centre’s a 
wonderful, wonderful place to represent. And I don’t know if 
many people . . . I haven’t heard the other side talk about how 
last Saturday was actually a day to support local business, small 
business. So I went out to Mayfair Bakery, as I often do. And 
it’s interesting who I meet there. They have the best bread in 
Saskatchewan. It’s a local business, and I think it’s important 
for us to get out and support our local businesses as much as we 
can. And I will talk a bit about that more. But whether it’s 33rd 
or 22nd or 20th or 2nd or 3rd or Broadway, their streets are 
amazing in Saskatoon, and I am proud to represent many of 
them here. 
 
As well I want to give a big thank you to my own family. 
We’ve had some exciting news. We’ve had two new 
grandchildren. They’re not twins, but two daughters have 
added, so this would be Felix’s and Frances’s . . . I don’t think 
they’re listening right now, but maybe way back or into the 
future. But it’s an exciting time. It’s an exciting time for us. 
 
So, I want to reflect on this Throne Speech, and it was an 
interesting one. In some ways just because whenever you hear a 
Throne Speech, you do have to sit back and say, so what does 
that sentence mean? What does that sentence mean? And I’ve 
got a couple. I’ve bookmarked this a couple of times here. Page 
four, here talking about “. . . my government’s goal of doubling 
exports by 2020 . . . introduce a new growth tax incentive . . .” 
Now it’s interesting this government’s approach to tax 
incentives, I think about the film tax credit. What happened 
here? How come one is wrong and yet the other one is right? 
 
You know just today we had a visitor, somebody who has 
moved to Vancouver, moved to Vancouver because work isn’t 
here anymore. Now I know the government here spent a lot of 
money — I think it was this summer on a film, Corner Gas — 
about product placement, now talking about Saskatchewan, 
trying to direct all sorts of money to it. But the fact of the matter 
is, if we had a decent film tax credit, the film would have been 
made here because they’re worried about that film, Corner Gas, 
being made in Manitoba, or Ontario. So here you have that 
situation. 
 
As well, I read this about the next page, and I quote: 
 

Through the New West Partnership, Saskatchewan is 
working with Alberta and British Columbia to harmonize 
labour standards and occupational health and safety 
regulations. 

 
Well here we go again, just a few short years ago we had the 
employment Act created when this government overhauled over 
a dozen pieces of legislation. And then they said, well don’t 
worry, it’s not going to change anything. Don’t worry, it’ll all 
be good. And yet we did see some major, major changes to 
labour legislation, and it was done in a hurry-up fashion — no 
consultations, no public meetings. 
 
We, on our side, we had seven meetings which hundreds of 
people came out to talk about their worry about what this 
means. And so I know the minister’s going to be going and 
speaking to the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] this 



5512 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

week, and I bet there will be questions about what does he 
really mean about harmonizing labour standards and 
occupational health and safety regulations? Last week we saw 
the premiums for workers’ comp for employers. Many went 
down. Some didn’t. But we still wrestle with the elephant in the 
room that Saskatchewan has the second-worst record in terms 
of injuries. And as well even in our own homes, we have not a 
great record when it comes to safety just generally. 
 
So there is work to be done here, but I’m not sure it’s this work. 
And I think we have to really focus on occupational health and 
safety, not to line it up with Alberta or BC but really to make 
sure our workplaces are the safest they can be. They absolutely 
should be and it makes sense to do that. We know it makes 
sense. 
 
Now the other one that I wanted to focus on, and this isn’t a bad 
idea, this is one that I’m going to look at with a lot of interest is, 
“This session, my government will amend The Health 
Information Protection Act to strengthen provisions protecting 
patient privacy.” That’s a good idea. That’s a great idea. But 
you know, it’s only one of the suite of privacy legislation that 
we really need to take a look at. 
 
Interestingly here, and this is the ironic part, is if you’re talking 
about harmonizing occupational health and safety and labour 
standards, are we going to be talking about harmonizing 
information privacy? If that’s the case in the workplace, what’s 
interesting in BC and Alberta is private employers are covered 
by privacy legislation. They are not here. That would be a good 
thing if private employers were covered by privacy legislation, 
but they are not here. So what is the government plan here? Are 
they going to say, only the things we want to harmonize we will 
talk about? But other things that have been raised like privacy 
in the workplace is something that we really, really need to 
focus on. 
 
I also want to talk about what’s been happening in Social 
Services. And there’s some things, a lot of things that are 
interesting in here. And I think that I just want to take a moment 
to talk about the child welfare legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I 
hope that we actually see this, my hope we actually see this in 
the next month or two so we can have a chance to talk about it 
over the winter months, have some input. That’s our role as 
opposition, to make sure we take it out and talk to people. 
We’re coming up . . . I mean in theory our election should be 
next year, and we won’t have a chance to take a look at that 
legislation if we don’t look at it pretty quick. Now they’ve 
announced it several times that there’s going to be a review of 
The Child and Family Services Act and The Adoption Act. We 
have yet to see it. It’s been several years in the making, and we 
really hope that it happens really quickly. 
 
The other one, and this is an interesting one, is the government 
talks about the social impact bond and makes a big deal about 
it. It makes a big deal that they say it’s the first in Canada. 
Actually I think it may be the third in Canada. We know the 
federal government has a social impact bonds, and we also 
know that in Alberta they were talking about this idea. I think it 
was Premier Alison Redford whose idea about social impact 
bonds. And so I’m kind of curious to see and what the facts are 
going to be in the way of a good story. So I’m interested to hear 
more about this. 

And really what happened with the Sweet Dreams, well clearly 
a good, good cause, a very important cause. It was kind of done 
in a hurry-up fashion because we didn’t have much lead time. It 
was done in the last week of session, budget had already 
happened. In fact the estimates already happened. And this 
happened after that, so there was a real question about that. 
 
I just want to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, just to talk about the 
announcement of the poverty reduction strategy. And I think 
this is one that we had asked for, many people had asked for. It 
had been called for, for a long time. So we’re glad to see that 
this is moving forward, and we’re looking to see how this 
develops. Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue. I think that we 
want to make sure that in the spirit . . . And some of the folks 
have said that, you know, have wondered about whether or not 
. . . And I appreciate what the former minister said about, you 
know, cutting across party lines. And I think that’s a good 
thing.  
 
You know when we have worked together on this, I can think 
about the work that we’ve done in this session over the past 
couple of years around asbestos. The Minister of Labour has 
worked with that, has worked on Jimmy’s law together. When it 
makes sense, we’ve worked together. And so we’re looking 
forward to seeing what this plays out to be. 
 
Our concern right off the bat though is the fact that it could end 
up being a pre-election photo op, but I have confidence in the 
people who are involved that that won’t happen, that in fact 
while this may be a real rigorous work, and it should be 
rigorous, that really this should not be used to some sort of 
quick or political advantage that really spoils the good work of 
some of the folks that are involved. And I think this is important 
that we take a sincere look at this because it’s an important 
issue for sure, and there’s just too many people who are falling 
by the wayside that I think that we need to take a good look at 
that. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say though that the reviews are 
in, and the reviews are very not kind at all. And in fact The 
StarPhoenix last week said the “Throne speech sets flat tone.” 
And in fact I’ll read and I’ll quote from the article, October 23, 
2014: 
 

Given the opportunity to generate excitement with a bold 
vision as the province heads for an election in 2015, Mr. 
Wall chose instead to reiterate many measures already 
taken and provide a smattering of new offerings that 
mostly cement his government’s commitment to get the 
private sector more involved in services now provided 
publicly. 

 
So there you go. It’s not a very kind editorial, and in fact it’s 
not very exciting, not very engaging. There’s a few things in 
there but, generally speaking, leading up to an election you 
would think this government would take the opportunity in fact 
to lay out a bold, engaging vision for everyone but in fact chose 
to play it in a very low key. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it reminded me of this cartoon. I don’t 
know if you saw this cartoon from The StarPhoenix on the 3rd 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5513 

of September. There is a cartoon of this fellow who I imagine to 
be the Premier, and then there’s this farmer looking at four piles 
of something. I’m not sure what the piles are, but the farmer is 
saying, “Hey poster boy, how about cleaning up some of your 
messes in your province?” Now this is what the piles are 
labelled: seniors care, smart meters, lean. 
 
And then there’s two that are not named, and I can just think of 
what they could be. They could be the Deveraux housing fiasco 
we’ve had. And I’m doing petitions every day, and I can talk a 
bit more. It could be the film tax credit. It could be the 
ministers’ travel that we talked about last spring. But this is 
quite a little . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It could be northern 
roads or the Premier’s travel. But here we have . . . And I think 
the quote is really quite appropriate: “Hey poster boy, how 
about cleaning up some messes in your own province?” Yes, I 
think the poster boy should get to work on that. 
 
Now you know, we’ve raised some of these issues. And I think 
about, you know, I know the government will say, hey, hey, 
hey, you know that’s a little offside. You can’t refer or think 
about the Premier as the poster boy. But really there are some 
issues here that we’ve got to deal with, and they’re real issues, 
serious issues. 
 
You know, we talk about seniors. And I just have to talk about 
95-year-old Roy Armstrong has bone, bladder, and prostate 
cancer, and struggles to walk and feed himself after two heart 
attacks. But the government says Armstrong’s too fit, too fit to 
take up a place in a seniors’ care home. We’re hearing stories 
and stories like this over and over again, real people. This guy 
has a name. His name is Roy Armstrong. He’s 95 years old, and 
he’s got these kind of conditions. And this is a situation. So I 
think the government needs to get down to work on it. 
 
Last week we heard about and we continue to hear about lean. 
We continue to hear about lean and this government just 
refusing to acknowledge that they really messed up on this one. 
They really messed up on it. In fact this is one, again the 
cartoon, the poster boy really needs to get down and figure out 
what’s happening with lean. They’ve cut off six months of the 
contract, maybe 5 million, but still 35-plus million compared to 
what they’re spending in Manitoba. 
 
How can you justify that, especially when you have people, 
leadership from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region who are 
saying this is just really not, not good? And this is what she had 
to say. She said there’s been a lack of respect, tattling on 
leaders if they question, expecting rigid conformity in a 
militaristic style, gossiping and undermining. It consists of 
activities that are not meaningful and in some cases are 
insulting, all of which are part of John Black’s approach, that 
are not only not educationally sound but cause skepticism, 
alienation, and frustration. 
 
So this is really something that we have to take seriously. And 
this is one of those piles that the Premier, or in this cartoon, the 
poster boy, has to get done. He has to get it fixed now. We’re 
coming into election. This would have been the Throne Speech. 
This would have been the time to say, hey, you know what? 
I’ve got some stuff to clean up. Let me clean it up. But instead 
the government, the Premier chose to take a road of ignoring 
that, just ignoring those piles and saying, hey, we’re not going 

to deal with it. 
 
And then today, today we heard questions about the smart 
meters. We have a situation where clearly, clearly this is a 
government who’s not engaged in their files, letting SaskPower 
take the rap for it, throwing them under the bus. And here we 
have a situation of a government that’s plowing ahead with pet 
projects that they should know better. It shows a real lack of 
due diligence and really, at the end of the day, showing a real 
lack of what this means for Saskatchewan families, real lack of 
what this means for Saskatchewan families. So this is a really 
unfortunate circumstance we’ve found ourselves in here. And I 
think this really shows a lack of ability for this government to 
show the leadership that they need to show. 
 
And I have some real, real concerns about it when we know in 
Alabama and in Philadelphia they were not using these meters. 
They were saying, hey we’ve got to back off. This is not the 
right thing to do. But instead the government now is throwing 
the SaskPower under the bus, throwing them under the bus. But 
they like them when they do the climate change, the carbon 
capture thing, hey? They love that. 
 
But you know the one thing that really got me, and I was 
thinking about this this fall, was the whole issue around the 
government’s failure to enforce a contract that meant the end of 
an affordable housing project. And really when this government 
talks about how it knows how to work with business, how 
they’re the people who know how to make things work . . . But 
here you had a situation where we had a fixed-price contract, 
and that meant the developer was going to take the risk and 
everybody went in with eyes wide open, eyes wide open, a $10 
million contract, but instead this government let the developer 
off the hook, let the developer off the hook. 
 
This really . . . Actually people across Canada were watching 
this, what this meant for contract law because if you are saying 
well that contract really doesn’t mean anything . . . And what it 
means for P3s is huge, is huge because are they really, is this 
government really going to enforce their laws? 
 
So there were a couple of really odd moments here when we 
were talking about the Deveraux project. And this is what the 
minister said when asked to explain the government’s decision. 
The Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re 
assuming there’s these desperate homeless people.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this really shows this disconnect. And I 
could go through editorial and editorial about how people are 
concerned about the disconnect this government has from the 
realities within our communities, a real disconnect. So I hope 
that she will take the time to really think about that and really 
get to learn what that means. 
 
I see and I know in our own community where we have a 
Housing First project that’s worked so well to get 16 or 17 
people off the street that are harder to house, that are causing a 
significant impact in their own lives but also in terms of the 
health care system, how that can work. But this minister, when 
she says that kind of thing, really shows a strong disconnect. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, another local political commentator wrote, 
and I quote: 



5514 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

It is the latest indication that Premier Brad Wall seems 
unwilling to do anything to displease business, even when 
he knows business is dead wrong and even if it means his 
government is failing on its promises to deliver 
low-income housing. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are some real concerns out there, some 
real issues that people are facing in Saskatchewan, whether it is 
seniors looking for a safe, dignified place to live; an 
affordability issue; whether it’s the smart meter fiasco that 
we’re having right now; the lean fiasco; ministers’ travel; the 
Premier’s travel; the film tax credit; the Deveraux housing 
fiasco, which I think is really a huge problem. 
 
This government has no shortage of people on the other side to 
pat themselves on the back. But as this cartoon says, “Hey 
poster boy, how about cleaning up some of your messes in your 
own province.” End of quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I will be supporting the amendment — of course I 
will be; that’s the only reasonable thing to do — and voting 
against the Throne Speech. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Thank 
you. I’m honoured today to speak to the 2014 Speech from the 
Throne and to lend my support to the government motion on the 
floor. 
 
I’d like to cover four main areas in the speech. I’d like to talk 
about the Melfort constituency. I’d like to talk about my 
position as the Legislative Secretary for regional municipal 
co-operation. I’d like to talk about some of the details of the 
Speech from the Throne. And I would like to talk about some of 
the history of the opposition and the all-too-typical amendment 
posed by the opposition. 
 
I would first like to take this opportunity to offer a few thank 
yous, Mr. Speaker. First and foremost, thank you to my wife, 
April, whose love and support guides me each and every day. 
And I almost make it sound like it’s her fault. Thanks to my 
CAs [constituency assistant], Peggy Gordon, and Debbie 
Perkins, who so carefully and caringly look after the situations 
that arise at home for the people of the Melfort constituency. 
When people come to our office looking for help, we have a 
pretty good batting average in finding that help for them. I 
would also like to mention the ministers and ministerial staff 
within this building, Mr. Speaker. They do a great job, and 
they’re a wonderful group to work with. 
 
And my thanks are especially extended to the people of the 
Melfort constituency — the best of the best. Many would say 
the Melfort constituency leads the way in growth in a growing 
province — and I would be among them — with strong and 
diverse companies like Bourgault Industries, Doepker 
Industries, Schulte Industries, Michel’s Industries, Failure 
Prevention Services, M & K Welding, and many others who all 
look to a great future, an expanding future in the days ahead. 
 
Of course agriculture continues to be dominant in the Melfort 
constituency with some of the best farm land and the best 
farmers in the province, and they’re supported by very, very 

strong agro service companies throughout. 
 
And the last speaker mentioned small business. And small 
business continues to grow and to thrive in the Melfort 
constituency and in Saskatchewan as it should. These 
entrepreneurs are the heartbeat of the growing province. And I 
may be labelled as a cheerleader for the Melfort constituency, 
but when you have so much to cheer about, it’s hard not to be. 
 
The First Nations communities of Kinistin and James Smith 
continue to improve the economic lot of their people. The chiefs 
and councils are working hard, and the results are showing with 
lower unemployment and education continuing to improve. 
 
We are seeing the excitement of growth in population in all our 
communities, both large and small. And do we have challenges? 
Of course we do. The government is working hard to devise a 
plan for the stabilization and lowering of the Quill Lakes, but 
with a complete understanding that fresh water lakes cannot be 
harmed by any solutions. Some of the challenges facing the 
constituency are large, but as an old saying goes, how do you 
eat an elephant? It’s one bite at a time. 
 
And BHP Billiton, the Jansen project, I had that opportunity to 
visit the Jansen project just last Friday, the world’s largest 
potash mine under construction. There were four busloads of 
municipal and First Nations leaders on those buses and 500 
employees on site. What fascinated me, the camp continues to 
be constructed for 2,500 people that will be necessary to 
complete the mine. When in operation, that camp will disappear 
and they will be left with 800 people working and living in their 
surrounding communities. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And I thought on Friday, have you ever been to camp Billy? I 
had a taste of camp life on Friday. Huge kitchens, the food 
service — dinner was excellent. A 14,000 square foot 
auditorium and gym area with free weights, indoor track, 
saunas, treadmill, and pretty much everything that you could 
think of, all within the confines of this camp. When finished, 
there will be over 2,580 rooms and there’s going to be four 
wings to it. And if you live in the end of one of the wings and 
want to go to the end of any of the other three wings, you’re 
going to be walking about a kilometre, but it’s all indoors and 
it’s all safety. And while I’m up, I should mention that the 
theatre for the complex is almost completed. So we’re looking 
forward to that. 
 
Now BHP, and it was shown again on Friday, it’s very evident 
any time you’re around that company that they are very safety 
conscious. And they were safety conscious to the people on the 
tour but also very much to their own workforce, and I think 
that’s amazing. And the record shows what they can do with the 
small amount of accidents on the site. 
 
It’s also a company that supports the communities and their 
organizations across the provinces. BHP has been working with 
First Nations partners, thriving local communities, and many, 
many other organizations right across the province that they 
have supported. And I want to make note of the town of LeRoy 
where BHP have made a donation of $1 million for a new arena 
after the old one was destroyed by fire. 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5515 

Mr. Speaker, this company is certainly a welcome citizen in our 
province. For the past 18 months I have enjoyed working as 
Legislative Secretary for Regional Municipal Co-operation — 
that’s 51 letters, one of the biggest names in government. I’ve 
worked closely with SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and have attended and 
spoke at the vast majority of regional meetings of both these 
organizations. But mostly I listened and I learned about the 
challenges that face municipalities today, and they’re serious 
challenges and they’re growing challenges. 
 
But with these challenges of growth that they face, we shouldn’t 
forget the challenges of 10 or 15 years ago. The challenges of 
decline. Challenges of keeping your school open. Challenges of 
keeping your hospital open. Challenges of every day, a 
declining population. Yes, they had challenges a decade ago, 
very much so. And if a mayor and council could leave their 
community at the end of their term exactly the same as they 
found it, they were successful. 
 
And I’ll tell you in 10 years time — and I mentioned this as I 
went around to the different meetings — in 10 years time I can 
be sitting on a nice, hot summer day on a sunny patio, drinking 
a cool one, probably a lemonade. And you know, I can do this 
with any member of council out there of any community out 
there, and we would look at each other and we would say, you 
know, we did okay. Because in each and every case, in each and 
every community, we will leave our communities bigger, we 
will leave our community stronger, and we will leave the 
communities better than when we were elected. 
 
And I want to know that this time that the door of the minister’s 
office is always open to SUMA and to SARM and to First 
Nations, the RMs [rural municipality], villages, towns, and 
cities of Saskatchewan. And this government does rely on these 
organizations for input and programs and legislation. 
 
And I would personally like to thank President Debra Button 
and her board of directors and the staff of SUMA, as well as 
President Dave Marit and his board of directors and the staff of 
SARM. SUMA and SARM both have shown me a great 
hospitality at their regional meetings and conventions. And I 
also want to pass on my appreciation to my minister and all the 
staff at Government Relations. 
 
As there are many speakers to follow that will go into details 
about the Throne Speech, I just want to mention a few of my 
personal favourites. As Legislative Secretary it is absolutely 
outstanding to see the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth 
initiative, or SIGI, not only reinstated but expanded to allow 
First Nations communities to take advantage of this remarkable 
program. 
 
And during my days as mayor of the city of Melfort, this 
program was invaluable in setting the stage to community 
prosperity. And it’s wonderful; it is absolutely great to see that 
we will not be spending another dime on new liquor stores 
when we need hospitals and schools and senior citizens’ 
facilities and other infrastructure — not another dime. 
 
Something that is a one- or two-liner in the Throne Speech, but 
I think is very important, is amending the human tissue Act so 

more people can be treated with transplant technology, and that 
we are continuing to make an investment of one-quarter of 1 per 
cent of the money spent in health care in the lean initiative to 
improve patient treatment and changing procedures to allow our 
health care professionals to do their job more efficiently and 
with less strain. 
 
And there’s also many other initiatives about health care in the 
document. We’ll be increasing educational supports, health 
care, seniors’ housing, support for low-income earners, and in 
one way or another this Speech from the Throne will make life 
better for every resident in the province. 
 
Now before my time expires, I want to speak briefly about the 
record of the NDP across the way. And I know, I know they 
hate it when this comes up. They hate it when we talk about 16 
years of miserable decline, 16 years of closing hospitals and 
eliminating 1,200 long-term care beds for our precious senior 
citizens, 1,200 of them. Receiving equalization for 16 years that 
they were in government and having to listen to the words of 
their party leaders quoted back to them. They hate that, so I 
won’t do that. I’m not going to do that. 
 
Instead let’s look at the recent history of the party across the 
way. The policies introduced that have built this province to the 
highest population ever — they voted against that. Policies that 
have more than doubled the municipal revenue sharing in this 
province, helping every RM, town, city, village, across the 
province, north, across the province — they voted against that. 
Building new hospitals across the province, including the new 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon — they voted against that. 
They voted against new homes for seniors, new homes for 
low-income people, new schools, new highways, new 
manufacturing programs, assistance to low-income seniors, new 
ideas. The NDP have voted against all of those — voted against 
all of them. 
 
With a handful of possible exceptions, the NDP has voted 
against everything that we have done — everything that the 
people of Saskatchewan have done. Simply everything that has 
happened in this great and wonderful province in the last . . . 
well since 2007, the NDP has been against. 
 
And what bothers me is that I go back in my memory and I talk 
about one point in my memory when I was new to the school 
board and we were having an SSTA meeting, Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association meeting, in Saskatoon. And I was 
new to the school board and I was all excited and, you know, 
we were going to do something, hopefully something very good 
in the school. And I went to this meeting and I remember 
walking into the Centennial Auditorium as it was called then, 
and there was a bright white light on a speaker from the 
Ministry of Education. And what he was telling us as members 
of the SSTA, he was saying okay, eight years ago the student 
population was here. Five years ago the student population was 
here. Three years ago it was here. Now it’s here. In five years 
it’s going to be here. In 10 years it’s going to be there. Figure 
out how to close your schools. 
 
And I found, for myself I found it deflating. It was just like 
getting hit in the chest with a brick. It was just . . . And you 
know, and then I got mad because what it said is that we 
couldn’t do anything about this, that our government couldn’t 



5516 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

do anything about this. All it was was Saskatchewan was on the 
trail of decline and it would be that way today and it would be 
that way tomorrow. And that’s the feeling they gave us. 
 
And you know, I’m still looking. In all these things that has 
happened since 2007 and all the new records we have and all 
the benefits of a strong economy that has come down to the 
people, the people in the Melfort constituency, the people in 
every constituency across this province, the benefit of economic 
growth, that I wondered: I’d sit here and I’d listen to the 
complaint and I’d listen to the negativism across the aisle and I 
thought to myself on the weekend, I thought, so what’s their 
plan? What are they suggesting? Rather than just standing up 
here and criticizing and picking apart little points here and 
there, what is their plan? 
 
So I looked it up and I checked again and I checked the third. 
What did I find? A good question, because I didn’t find 
anything. There was nothing there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The manifesto’s there. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — No actually the manifesto’s gone. They finally 
hid that away someplace, the socialist document that started the 
former CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation]. And I 
don’t think anybody in the House can read that document 
without thinking of that word or something different. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, now the opposition puts forth an 
amendment that condemns the Government of Saskatchewan, 
condemns this Government of Saskatchewan. It’s absolutely 
ridiculous. Mr. Speaker, I would take it everybody in the House 
kind of got the point by now that yes, I will be voting in favour 
of the motion and, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the 
amendment proposed by the old, the tired, and the negative 
nine. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to rise in the House and give my comments about the 
2014 Throne Speech on behalf of the great people of Regina 
Dewdney. This document is titled “Keeping Saskatchewan 
Strong” and I can’t think of anything stronger. 
 
I can’t think of anything stronger in our country and our 
province than our military and our police officers — the Regina 
Police Service, for example, first responders, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are the people that look after us. They are dedicated to 
our democracy. And certainly I don’t know if I’m qualified or 
able, but I certainly would like, on behalf of the people of 
Regina Dewdney, to send our heartfelt condolences to the folks 
out east that had trouble this past week, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
horrible events on our own soil by cowards acting alone in a 
cowardly fashion, as I mentioned. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So certainly our thoughts and prayers are with those families, 
with those communities. And we always remember to remain 
diligent in upholding our democracy, Mr. Speaker. So those are 
terrible, terrible times. And again nothing makes me prouder as 
a Canadian than our military record and our record of 

selflessness around the world. So that’s a strong . . . That’s what 
makes Saskatchewan and our country strong. 
 
Certainly Regina Dewdney I think remains strong, just as our 
province does. Specifically in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
there is great growth in the area, as I mentioned before. I think I 
have mentioned before that there are basically no land left. All 
the new developments in Regina Dewdney will be infill. There 
is a few residential lots around Heseltine Road I know, but there 
is new businesses. 
 
There was open land south of Victoria Square Mall, south of 
Victoria, along University Park Drive, Mr. Speaker. But there’s 
a new apartment complex — looks like to be quite a large one 
— which will help with that vacancy rate a great deal. And 
there will be new businesses, and opening just south, there’s a 
few new gyms opening up, Mr. Speaker. And so that will help 
make our population a little healthier. And that’s good to see 
new businesses continuing to open right along Victoria Avenue, 
along Quance, and there, as I mentioned, new apartments, new 
condos. 
 
And I see all the time, Mr. Speaker, new families moving into 
the area from right across Canada, from right all throughout the 
world, Mr. Speaker. And that is just great to see. They’re 
becoming part of our community, becoming a part of the new 
Saskatchewan. And they’re setting up roots here. And there’s 
lots of options and right in Regina Dewdney and of course in 
our province right now. And people are seeing that opportunity, 
and they’re voting with their feet. They’re coming to 
Saskatchewan. And like I said, lots of great new building 
happening in our constituency and new buildings going up. And 
that’s great to see that. 
 
There’s entrepreneurs that are willing to risk their hard-earned 
money to try and build a business and employ people. And so 
we see the backbone happening right in the capital city, of 
people creating jobs and just contributing to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I mentioned new families. I should probably mention my own at 
some time. It’s a good time to do that. The strongest part of my 
family is certainly my wife, Tami. And she does a great job. 
We’re both busy at work, and we have three kids to run around 
to different activities. And so she keeps things scheduled and 
does a great job. So she’s the part that keeps our family strong. 
 
I’d like to mention also Brittany in our constituency office. She 
does a great job to keep that office strong and keep it flowing 
properly for the people of our constituency. 
 
I think this is a strong Throne Speech. We have strong 
leadership on this side of the aisle, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the 
Premier, the Deputy Premier, all the members of cabinet. 
Everybody’s a leader, and we see that. What a great document 
they have produced, and certainly we thank them for that. 
 
I think in the first few paragraphs it talks about all the great 
employment numbers that we see in our strong province: more 
people working than ever before, lowest unemployment rate in 
the country for a couple years now, Mr. Speaker. Things are 
happening right across this province, and it’s great to see 
certainly a more diversified economy. 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5517 

I think one area that was a pretty big deal, I don’t know if it got 
much press or if people looked at it, but Moody’s recently, and 
it’s referenced right in the Throne Speech, that they upgraded 
our credit rating to AAA, Mr. Speaker. That’s certainly great 
news. That means that not only . . . S & P [Standard & Poor’s], 
Moody’s, they’re the two main bond rating agencies. They’re 
out of New York. They’ve been doing it for around a hundred 
years. 
 
So it’s certainly a rarity these days for jurisdictions, national or 
sub-national, to get their credit rating upgraded. And that’s 
good news because now Saskatchewan is seen as a prime place 
to park your money if you want to buy debt on the market. That 
means we get very competitive interest rates. That means of 
course that those bond rating agencies have a lot of confidence 
in the economy of this province, the people of this province, the 
Ministry of Finance to put forward budgets that pay down debt. 
 
We’ve paid down 44 per cent of the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund], the operating account debt here in our province, since 
2007. And certainly that saves on interest costs. We won’t send 
as much money to bond holders because of that. But also it’s a 
perpetual positive cycle. When you can pay down debt and you 
have balanced budgets, you’re able to get a better credit rating. 
And certainly that’s less money going to banks in foreign 
countries or whoever may hold our bonds. So we’re seen as a 
prime place, and it’s a fairly rare situation in the world, really. 
There’s, you know, a dozen or so jurisdictions in the world that 
have AAA stable, a few places in Europe, Singapore, places 
like that, Mr. Speaker. And certainly it’s a credit to the people 
of the province, as I mentioned, and the Minister of Finance 
who’s done a great job. 
 
There’s only about a quarter of the US states that have AAA 
stable. I checked it out. And these are fairly new statistics that I 
found. Of course they can go up and down frequently, so we 
have to be diligent that way. And I think there’s three provinces 
— BC, Alberta, and Saskatchewan — and the federal 
government. It’s interesting to note, a few years ago there was 
big news that the United States had their credit rating 
downgraded, I believe the second-biggest economy in the 
world, now behind China. But it’s certainly to remain diligent 
and watch after that. 
 
And hopefully one day, hopefully it’s one day soon, we won’t 
have to worry about S & P and Moody’s. We’ll get rid of the 
debt completely, hopefully, one day in Saskatchewan. But 
we’re certainly on the right track, and it takes prudent 
budgeting. It takes some sacrifice. And certainly we’ve seen a 
lot of improvement in that over the years since the ’90s. 
 
One thing that’s not in my constituency, and it’s not directly 
mentioned in the Throne Speech, but they talk quite a bit . . . 
not they, this government talks quite a bit about the Ministry of 
Parks, Culture and Sport. And I know a few years ago there was 
$750,000 put into Leibel Field here in Regina. So I just want to 
talk a little bit about Leibel Field. During the supper break, I’ll 
be heading over there as a matter of fact to help coach my son’s 
football team for a little while. 
 
That facility has been in operation since the summer of 2011, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s not complete. Just recently, earlier this 
year, earlier this fall, I was able to attend the official grand 

opening of the completed Leibel Field, of what the original 
vision looked like. The folks at Regina Minor Football and the 
soccer folks that wanted to originally build this had the vision 
for it, Mr. Speaker. So you know, you think of one of the nicest 
facilities of its kind anywhere in Canada really. There’s 
thousands of football players and soccer players that use that 
facility. 
 
On a day like today, Mr. Speaker, in years past, all the games 
would have been cancelled. All the practices on that field would 
have been cancelled not only because it’s dark at about 6:15, 
Mr. Speaker, but there’s now artificial turf which doesn’t get 
chewed up. On a day like today, it would have been a mud 
bowl. But they’ve done just an outstanding job. The local 
community has stepped up. 
 
And I have to mention one guy who’s really been the driving 
force, had the vision for it, and that’s Len Antonini. He’s the 
executive director of Regina Minor Football, and he’s been a pit 
bull getting this thing going. He’s been absolutely the driving 
force. And boy, what a legacy for the city of Regina. And I 
don’t mean to take . . . It’s in the member from Douglas Park’s 
constituency certainly, but I spend a lot of time there. People 
from right around the city spend a lot of time there, Mr. 
Speaker, whether you’re a soccer player, touch football player, 
tackle football. There’s dozens of programs that run out of 
there. And it’s a facility to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first year there was no stands. The next year there they put 
in new stands, a new score clock, earth berm fence around, a 
canteen. There are washrooms a bit of ways away, and the next 
project I hear from Len is going to be bathrooms on that 
facility. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s something to be proud of. And 
boy, it’s just a great community place to gather. All three levels 
of government contributed and certainly the people, the Regina 
Minor Football contributed. There was donors large and small, 
and they just got that thing done.  
 
And that proves what our province is about — strong leaders, 
strong volunteers, coming together to build a facility that’s 
second to none. I know the kids are very proud to able to play 
there. And for years and years there’s going to be thousands and 
thousands of people, users, getting a chance to use the new 
Leibel Field. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, mentioned in the Throne Speech is 
Habitat for Humanity. I mentioned this before in previous 
speeches. I never get tired of doing it. Our government’s 
committed 7.85 million since ’09 to the great work they do at 
Habitat for Humanity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ReStore is in my constituency; that’s why I always like to 
mention it. That’s the place where people donate used items, 
and the proceeds from the resale of it go towards Habitat 
programs. I know they are currently finishing up nine units 
beside Lewvan Drive and Sherwood Drive, Mr. Speaker. So in 
the city’s northwest, nine new families soon are going to have 
their own home. Their days of worrying about where they’re 
going to live and what’s next for their family, they can become 
part of a community. They can set roots. They can live in a safe 
place. And they’ll certainly enjoy and they get a chance to 
continue on, continue on that program. They’ll give their 500 
hours. They’ll pay into, through a mortgage they’ll pay into 



5518 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

their future build. So the process just continues along, and so 
they do great work. 
 
And I’d also be remiss if I didn’t mention the TASCAP [Trades 
& Skills Construction Apprenticeship Program] program, the 
trades program out of Regina Campus Public in my 
constituency as well. They run the TASCAP program. And 
what it is, is they are high school age students that build a 
house. Through two semesters, they’re able to take credits 
towards their high school degree, but also they learn the trades. 
They learn, they build a house.  
 
And I always say boy, what a great legacy to have. I mean, 
when I was in grade 9, in wood shop I built a jewellery box. I 
built a jewellery box. I still have it, by the way, I still put stuff 
in there. But I mean, if you’re a student in 20 years, you can 
look . . . I look to my jewellery box, my wooden jewellery box. 
Somebody, one of the kids from TASCAP, can go by 20 years 
later. They’re working on two houses on Robinson Street, 1300 
block Robinson Street. They can say, hey kids, I helped build 
that house. Whatever they do in life, they can say, I helped a 
family about 20 years ago build a house. I think that’s pretty 
special, Mr. Speaker. And certainly they do great work. 
 
Of course this gives them a chance to see if they would want to 
get into the trades. Maybe after a semester of it they say, well 
no, that’s not for me. I’m going to try something else. But 
many, many of them get a chance to move on in the trades. 
They get credits towards their high school degree, but also gives 
them references to move on to companies or to go on to SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 
 
I know Regina Trades & Skills they take the results of what 
happens at TASCAP seriously. The two teachers, I’ll mention 
them as well. Eldon Hall and Devon Heron, they do great work 
there. They’re experts in that field, but they also are able to give 
good recommendations on students that perform well in the 
TASCAP program. 
 
And certainly that aligns well with what we see in the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker. The adult basic education, many more 
seats in those areas — 775 more training seats. Certainly that’s 
going to be that many more people that are able to maybe move 
on, get into a trade, move on to post-secondary . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5489 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 
 Saskatchewan Good for Entrepreneurs 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5490 
 Women’s History Month 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5490 
 Autism Awareness Month 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5490 
 Agriculture Month 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5491 
 Violence Prevention Week 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5491 
 United Nations International Day of the Girl 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5491 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Leadership in Saskatoon Health Region 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5492 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5492 
 Agreement with Smart Meter Supplier 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5494 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5494 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5495 
 Lloydminster Seniors’ Care Facility 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5495 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5496 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Edible Oils Dispute 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5496 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5497 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5497 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5499 
  Cheveldayoff (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 5501 
  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 5501 
  Belanger (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 5502 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5505 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5508 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5511 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5514 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5516 
 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


