
























































Hansard: October 22, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2014, 14:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5449 
 October 22, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 
and gentlemen, please remain standing for the entrance of the 
Lieutenant Governor and the Vice-Regal party. 
 
[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
14:01.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, honoured 
guests, people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome to the opening of the Fourth Session of the 
Twenty-Seventh Legislature. 
 
I’d like to begin by extending deepest condolences to the 
family and friends of the soldier who was killed in the 
senseless attacks that occurred today in our nation’s capital. 
 
Our thoughts and prayers are also with the parliamentary 
guard who has been wounded and with all of our armed forces 
and protective services personnel involved in combatting 
terrorism abroad and keeping us safe at home. 
 
Our country owes each one of them a tremendous debt of 
gratitude for their willingness to put themselves in harm’s way 
to protect our safety. 
 
On behalf of a grateful province and its people, thank you. 
 
I ask that you please join me in a moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
We gather today during the season of Thanksgiving. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, there is much to be thankful for. 
 
Saskatchewan is strong. 
 
Our province is growing. 
 
There are more people living here than ever before. 
 
More people are choosing to stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
More people are coming from other provinces and other 
countries. 
 
More people are working in Saskatchewan than ever before. 
 
In June, employment hit a record high of 577,000 people 
working in our province. 
 
In July, unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per cent – the 
lowest unemployment rate ever recorded. 
 
In September, Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment 

rate and the fastest rate of job creation anywhere in Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan people are earning more than ever before, and they 
are keeping more of what they earn, thanks to lower taxes. 
 
Our province has a balanced budget. 
 
During this session, my government will again demonstrate its 
commitment to sound financial management by delivering its 
eighth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Because of my government’s commitment to sound financial 
management, Moody’s recently upgraded Saskatchewan’s 
credit rating to triple-A – their highest possible rating. 
 
In providing the upgrade, Moody’s said: “Saskatchewan’s 
triple-A rating reflects the province’s fiscal discipline and 
sustained low debt levels, which underscore prudent financial 
management practices.” 
 
The numbers demonstrate that Saskatchewan is strong. 
 
But while these numbers are impressive, the true strength of 
our province is found in the compassion and generosity of its 
people. 
 
This was never more apparent than during the flooding earlier 
this year, when friends, neighbours, and family members rallied 
to help one another as the waters rose. 
 
On the Henderson farm north of Carievale in southeast 
Saskatchewan, the call went out for sandbaggers. 
 
Within 20 minutes, 200 people responded and laid down close 
to 3,000 sandbags around the Hendersons’ home, sparing it 
from the flood. 
 
Jennifer Henderson said she couldn’t believe her eyes when 
she saw how many people came to her family’s aid. 
 
“It was amazing,” she said. 
 
“And the spirit has not stopped. I’m an American who married 
a Canadian. And I’m so darned happy to be a Canadian 
today.” 
 
That quick action near Carievale was mirrored in dozens of 
other locations across the province, affirming once again that 
Saskatchewan is strong because our sense of community is 
strong. 
 
A PROVINCE ASCENDING 
 
Saskatchewan’s economic star continues to rise. 
 
Since 2007, Saskatchewan’s exports have increased by 63 per 
cent, while manufacturing shipments have climbed by more 
than 50 per cent. 
 
Surging demand for our products has created unprecedented 
opportunity for workers and businesses, and attracted people 
from across the country and around the world. 



5450 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

Saskatchewan’s population is now at an all-time high of over 
1,125,000 people. 
 
That represents an increase of more than 123,000 people in the 
past seven years – a far cry from the previous seven years when 
Saskatchewan’s population actually declined. 
 
Our province remains on track to reach the population target 
set by my government of 1.2 million people by 2020, while 
Statistics Canada has predicted Saskatchewan’s population 
could surpass 1.5 million by 2038. 
 
Newcomers are enriching our province through the work they 
do and the cultures they share. 
 
They give life to Saskatchewan’s motto: “From Many Peoples 
Strength.” 
 
SUSTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
 
In this session, my government will continue working hard to 
keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
A strong economy is the foundation of a strong province with 
an excellent quality of life for all its people. 
 
A strong economy means we are better able to meet the 
challenges of growth in health care, housing, education, and 
infrastructure. 
 
My government will continue taking the right steps to 
encourage economic growth. 
 
Saskatchewan’s resource sector is strong. 
 
The first new potash mine to be built in the province in 40 
years, the K + S Legacy project near Bethune, is under 
construction while multi-billion dollar expansions of existing 
mines are coming on stream. 
 
Uranium production is also increasing, with the opening of 
Cameco’s Cigar Lake mine - the first new uranium mine to be 
built in Saskatchewan in over a decade. 
 
Saskatchewan is setting new records in oil production and the 
province’s forestry industry is making a comeback, with seven 
mills now operating and two more mills expected to re-open in 
2015. 
 
Saskatchewan manufacturers are on track to ship a record 
amount of product this year. 
 
To help meet my government’s goal of doubling exports by 
2020, it will introduce a new growth tax incentive tied to the 
creation of new jobs by manufacturers and processors as they 
expand their sales outside Saskatchewan. 
 
This measure will also include a new growth tax incentive for 
the creation of new corporate and head office jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To further support our exporters, my government will maintain 
its emphasis on international engagement, particularly in Asia, 

the fastest growing region in the world. 
 
In the months ahead, my government will undertake trade 
missions to key international markets while continuing to 
support the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
(STEP), which carried out 42 trade missions to 27 countries in 
2013. 
 
Recently, my government received the recommendations of the 
Saskatchewan-Asia Advisory Council, which was appointed to 
provide advice on trade, innovation, and investment attraction. 
 
Our efforts to strengthen trade ties in Asia will be guided by 
these recommendations. 
 
In order to continue the strong growth in exports, we must ship 
our products to market. 
 
We have seen how limited rail capacity can impact our 
economy. 
 
That’s why my government is making rail capacity a priority 
by encouraging railways to increase shipping volumes, by 
strengthening the short line network, and by working to 
enhance rail linkages to Canada’s coastlines and our biggest 
trading partner, the United States. 
 
PROMOTING FREE TRADE 
 
My government supports free trade. 
 
The Comprehensive European Trade Agreement (CETA) will 
open many new markets for Saskatchewan exports. 
 
The Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement (CKFTA) will give 
Saskatchewan exporters equal footing with their European and 
American counterparts in South Korea’s $1.3 trillion economy. 
 
My government will continue working to reduce international 
trade barriers, such as Country of Origin Labelling regulations 
in the United States. 
 
While international trade barriers are coming down, some 
barriers remain in place between provinces. 
 
This must change. 
 
My government has taken a leadership role in enhancing the 
dispute resolution mechanism within Canada’s Agreement on 
Internal Trade. 
 
More can be done to open up trade between provinces. 
 
Through the New West Partnership, Saskatchewan is working 
with Alberta and British Columbia to harmonize labour 
standards and occupational health and safety regulations. 
 
New West Partnership members are urging other provinces to 
review their regulations in these areas. 
 
My government will look for other opportunities to expand free 
trade, such as Saskatchewan’s agreement with British 
Columbia to offer consumers in both provinces greater access 



October 22, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5451 

to locally produced wine and craft spirits. 
 
We will also continue to advocate on behalf of industries that 
are subject to unfair trade practices within Canada, as we did in 
a successful challenge of the Quebec government’s restrictions 
on the production, sale, and marketing of oil-based dairy 
products. 
 
My government is working to ensure opportunities for local 
businesses are maximized within existing trade agreements. 
 
Priority Saskatchewan, a new agency, is leading a 
cross-government review of current tendering practices. 
 
To provide further support to local businesses, the Ministry of 
Central Services has launched the new SaskTenders website. 
 
The website will serve as the primary gateway to public sector 
procurement opportunities in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 
British Columbia - the member provinces of the New West 
Partnership. 
 
BUILDING A SKILLED WORKFORCE 
 
A strong workforce means a strong Saskatchewan. 
 
But our province continues to face a shortage of skilled labour. 
 
In some cases, people are unable to compete for jobs because 
they lack the skills required to secure employment. 
 
To address this situation, my government has invested heavily 
in Adult Basic Education (ABE) services and is working to 
eliminate the waitlist for ABE. 
 
In the upcoming fiscal year, we will increase the number of 
ABE training seats by 775, eliminating the 2012 wait list and 
bringing the total number of seats to 9,355, an increase of 
nearly 60 per cent since 2007. 
 
My government will boost the number of apprenticeship seats 
by 300, bringing the total number of seats to 7,000, an 86 per 
cent increase since 2007. 
 
Saskatchewan took a lead role in national negotiations on the 
design of the new Canada Job Grant, which provides 
employers with up to $10,000 per worker to cover the cost of 
training. 
 
A few months ago, we were pleased to sign a Canada Job Grant 
agreement with the federal government. 
 
My government is investing $15.7 million in the program, 
which will link training directly to the needs of employers. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
My government has made significant progress tackling the 
province’s infrastructure deficit. 
 
Since 2008, ministries and Crown corporations have spent 
close to $16 billion on a range of capital projects, including 
hospitals, highways, schools and power plants. 

This year alone, nearly $3 billion has been committed to renew 
and expand the province’s infrastructure. 
 
But there is more to be done. 
 
To meet those challenges, my government is leveraging the 
forces of innovation and competition through public private 
partnerships (P3s). 
 
SaskBuilds, created two years ago to help deal with the 
province’s infrastructure demands, has initiated a number of P3 
projects. 
 
These include: 
 
• Nine joint-use elementary schools located in Regina, 

Saskatoon, Martensville, and Warman - communities 
experiencing extraordinary growth; 

 
• The Regina Bypass project, the largest transportation 

project in Saskatchewan’s history; and 
 
• The Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford – Integrated 

Correctional Facility. 
 
The 225-bed Swift Current Long-Term Care Centre is now 
under construction and is expected to save taxpayers $13 
million by using the P3 approach. 
 
My government will save hundreds of millions of dollars on P3 
capital projects - money that can be used for other priorities. 
 
Municipalities should also consider P3s to access funding 
offered by the federal government. 
 
My government has partnered with the City of Saskatoon and 
the federal government on a P3 project to build the North 
Commuter Parkway Bridge and we have offered to enter into a 
similar partnership for a second bridge in Prince Albert. 
 
In March, the federal government announced the new $53 
billion Building Canada Fund (BCF) to support the construction 
of roads, bridges, public transit, and other infrastructure 
projects. 
 
To help municipalities take advantage of the new BCF 
program, my government will reintroduce and expand the 
popular Saskatchewan Infrastructure Growth Initiative (SIGI). 
 
This program provides interest rate subsidies for up to five 
years on municipal borrowing for infrastructure development. 
 
Under the first iteration of SIGI, nearly $200 million in 
borrowing was approved and 82 communities benefited from 
interest rate subsidies. 
 
My government believes Saskatchewan First Nations would 
also benefit from SIGI, so the program will be opened to those 
First Nations in a position to participate, like Whitecap Dakota 
under the progressive leadership of Chief Darcy Bear. 
  



5452 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

PRIVATE LIQUOR STORES 
 
With so many infrastructure priorities in Saskatchewan, my 
government must make choices, including the choice of what 
not to fund. 
 
Here’s one. 
 
My government will not spend one more taxpayers’ dollar 
building liquor stores. 
 
Instead, those capital dollars will be used for highways, 
hospitals, schools, and bridges. 
 
New liquor stores in the province will be built and operated by 
the private sector. 
 
Today, there are two new private liquor stores operating in 
Saskatoon and one in Regina, with another in Regina opening 
soon. 
 
This change has been well received and many people are 
asking my government to go further. 
 
This fall, my government will release an options paper and 
gather feedback from the public regarding the future of liquor 
retailing in Saskatchewan. 
 
HIGHWAYS 
 
As Saskatchewan grows, so does the number of vehicles on our 
roads. 
 
Increased traffic and unprecedented flooding have taken a toll 
on our highways. 
 
My government is responding with record investments in 
highway construction and maintenance. 
 
On Highway 16, work has begun on a new twinning project 
from Saskatoon to Clavet. 
 
On Highway 7, new passing lanes between Delisle and 
Rosetown are under construction. 
 
Meanwhile, preconstruction work continues on the twinning of 
Highway 7 from Vanscoy to Delisle and Highways 6 and 39 
from Regina south to Estevan. 
 
My government is also evaluating an innovative proposal from 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities that 
would use federal, provincial, and municipal funding to 
leverage private sector investment in rural roads. 
 
EFFICIENT GOVERNMENT 
 
My government recognizes Saskatchewan citizens expect 
services that are accessible, effective, efficient, and sustainable. 
 
Across government, the Lean process is used to improve 
services for people and businesses. 
 
For example, by using Lean, the Ministry of Economy has 

reduced the time it takes to issue routine permits for oil 
companies from ten days to one day, while the Ministry of 
Highways now processes 13,700 more bridge permits annually, 
double the previous volume. 
 
HEALTH CARE 
 
The purpose of a strong and growing economy is to ensure the 
best possible quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Six years ago, my government proceeded with the first ever 
review of the Saskatchewan health care system from the 
perspective of patients. 
 
The Patient First Review has guided our efforts to make the 
health care system more responsive, efficient, and effective. 
 
In this session, my government will release an update on the 
Patient First Review that will highlight areas where progress 
has been made and areas where improvement is required. 
 
My government recognizes that we need to do more to help 
people dealing with mental health and addiction problems. 
 
In the coming months, the commissioner appointed to lead a 
review of mental health services in the province will release a 
10-year Mental Health and Addictions Action Plan. 
 
The plan will inform our efforts to improve services and 
supports for patients and their families. 
 
Last year, my government announced the creation of the Urgent 
Action Fund to improve the quality of care for residents of 
long-term care homes. 
 
We have provided $10 million to health regions for specific 
initiatives and an additional $3.7 million for ongoing programs. 
 
This funding will be used to purchase 700 pieces of equipment, 
hire additional staff, and support staff training. 
 
In 2009, my government established the Saskatchewan 
Surgical Initiative and set a bold objective of ensuring no 
patient would wait more than three months for surgery. 
 
Thanks to a significant effort within the health care system, the 
number of patients waiting more than three months for surgery 
is down 81 per cent. 
 
While the Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative has concluded, we 
will continue working to improve the system and reduce 
surgical wait times. 
 
Patients in our health care system need to be assured their 
privacy is protected. 
 
This session, my government will amend The Health 
Information Protection Act to strengthen provisions protecting 
patient privacy. 
 
This includes stronger measures to prevent the unauthorized 
viewing of patient records and a provision authorizing the 
Minister of Health to appoint a person or body to take control 



October 22, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5453 

of abandoned patient records. 
 
My government will amend The Human Tissue Gift Act to 
modernize Saskatchewan’s organ donation and transplantation 
processes to reduce wait times for people who need organ 
transplants. 
 
Among those who will benefit are 100 people who have waited 
up to two years for a cornea transplant. 
 
My government will amend The Pharmacy Act to enhance the 
scope of practice for pharmacists by giving them the authority 
to administer vaccinations and other drugs as well as ordering, 
accessing, and using lab tests. 
 
My government will continue to focus on retaining and 
attracting health care professionals. 
 
Much progress has been made in the last few years. 
 
Since 2007, the number of doctors practicing in the province 
has increased by over 400 while the number of nurses in all 
designations has increased by more than 2,600. 
 
EDUCATION 
 
Our province’s schools are a vital part of a strong 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My government recently received the results of its historic 
Student First consultation. 
 
More than 120 engagement sessions were held involving nearly 
1,000 students, parents, caregivers, and teachers from across 
the province and more than 1,500 submissions were received 
online. 
 
The information gathered will be considered as my government 
works with its partners to develop an education system that 
truly puts the student first. 
 
In this session, my government will introduce legislation to 
make the regulatory process for teachers similar to that in other 
jurisdictions and other professional bodies within our province. 
 
Over the last seven years, my government has spent more than 
$700 million on education infrastructure - a 268 per cent 
increase. 
 
Forty new schools have been built or are in the planning stage. 
 
This year, new schools have opened or will open soon in Swift 
Current, Lloydminster, White City, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
Schools in La Ronge and Lumsden have undergone major 
renovations. 
 
My government will continue to invest in the province’s school 
system to meet the challenges of growth. 
 
POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION 
 
Our universities, technical institutions, and regional colleges 

play a vital role providing the leaders of tomorrow with the 
skills and training needed to succeed. 
 
That is why my government continues to make post-secondary 
education a priority by providing record support for students 
and institutions. 
 
Programs such as the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, 
the Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings, and 
the Graduate Retention Program have made post-secondary 
education more accessible and affordable. 
 
Since 2008, the Graduate Retention Program has provided $130 
million in rebates to more than 50,000 students who have 
chosen to stay in Saskatchewan after graduation. 
 
Aboriginal enrolment in post-secondary institutions is 
increasing. 
 
My government will continue to support the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technology, the First Nations University of 
Canada, Gabriel Dumont Institute, and all post-secondary 
institutions to ensure First Nations and Métis students have the 
support they require to complete their studies. 
 
Recent legislation has enabled more institutions to offer degree 
programs. 
 
During the last few months, the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology has officially become known 
as Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
This will create more opportunities for students and will help 
meet the needs of employers. 
 
Many regional colleges in Saskatchewan have insufficient 
internet bandwidth to accommodate the needs of their students. 
 
The Ministry of Advanced Education will work with SaskTel 
to upgrade internet access and speed at regional colleges to 
ensure students and teachers have sufficient bandwidth to 
accommodate their current requirements and growth in future 
years. 
 
INNOVATION 
 
Earlier this month, people from around the world gathered at 
Boundary Dam Power Station near Estevan as SaskPower 
opened the first commercial power plant in the world with a 
fully integrated post-combustion carbon capture system. 
 
More than 90 per cent of the carbon dioxide emitted at 
Boundary Dam 3 will be captured and stored for use in 
enhanced oil recovery operations in mature oil fields. 
 
This is the equivalent of taking more than 250,000 vehicles off 
Saskatchewan roads each year. 
 
Boundary Dam 3 strengthens Saskatchewan’s reputation as a 
global leader in carbon capture and storage research. 
 
SaskPower has established a global CCS consortium to share 
knowledge and best practices with other utilities and 



5454 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

researchers. 
 
Construction of Saskatchewan’s cyclotron and radioisotope 
facility at the University of Saskatchewan is in the final stages. 
 
The $25.5 million laboratory is a partnership between the 
federal government, the province, and the university. 
 
The laboratory will provide Saskatchewan researchers with the 
resources they require to develop radiopharmaceuticals – drugs 
containing radioactive materials. 
 
These drugs can be used to detect, diagnose and treat diseases 
such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and multiple sclerosis. 
 
The laboratory will be managed and operated by the Sylvia 
Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation. 
 
SUPPORTING COMMUNITIES 
 
My government is working closely with our municipal partners 
to address the challenges of growth. 
 
As a result of the province’s predictable and sustainable revenue 
sharing program, municipalities already know they will receive 
record revenue sharing of $265 million in next year’s budget – 
more than double what it was when my government took office. 
 
Earlier this year, Saskatchewan was once again hit hard by 
flooding. 
 
My government responded by establishing 11 recovery centres, 
including three in First Nations communities. 
 
These were one-stop points of access staffed by representatives 
from ministries, Crown corporations, the Canadian Red Cross, 
Samaritan’s Purse Canada, and other organizations to help 
individuals and families affected by flooding. 
 
So far this year, the Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 
(PDAP) has determined more than 325 municipalities and First 
Nations, and individuals living in those communities who were 
affected by flooding, are eligible for assistance under the 
program. 
 
PDAP has completed or is in the process of completing well 
over 3,000 claims from this year’s flooding. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector is strong, contributing $4.5 
billion to Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product and 
sustaining 50,000 direct and indirect jobs. 
 
My government is committed to serving as a strong advocate 
for agriculture. 
 
Last year, when the Canadian rail system was failing to move a 
record crop to market, we urged the federal government to 
bring forward legislation compelling the railways to move 
more grain. 
 
In the coming weeks, Saskatchewan will host a New West 

Partnership transportation and market access summit to discuss 
long term improvements to Western Canada’s transportation 
system. 
 
We need an efficient transportation system because the success of 
our agriculture industry depends on our ability to export. 
 
In 2013, Saskatchewan set a record for agriculture exports for a 
third consecutive year with sales of $11.7 billion, and we are 
on track to meet our goal of increasing agriculture exports to 
$15 billion by 2020. 
 
Today’s agricultural sector also requires more improved 
internet and cell phone service. 
 
SaskTel’s rural strategy will see the expansion of high speed 
internet into another 54 communities by the end of the year. 
 
SaskTel is also doubling the available internet speed in 220 
rural communities and improving cell phone service in 111 
rural communities by adding more capacity to its 4G network. 
 
This is in addition to the 318 rural communities that have 
already received improved internet service and upgrades to 
cellular service in more than 500 locations since 2007. 
 
SAFE COMMUNITIES 
 
My government is mindful of its responsibility to protect the 
most vulnerable in society. 
 
That is why, during the summer, we established the new 
Counsel for Children Office. 
 
The Office will ensure all children in protection proceedings 
can have access to legal counsel when decisions are being made 
about their future, such as where and with whom they are going 
to live. 
 
This fall, the Ministry of Justice announced enhancements to 
the Victims Compensation Program. 
 
The Ministry will also be introducing amendments to The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act to expand the ability of 
police and the justice system to protect victims of violence and 
abuse. 
 
Following a trial or hearing, court judgments ordering one party 
to pay money to another are not always obeyed. 
 
My government will amend The Enforcement of Money 
Judgments Act to improve enforcement mechanisms. 
 
Improving access to the justice system for all makes 
Saskatchewan a fairer, safer place to live. 
 
This fall, my government will introduce legislation to expand 
fee waivers to all three levels of Saskatchewan’s courts, making 
the justice system more accessible to low-income people. 
 
By the end of the year, my government will expand the HUB 
model of crime prevention to Meadow Lake and Melfort, 
bringing the number of communities operating the program to 



October 22, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5455 

13, including Prince Albert, Yorkton, La Ronge, North 
Battleford, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Weyburn, Nipawin, Swift 
Current, Saskatoon, and Lloydminster. 
 
Two more communities will be added to the list in the first 
quarter of 2015. 
 
The HUB brings together police, government ministries, and 
community agencies to share information and identify 
situations that could lead to criminal behavior. 
 
Communities in Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, and Nova Scotia 
are following Saskatchewan’s lead by implementing this 
successful crime prevention program. 
 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
 
My government is aware there is a close relationship between 
the availability of safe, affordable housing and quality of life. 
 
In the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, we committed $344 
million to boost the supply of housing in the province, 
particularly for low and moderate-income families. 
 
In 2013, the number of rental housing units started was nearly 
34 times higher than in 2006. 
 
Today, the vacancy rate in Saskatchewan is 3.3 per cent, which 
is higher than the national average. 
 
My government has decreased waiting lists for families needing 
housing and has increased supports for the homeless. 
 
At the same time, we are increasing opportunities for 
low-income families to own homes, in cooperation with 
organizations like Habitat for Humanity. 
 
Since 2009, my government has committed $7.85 million to 
assist Habitat for Humanity build 134 houses in 12 
communities. 
 
My government has pledged to make Saskatchewan the best 
place to live for persons with disabilities. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability (SAID) 
program is an important part of our effort to fulfill that promise. 
 
There are now close to 13,000 households in the province 
enrolled in SAID, a 250 per cent increase since the program 
was introduced in 2009. 
 
My government wants to ensure all children in the province can 
live with their families in safety. 
 
To help meet this goal, my government is conducting a 
comprehensive review of its child welfare legislation. 
 
The review began this spring with an online discussion guide 
and meetings with stakeholders. 
 
The objective of the review is to strengthen The Child and 
Family Services Act and The Adoption Act. 
 

Earlier this year, my government was pleased to announce the 
opening of the Sweet Dreams home in Saskatoon. 
 
Sweet Dreams will provide at-risk single mothers with 
affordable housing and support while they complete their 
education and learn life and parenting skills. 
 
This project was made possible through a Social Impact Bond 
funding model - the first of its kind in Canada. 
 
My government will continue to explore other opportunities for 
Social Impact Bonds to make a positive difference in 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Saskatchewan has the second lowest poverty rate in Canada. 
However, we know there is still more work to do. 
 
My government is pleased to announce the development of a 
Poverty Reduction Strategy and thank the organization Poverty 
Costs for its work on this important issue under the leadership 
of individuals like Alison Robertson, Dr. Ryan Meili, and Dr. 
Cory Neudorf. 
 
PARKS, CULTURE AND SPORT 
 
Saskatchewan’s unprecedented growth has allowed my 
government to invest in the province’s extensive provincial 
park system. 
 
Since 2007, my government has committed $71 million to 
improve the camping experience in our parks, including adding 
1,400 new electrified camping sites. 
 
Saskatchewan’s lottery system supports 12,000 non-profit 
sport, culture, and recreational organizations. 
 
Recently, Sask Sport, SaskCulture, and the Saskatchewan 
Parks and Recreation Association signed a five-year lottery 
agreement to provide funding stability and allow these 
organizations to maintain quality programs and services. 
 
Last year alone, $52 million was distributed to these 
organizations. 
 
Hockey and curling rinks are vital to community life in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To assist with the cost of operating rinks, my government 
introduced the Community Rink Affordability Grant program 
in 2012. 
 
More than $3.2 million has been invested in the program 
during the last two years, with more than 380 communities 
benefiting. 
 
This year, my government has committed another $1.7 million 
to the program. 
 
The Main Street Saskatchewan program offers a 
community-driven approach to revitalizing historic downtown 
and commercial areas. 
 
Since its introduction, Main Street Saskatchewan has leveraged 



5456 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

10 dollars in private sector investment for every dollar invested 
by the government. 
 
The results can be seen in communities like Maple Creek, 
where a group of new residents from the Philippines invested in 
Maple Creek’s historic Commercial Hotel, which was damaged 
by flooding in 2010. 
 
The owners of the hotel received $32,000 from the Main Street 
Saskatchewan program and the hotel is now a thriving 
business. 
 
My government is pleased Creative Saskatchewan is now fully 
operational. 
 
To date, $7.7 million has been provided to support the 
marketing and development of all creative industries in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This includes $3.4 million distributed to the film industry, $2 
million to the music industry, $1.1 million to the visual arts 
sector, and $800,000 to the publishing industry. 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
My government believes economic growth and environmental 
protection are compatible objectives. 
 
A clear example of this is the Boundary Dam 3 project, which 
will demonstrate to the world it is possible to significantly 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions while generating the 
electricity needed to sustain growth. 
 
In the coming months, we will adopt a new results-based 
regulatory model that will improve protection of the 
environment and promote innovative management tools, 
including the Saskatchewan Environmental Code. 
 
This approach will allow industry and communities to develop 
innovative solutions to meet environmental protection 
objectives while allowing the Ministry of Environment to 
dedicate more resources to activities that pose the greatest 
environmental risk. 
 
This session, my government will amend The Wildlife Act to 
increase penalties for illegal hunting. 
 
The amendments include: 
 

- Increasing the hunting suspension for serious violations 
from one to two years; 

 
- Prohibiting those who have not paid a hunting fine from 

buying a licence; and 
 
- Prohibiting any Canadian resident suspended from hunting 

or fishing in another jurisdiction from purchasing a licence 
in Saskatchewan. 

 
In addition, those convicted of three serious wildlife offences 
will be banned for life from hunting in Saskatchewan. 
 
My government has undertaken an online drainage 

consultation that received nearly 500 submissions and will 
carry out further consultations with stakeholders in the coming 
months. 
 
These consultations will lead to the development of new 
regulations governing drainage as part of the province’s 25 
Year Saskatchewan Water Security Plan. 
 
This is a priority issue for the Water Security Agency. 
 
HONOURING THOSE WHO SERVE 
 
My government recognizes the sacrifices made by the men and 
women who choose to serve our country in the Canadian 
Armed Forces and the sacrifices made by their families. 
 
In 2009, my government introduced the Saskatchewan 
Scholarship of Honour – a $5,000 scholarship available to 
returning military personnel and to the spouses and children of 
Canadian Armed Forces members killed or permanently 
disabled in the service of their country. 
 
We are forever indebted to those who have paid the ultimate 
price for our freedom. 
 
Since 1919, the Government of Canada has awarded the 
Memorial Cross, sometimes called the Silver Cross, to the loved 
ones of Canadian Armed Forces personnel who died in service. 
 
This fall, my government will make a commemorative licence 
plate available to recipients of the Memorial Cross. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Saskatchewan is strong. 
 
This strength comes from our people – their hard work, their 
determination, their ingenuity and their generosity. 
 
These Saskatchewan values will keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I now leave you to the business of the session, knowing that you 
will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May divine providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Assembly in all its deliberations. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan. 
 
God bless Canada. 
 
And God save the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — I invite Elder Betty McKenna to come 
forward. 
 
Ms. McKenna: — [Elder McKenna spoke for a time in 
Ojibwa.] 
 
On this day of new beginnings I humbly ask you, O Great 
Spirit, to be ever present with the members of this honourable 
Assembly. With your grace, give them wisdom and counsel. 
Give a blessing of order, harmony, peace, and prosperity, a 



October 22, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5457 

blessing of health for mind, body, and spirit. So long as the sun 
shines and the wheat grows, keep Saskatchewan a safe and 
blessed and strong province. 
 
[Elder McKenna continued in Ojibwa.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Elder McKenna. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:47.] 
 
The Speaker: — I will begin with our traditional Assembly 
prayer. Please all rise. 
 
Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 
favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 
works, begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy 
holy name, and finally by thy mercy attain everlasting life. 
Amen. 
 
Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just before I move the Pro 
Forma Bill, I would seek leave of the Assembly to make a 
statement on the events of this day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has leave to make a statement on 
events of the day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

National Events and the Work of Democracy 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, while no one in this room 
knows all of the details of this day’s horrific events in the 
nation’s capital, I think it’s fair to say that when coupled with 
the events in Quebec not long ago, and today’s events, that 
democracy in Canada, has fallen under attack. Those who 
perpetrated the attack no doubt are motivated by a hatred that is 
very strong. They should know this: our resolve is stronger; our 
strength is greater. Our freedoms have faced threats before and 
our nation has always prevailed. Our thoughts and prayers 
today are with that young soldier’s family and his friends, the 
soldier who was so cowardly attacked and killed. 
 
This morning he was part of an honour guard at our country’s 
war memorial, a memorial that reminds us, each one, that 
freedom is not free. We say a prayer of thanks today, Mr. 
Speaker, and a prayer of protection for each and every member 
of the Canadian Forces, to all who respond to emergency, to 
those who police our great country. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, we considered if only briefly today, 
if we should even go ahead with today’s ceremony, the Throne 
Speech — that enduring parliamentary symbolic affirmation of 
a free people, of a democracy that gives freely and unreservedly 
and without any hesitation to long-standing citizens and to 
newcomers alike, every single liberty, every freedom to speak 
and to believe and to assemble and also then the rule of law. 
And this ceremony is made ever better by the presence of our 

Armed Forces personnel, of those members of police services, 
of members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, of 
representation of our judiciary, the conveyance of that rule of 
law and, today, of 70-plus heads of diplomatic missions and 
their spouses who are visiting our capital from the nation’s 
capital. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we resolved that we must proceed. I want 
to thank on behalf of this House and each guest here, and on 
behalf of the province, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
who’ve added resources to make this day possible, the City of 
Regina Police Service who have added resources to ensure our 
safety today and also, Mr. Speaker, to our Sergeant-at-Arms, to 
Mr. Pat Shaw and his team for his leadership. And, Mr. 
Speaker, to you for your leadership. We will proceed. We have 
work to do. It is the work of this democracy. Let us be about 
that work. And even as we do it, might we send a message 
today to any who would harbour some dark conspiracy that this 
democracy in our country and here in our province might be 
intimidated or changed, even silenced, that we will simply 
never let that happen. 
 
Let us all be in equal measure, vigilant against such dangers and 
threats but protective of each other and considerate of each 
other, that we would love our neighbours as ourselves. For if we 
do, we will prevail. And we will give life to our creed, for this 
is Saskatchewan: Multis e gentibus vires, “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Broten: — With permission for leave for members to 
make a statement following the Premier’s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
members for granting leave. 
 
And it is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we would take a bit of a 
diversion from normal throne day proceedings to comment on 
the events that we all saw unfold today in our nation’s capital 
and affecting those in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, but affecting 
everyone across this country in every province, in every 
territory. 
 
I would first, Mr. Speaker, like to add my words of appreciation 
to all of the staff and protective services, Regina Police, the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] for the work that they’ve done today, on short notice, 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring that the proceedings here are safe and 
that all of our invited guests are in fact able to partake and 
witness what is going on today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On a number of occasions we’ve stood as members in this 
Assembly and commented on members of our Armed Forces 
who have gone abroad, who have put their lives on the line, 



5458 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

who have faced danger, Mr. Speaker. And we remember the 
sacrifice that they have made, and of course we are always 
shocked and we are always saddened when a member of the 
Armed Forces is killed or wounded in the line of action 
overseas. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s all the more unsettling and it’s all the 
more shocking when we see this happen here on Canadian soil, 
and especially so close to our national parliament and by the 
war memorial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I share and the opposition shares the concern, the 
outrage, the deep mourning that we have for the Canadian 
soldier who passed away, who was killed, Mr. Speaker, as well 
as those who have been wounded through the events of today. 
 
And I would echo the Premier’s comments. I would ask that all 
Saskatchewan people at this time find this as an opportunity to 
strengthen our resolve to look out for one another, find this as 
an opportunity to strengthen our democracy, the things that we 
hold dear, the things that we celebrated through the proceedings 
of this Throne Speech here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask that we look out for one another and that we take 
actions to protect our democracy. With that, I would thank 
members for the time to make some remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At this 
time I move that a Bill respecting the Administration of Oaths 
of Office be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 
the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this session will be Caitlin Smith, Leslie Grey, Sabra Leier, 
Tayler Kosloski, Kennedy McBain, and Sydney McWilliams. 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 
now: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Thursday, October 23, 
2014. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Thursday, October 23, 
2014. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would like to thank all the guests and members of the public 
that have joined us today. 
 
I would like to recognize all of the members of the diplomatic 
corps of ambassadors and high commissioners who are in 
attendance today in our galleries. They were here in Regina to 
take part in an economic mission this week, and we welcome 
them to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to thank the members of the judiciary from the Court of 
Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, the Provincial Court for 
your attendance today. 
 
I would like to thank Elder Betty McKenna for taking part in 
today’s ceremony. 
 
I would like to introduce the school group that is with us today. 
In the west gallery we have grade 7 and 8 students from 
McNeill School in Regina. I would like to thank all of you 
along with your teachers for attending today’s ceremony. 
 
I’d also like to welcome the grade 7 choir from École 
Monseigneur De Laval who are seated in the west gallery. And 
I will be calling upon them to sing in a few moments. 
 
Thank you to Kevin Kasha for taking part in today’s ceremony 
by playing the Vice-Regal salute. 
 
I would like to thank the members of the following 
Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 
providing us with the honour guard earlier this afternoon: 3rd 
Canadian Division Headquarters Saskatchewan Domestic 
Operations, 15 Wing Moose Jaw, Royal Regina Rifles, 
Saskatchewan Dragoons, 38 Signal Regiment, 38 Service 



October 22, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5459 

Battalion, 16 Field Ambulance, and HMCS Queen. 
 
As well I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 
Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, and the Royal 
Canadian Artillery Band. 
 
I would like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and the members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. This tea will be 
held in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the 
library reading room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I would now like to welcome the grade 7 choir from École 
Monseigneur De Laval under the directorship of Claude Martel 
who will be singing two songs for us: “On va s’aimer Encore” 
et “À Fleur de Peau.” Ladies and gentlemen, the grade 7 choir 
from École Monseigneur De Laval. 
 
[The choir sang.] 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I would like to thank 
the choir for their very fine performance. 
 
One final announcement. I ask that members and guests observe 
the following order when departing from the Chamber: the 
Speaker’s party; Her Honour’s party; Premier and Provincial 
Secretary; Leader of the Opposition; judges of the Court of 
Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court; members of 
cabinet and their spouses; other members of the Legislative 
Assembly and their spouses; and guests. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow, Thursday, 
October 23rd, 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:10.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 5449 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 National Events and the Work of Democracy 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5457 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5457 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5458 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5458 
TABLING OF THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5458 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5458 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	SUSTAINING THE MOMENTUM
	PROMOTING FREE TRADE
	INFRASTRUCTURE
	HIGHWAYS
	EFFICIENT GOVERNMENT
	HEALTH CARE
	EDUCATION
	POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION
	INNOVATION
	SUPPORTING COMMUNITIES
	AGRICULTURE
	Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector is strong, contributing $4.5 billion to Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product and sustaining 50,000 direct and indirect jobs.
	PARKS, CULTURE AND SPORT
	ENVIRONMENT
	HONOURING THOSE WHO SERVE
	CONCLUSION

