




















































Hansard: March 11, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 11, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4631 
 March 11, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would request 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 
for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce and to welcome to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to our Legislative Assembly a very special 
guest in your gallery. Now we have with us today His 
Excellency Luis Carlos Delgado Murillo, the ambassador of the 
Republic of Costa Rica to Canada. 
 
This is the ambassador’s first visit to Saskatchewan. In fact, I 
think this might represent his country’s first visit to the 
province of Saskatchewan. During his stay here in the land of 
living skies, His Excellency will meet with provincial and local 
government officials. He’ll meet business leaders, some 
officials from the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 
along with our Lieutenant Governor, the representative of the 
Queen in our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador’s visit here signals the first steps 
in a relationship between the province of Saskatchewan and the 
nation of Costa Rica. It provides an opportunity to explore 
potential markets for Saskatchewan’s exporters to this very 
important Central American country. Costa Rica’s attracted one 
of the highest levels of foreign direct investment per capita in 
Latin America, with its primary industries including 
microprocessors, food processing, medical equipment, textiles 
and clothing, construction materials, fertilizer, plastic products, 
and ecotourism. It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that Costa 
Rica produces more than 90 per cent of its electricity through 
renewable resources. 
 
And of course I’m sure everyone in the Assembly who’s braved 
our winter very much wishes that we could explore some 
innovative way to import Costa Rica’s tropical weather to our 
part of the world. Not likely to happen, Mr. Speaker. But we 
look very much forward to working with the government and 
the people of Costa Rica and to nurture a very strong new 
relationship and of course warm friendship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of the Assembly please 
join me in welcoming our very special guest, His Excellency 
Luis Carlos Delgado Murillo, to Saskatchewan’s legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Provincial Secretary in welcoming His Excellency to the 
Assembly today. The Provincial Secretary outlined many of the 
economic ties and opportunities that exist, so we thank His 
Excellency for being here. And I know we do export a few of 
our residents each year for a few months to enjoy the beaches 
and the good climate of Costa Rica, whether it’s down for a 
wedding or just a good holiday. It’s a popular destination for 
many people. But the ongoing ties are very important so we 
thank you for your work here and thank you for your presence 
here in the Assembly today. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you, I have the honour of introducing a very 
special group of women from the University of Saskatchewan. 
Joining us today from the Women in the Legislature student 
society are Meritt Kocdag, president, and 22 colleagues. And 
maybe when I announce your name you could wave: Aimee 
Ferré, Rebecca McMillan, Kayla Hrudka, Serena Dimitrie, 
Shannon Evans, Helen Tang, Erin Pillipow, Ariel Fitzgerald, 
Amanda Lindgren, Chelsea Lehner, Carlie Heagy, Kendra 
Schreiner, Joree Nelson, Nicole Kozar, Janna Mitchell, Natasha 
Steinback, Desiree Steele, Samantha Gauvin, Olya Stepanenko, 
Christine Young, and Brenda Schurr. Also in attendance is Pat 
Faulconbridge, the Status of Women office and Ministry of 
Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young women have been in the legislature 
for a couple of days to learn about the provincial political 
system and to see first-hand how women contribute to 
government institutions. 
 
This non-partisan group was formed to increase awareness of 
under-representation of women in Canada politics, to inspire 
interest in governance, to encourage women to become active in 
political life, and to provide women with the opportunity to 
learn about the Canadian political system. 
 
Alumni of the Women in the Legislature have gone on directly 
to participate in politics and governance, and graduated alumni 
are now contributing to political campaigns, and/or they hold 
positions in the federal, provincial, or First Nations governance. 
 
I want to thank all of these women for their passion and their 
inspiration and wish them all the best as they take the 
experience they have gained over the last couple of days and 
use it in their own future. I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these outstanding women to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming the Women in the Legislature 
participants. And it’s been great to see this program grow over 
the last couple of years and see larger groups of women and 
students coming to the Assembly and exploring the possibility 
of a future in politics. 



4632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

And I know our NDP [New Democratic Party] staff and MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] have thoroughly enjoyed 
the opportunities to meet with you and to discuss items. And I 
hope the glimpses of life in the legislature that you’ve had over 
the last few days encouraged you to think more seriously about 
a future in politics. I hope it’s not the other way around in terms 
of the thoughts that you’ve had over the last while. 
 
After the next election, we need to see many more women 
elected to the legislature. I hope many of those women are you, 
and I also hope many of you are in the New Democratic Party 
and caucus, but perhaps that’s a discussion for another day. I’d 
ask all members to join me in welcoming the Women in the 
Legislature group. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleagues and the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
His Excellency the ambassador from Costa Rica to our 
province. We’re very grateful for your country’s first official 
visit to Saskatchewan, as we are grateful for the trading 
relationship that we enjoy, and frankly the other relationships 
that have been referenced by the Leader of the Opposition, 
more and more of recreation and tourism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to say hello and welcome to the Women in the 
Legislature student club participants who are here. One thing 
that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and I would agree with 
is that there are too many in this Assembly of our gender and 
not enough of yours. And whether it’s on that side of the House 
or this side of the House, we very, very much need more 
women in this particular Chamber, in the House of Commons, 
in government right across this country. And so we want to 
encourage them as they consider all of these options in their 
future and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly here 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister, the Premier, and the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming the Women in the Legislature group. It’s been my 
privilege the past three years to sit down with the various 
participants and share a little bit about my own experience. But 
I want to give a special shout-out to Meritt Kocdag, who I had 
the opportunity to meet when we founded Equal Voice, the 
Saskatchewan chapter. Meritt took on a job that many people 
aren’t interested in. She jumped right in and was the treasurer of 
Equal Voice and did that job incredibly capably and is I think a 
really great inspiration to other women. So with that I’d like 
everyone to join me in welcoming the Women in the 
Legislature, and a special hello to Meritt, and of course to Pat 
Faulconbridge with the Status of Women. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to introduce someone that’s very special in 
my life. Our daughter Kayla is here with us today, and she’s 
here as part of the Women in the Legislature delegations. Give 

us a wave, Kayla. There you go. 
 
Kayla has a very, very busy life, Mr. Speaker. In addition to her 
studies, which she works very, very hard at, she’s the mother of 
our granddaughter, Mia, who’s three years old. And of course 
Mia, as anyone else knows who has a grandchild, is the light of 
our life. And so we’re very, very happy. 
 
Kayla also has the great distinction of being only one of two 
women on my wife’s approved date list when she’s out of town. 
So that’s why oftentimes you’ll see Kayla accompany me when 
I’m out. And the other one is my other daughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce Nikki Kozar. Nikki is 
also with us today as part of the delegation. Nikki’s a very good 
friend of our family, and she’s also very, very busy with her 
studies and raising her young son. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask my 
colleagues in the legislature to welcome Kayla and Nikki to 
their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I, along with my colleagues, would also like to extend a 
welcome to the women of WiL [Women in the Legislature]. I, 
along with my colleague from Regina Wascana Plains and 
Saskatoon Riversdale, had the opportunity to present to them 
and entertain a very fruitful dialogue yesterday morning. And I 
do hope that each and every one of them will consider public 
life. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House 
someone in your gallery who really needs no introduction — 
he’s no stranger to this House — Graham Addley, the former 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, who was with us last night 
celebrating the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
dinner. So I’d ask all members to give a great welcome to 
Graham over here. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Addley to the 
gallery today. Mr. Speaker, I can remember well when we were 
in opposition working with Mr. Addley. I remember somebody 
at one point having changed the licence plate on his car to a 
Saskatchewan Party licence plate and he had several weeks of 
good travel during that period of time. And I would like of 
course to remind him of that and welcome him back. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
rest of the Assembly, sitting in your gallery, I’d like to invite all 
members to join me in welcoming a delegation of the Anatolian 
Heritage Foundation. They are also affiliated with the 
Intercultural Dialogue Institute and the Turkish Canadian 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4633 

congress. 

Here today — and I’m going to really do my best here — but 
here today are, and just give us a wave: Ayan Ozturk, Menaf 
Ozturk, Ahmet Oksum, Mustafa Erdem, Ozgar Tas, Omer 
Yildiz, Emre Eroglu, Bilal Sayin, Omer Kacar, Ibadullah Catal, 
Mehmet Kahraman. 

The AHF [Anatolian Heritage Foundation] is an organization 
with the purpose of bringing people together. Their mission is 
to promote cultural, educational, social, business, and 
arts-related events and activities that bring Canadian and 
Turkish communities together. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to the legislature, and invite all members to the AHF’s 
first friendship reception being held later today in room 218. 
And again, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome the 
Anatolian Heritage Foundation, the Intercultural Dialogue 
Institute here today. These are certainly leaders within our 
community. They assist in building very important relationships 
with the Turkish community, both within our province and 
abroad. I’d like to say that the nurturing of relationships and 
dialogue that they’re promoting within our province are 
certainly building important understanding, building 
relationships, and strengthening us from an economic, social, 
and cultural perspective. 

I’ve had the privilege of getting to know many of these 
individuals and to count many of them as friends. I’ve enjoyed 
the conversations in our community office. I found their first 
banquet that they held last year here in Regina to be just 
exceptional in bringing together the community. And I know 
my wife, Stephanie, and I really enjoyed the public Ramadan 
tents that you held last summer in Victoria Park here in Regina 
— an exceptional opportunity to learn together and to share 
with the public. So thank you for your leadership on those 
fronts. 

So it’s my pleasure to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming these community leaders here today. And I ask 
members to join me in doing so. 

Mr. Speaker, while still on my feet I want to introduce a good 
friend that’s here today, Mr. Arlee McGrath from LeRoy, 
Saskatchewan who’s here today assisting and supporting the 
Women in the Legislature delegation. I understand he’s 
volunteering his time and his vehicle, and thank you for doing 
so. 

Arlee’s certainly a leader within this province from a 
community perspective, from an economic perspective. And 
he’s a strong producer in this province — both a grain producer 
and pork producer — and a good friend. 

I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome Arlee McGrath 
to his legislature. 

[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have two guests that I’d like to introduce. I feel 
pretty lucky following my good friend from Coronation Park 
and doing such a great job on those names. Mine is really quite 
simple. 

Sean Wilson, Mr. Speaker, is the president of G.W. 
Construction, and he’s also the Chair of the board of the 
Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. We’ve had a 
great working relationship obviously with Sean and the 
construction association over many years, and we certainly look 
forward to that great relationship as we move forward. 

Also sitting next to Sean is Shantel Lipp who is the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. 
For any of you that have got to know Shantel, you’ll know 
that she may be small in stature, but she can rule those 
heavy construction guys around like you wouldn’t 
believe, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyway I thank both of them for the great work that they do for 
this province and the infrastructure that we need to make this 
province tick. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the minister and welcome the 
representatives of the Heavy Construction Association here 
today and to thank them for their work within our province. 
Thank you for joining us here today. Thank you. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. 
And we know that bullying can cause serious harm, and the 
consequences of bullying are devastating, including depression, 
self-harm, addictions, and suicide, and that other provinces have 
brought forward legislation and various tools and programs 
showing swift and effective government action. We know that 
this government is not doing enough to protect Saskatchewan 
youth and that bullying happens wherever children gather to 
live, learn, or play. 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 
Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 
young people are at stake and that this government must do 



4634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

more to protect our youth. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
from across our province as it relates to the failed audit by this 
government, an unprecedented failure, the first ever in Canadian 
history for a provincial government to fail an audit by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member should know better than to enter 
into debate during the presentation of petitions. I recognize the 
member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course this is of concern to 
Saskatchewan people, and I present a petition here today calling 
for books that Saskatchewan people can trust. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 
true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 
with the rest of Canada, in compliance with the public 
sector accounting standards, and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin to 
provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy financial 
management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 
organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 
concerned about seniors’ care in the North. The Croft report of 
2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 
seniors, and the problem has only gotten worse. The seniors 
have done their part for this province and it’s time for the 
government to do its part. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 
citizens with respect and dignity, and to immediately 
invest in a long-term care facility in the La Ronge area. 

 
I so present. And it’s signed by many people of northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan bring to the 
Assembly’s attention the following: that the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School in north central Regina is now quite 
literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no 
longer safe for students or staff. In the prayer that reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens in the city of 
Regina. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Women in the Legislature 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
an opportunity to recognize the participants and organizers of 
the University of Saskatchewan’s Women in the Legislature or 
WiL program, an initiative that aims to encourage women to get 
involved in politics. 
 
I had the chance, alongside several MLAs and staff, to meet 
with the group and discuss my experiences as a woman with a 
career in the legislature. This is one of my favourite parts of the 
job, sharing honestly the ups and downs of our work, and 
working to spark an interest in other women to consider elected 
office as a possibility in their future. 
 
These women are in the Assembly today as part of their 
two-day trip to Regina. The opportunity to spend time in the 
legislature gives them a chance to get a glimpse of the work of 
politicians, public servants, and political staff, and to learn there 
are all kinds of ways to be involved in politics and to serve. 
 
The mission of the Women in the Legislature is echoed by 
another important organization in the province, Equal Voice. 
Equal Voice Saskatchewan has provided integral support for the 
Women in the Legislature program. Equal Voice is a national, 
multi-partisan organization whose mission is to elect more 
women to political office in Canada. We commend them for 
their work, and look forward to their important contributions to 
the province in years to come. 
 
I would like to call on the Assembly to recognize these women 
and all of those who’ve worked so hard to make this WiL event 
a success. We look forward to the day when women’s voices 
are heard more loudly and clearly at all levels of government in 
Canada. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
River Valley. 
 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4635 

First Nations Agency Receives Accreditation 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Saskatchewan Rivers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise in the House to talk about a wonderful 
announcement in Prince Albert this morning by the Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. Just recently the Peter Ballantyne Cree 
Nation First Nation Child and Family Services agency was 
accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of 
Rehabilitation Facilities or CARF. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CARF is an internationally renowned organization 
recognized for its rigorous service standards and guidelines. An 
accreditation through CARF requires significant time and 
effort, but it’s time and effort that is meaningful because it’s a 
seal of approval. It’s a seal of trust. This accreditation means 
that Peter Ballantyne Child and Family Services is providing 
the best possible service to the children and families in its 
communities. It means that Peter Ballantyne Child and Family 
Services cares. 
 
This type of accreditation isn’t an easy thing to achieve or 
maintain. It sets a very high standard for child welfare services. 
We truly admire them for committing to this important work. 
They have set the bar high for both themselves and for child 
welfare services across the province. 
 
In closing, I want to congratulate the Peter Ballantyne Cree 
Nation and thank them for working with us to help make life 
better for vulnerable children. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Artifact or Artifiction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I was 
pleased to attend the second annual Artifact or Artifiction here 
in Regina hosted by the Friends of the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum. The Friends of the Royal Saskatchewan Museum is a 
non-profit organization that promotes Saskatchewan’s culture 
and natural history by encouraging public involvement and 
financial support of the museum and increasing its visibility 
within the community. 
 
I’m happy to report that the event was a great success. The 
guests enjoyed incredible food provided by Crave Kitchen & 
Wine Bar and participated in a silent auction and the egg 
scramble raffle. Further, the event was an opportunity to 
explore the museum and challenge the participants’ knowledge 
of our province’s rich history. Artifacts and specimens from the 
museum’s collection were on display, each with its own story 
told by museum staff, volunteers, and curators. Participants 
were asked to guess what was fact and what was fiction. The 
unique event was a lot of fun. 
 
Proceeds from the event go towards scholarships to help further 
Saskatchewan’s scientific and historical heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the Friends of the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, the board of directors and staff, as well 
as the leadership and staff at the RSM [Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum] for their ongoing dedication in promoting and 
celebrating Saskatchewan’s culture and history. I ask all 
members of this Assembly to join with me to congratulate and 

thank all those involved for hosting and making this event a 
great success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 

Regina Company Raises Funds in Silicon Valley 
 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I rise to acknowledge a young local entrepreneur 
recently returned from a trip to Silicon Valley where he raised 
an impressive $200,000 for his tech start-up company. Jordan 
Boesch, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina-based 
7shifts, founded the company in 2011. 7shifts has developed an 
employee scheduling app designed to make running a restaurant 
and coordinating staff easier for businesses in the food service 
industry. 
 
Jordan, along with his wife Andree Carpentier and colleague 
Johannes Lindenbaum, travelled to San Mateo, California last 
October after being selected by a start-up accelerator called 
Boost. In exchange for a piece of the company, the trio was 
given the opportunity to work on building 7shifts right in the 
heart of Silicon Valley under the direct guidance of successful 
tech entrepreneurs. During their three-month trip, 7shifts 
doubled its revenue, signed major new clients, and secured 
funding from new investors. After settling back in Regina, 
Jordan plans on seeking out more investment and eventually 
finding an office space to work in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Jordan and his team at 7shifts on their incredibly successful trip 
to California and wish them all the best in the future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Women Build Launched in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to inform the Assembly about an exciting new housing 
project between the province and Habitat for Humanity that I 
helped launch last week in Prince Albert. This project will 
result in a Saskatchewan family receiving a home to call their 
own. The initiative will be led entirely by women and is the first 
of its kind in Prince Albert. 
 
Established by Habitat for Humanity, Women Build is a 
program that encourages and promotes women’s leadership and 
participation in construction and skilled trades. The program 
provides an environment in which women can feel comfortable 
learning a variety of construction skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will take this opportunity to recognize and thank 
Habitat volunteers, women and men, who will be participating 
in this project. Our government believes in this can-do spirit, 
and we feel privileged to work with Habitat and its many 
community partners to help another family come home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2009 we have dedicated $7.1 million in 
funding to Habitat for Humanity affiliates to help build 130 
homes across our province. This investment is a concrete 
demonstration of our commitment to increase the supply of 



4636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

quality, affordable housing across Saskatchewan and to 
encourage Saskatchewan women to lead and to learn skilled 
trades. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Huskies Women’s Basketball Team 
Wins Canada West Title 

 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am both excited 
and proud to share the news that the University of 
Saskatchewan’s women’s basketball team took home the 
Canada West championship title last weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Huskies downed the Fraser Valley Crusaders 67 to 56 in 
the gold medal game at the Canada West Final Four in 
Edmonton. Kabree Howard led the Huskies with 20 points and 
six assists, while Canada West MVP [most valuable player] and 
Defensive Player of the Year Dalyce Emmerson recorded a 
double-double with 19 points and 22 rebounds along with eight 
blocked shots. 
 
This marks the third time in team history and the second time in 
four years that the Huskies have won the Canada West title, Mr. 
Speaker. It also marks the 100th title in the history of Huskie 
athletics varsity programs. The Huskies came into the 
tournament as the underdogs against top-ranked Alberta and 
Regina, but played their best basketball of the year and left as 
champions. 
 
The women’s basketball team will now head to Windsor, 
Ontario for the CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] Final 8 
championship from March 14th to the 16th, the seventh time in 
the past nine years the team has headed to the national finals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
women’s Huskies basketball team on their huge win and wish 
them the best at nationals later this month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River. 
 

Effects of Carbon Levies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it finally happened. For 
over a year now, we’ve been waiting for the NDP leader to 
release some sort of economic policy. Today he finally did it on 
Twitter. The problem is it’s a policy that could potentially do a 
lot of harm to our economy and to Saskatchewan families. He 
wants a carbon levy and he wants it now. 
 
Our side of the House has been asking him for months to 
present a plan, to do more than just call for more and more 
spending. But now he’s proposing a carbon levy which could 
have a huge impact on SaskPower, on SaskEnergy, and on 
Saskatchewan families’ utility bills. Has he ever considered 
this, Mr. Speaker: does he have any idea of how much this 
would cost Saskatchewan families, how much it would cost 
Saskatchewan’s economy, before he goes rushing headlong into 
this NDP carbon levy? 

Mr. Speaker, I know we have been calling on the NDP leader to 
finally release some of his own ideas instead of just opposing 
everything, but if carbon levies without consideration of the 
cost to Saskatchewan families is the best that he can do, 
Saskatchewan could do without the NDP’s ideas. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Inspections of Personal Care Homes 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The independent 
Provincial Auditor reviewed this government’s approach to 
regulating personal care homes back in 2012. The auditor said 
that this government was failing to provide proper oversight of 
personal care homes. And the auditor also said that this 
government should start conducting more unannounced 
inspections and publicly post the results of those inspections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has still not yet followed through 
on that. My question to the Premier: why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect to the Leader of the Opposition’s question about 
when we will begin publicly reporting on inspection results, the 
reason why we haven’t done that yet is because the bill is still 
before the House, Mr. Speaker. There is an amendment to The 
Personal Care Homes Act that is before the legislature that I 
introduced in the fall. I certainly hope that will be passed this 
spring, Mr. Speaker, which will give us the legal framework to 
be able to publish the inspections online. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the inspection process, we do have 
the ability to conduct spot inspections when there is a complaint 
that has been received, Mr. Speaker. And that does happen from 
time to time, as well as the inspections that do take place during 
the regular licensing process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, most private care home operators 
do a good job in caring for seniors in the province. But we 
know that there are some bad apples in the mix and we know 
that the condition of care, the quality of care in some of those 
homes is deplorable. The inspection records that the 
government has refused to post publicly reveal serious incidents 
not reported to the Ministry of Health. The records also talk 
about medicines not being properly administered, food safety 
problems, blocked exits, and fire sprinkler systems that aren’t 
working.  
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: can he guarantee that 
his government ensured that every single one of these serious 
concerns were addressed after the inspections were completed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly when there are complaints that have been 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4637 

raised, either through the complaint process or whether there are 
deficiencies with the inspection during the licensing process, 
Mr. Speaker, the inspectors do follow up with those personal 
care home operators, Mr. Speaker. The consultants that do work 
for the ministry, for the regional health authorities, do follow up 
with those to ensure that the operator is aware of the deficiency, 
they’re aware of what the expectations are that are set out in the 
handbook for operating a personal care home, Mr. Speaker, and 
that those are rectified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly believe this government has taken the 
position that we agree with the Provincial Auditor in terms of 
enhancing the accountability and the transparency for operators 
of personal care homes. Mr. Speaker, certainly I would expect 
that with the understanding that deficiencies in the inspection 
and the reporting will be now made public with the passage of 
this Act, the amendments, that personal care home operators 
will know that if they are deficient it will be made public. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These inspection 
records show that at least one personal care home still did not 
have a carbon monoxide detector in 2012. And that’s two years 
after three seniors died in St. Mary’s Villa because of carbon 
monoxide poisoning. That is simply unacceptable. And we 
don’t even know how many other homes did not have a carbon 
monoxide detector, Mr. Speaker, because this government 
didn’t even bother to inspect 47 privately run care homes. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many homes did 
not have a carbon monoxide detector? And can he guarantee 
today that every private care home has a carbon monoxide 
detector? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, following the tragic circumstances at St. Mary’s Villa, 
we ensured that all long-term care facilities in the province — 
all hospitals, those facilities that do keep people overnight — do 
in fact have, Mr. Speaker, carbon monoxide detectors. In fact 
we are expanding that to all health facilities within the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the Act and publishing the results of 
inspections, Mr. Speaker, we can do that today. Mr. Speaker, 
we could go forward with the process if the Leader of the 
Opposition, if the opposition wishes to do that today, certainly 
the government is prepared to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see is a lack of 
willingness of this government to come forward with 
information unless they are pressured to do so, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting. I asked, Mr. Speaker, if every private care home had 
a carbon monoxide detector. There was no answer whether or 
not every one today in fact had one. It’s hard to know, Mr. 
Speaker, because there were 47 private care homes that were 
not even inspected. So it’s hard to know the current state. 
 
Residents in care homes deserve the best possible care, Mr. 

Speaker. And their friends and family members deserve the 
peace of mind, the peace of mind to know that their loved ones 
are receiving great care. But the inspection records reveal that 
some care homes, Mr. Speaker, are not clean, are not sanitary, 
and are not safe. It even stated, Mr. Speaker, that some care 
homes don’t have the proper temperature so that seniors can be 
comfortable. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: when will this 
government start ensuring proper inspections of every home? 
When will this government post that information online? And 
when will this government start enforcing appropriate 
standards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
hon. member is right; this is a serious issue, Mr. Speaker. And 
the government has brought forward legislation that will be 
certainly part of the solution here in terms of transparency, in 
terms of the immediate availability of inspection reports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the Leader of the Opposition’s co-operation, 
with the co-operation of members opposite, we can ensure that 
that bill is dealt with in committee today, passed in this House 
today, and in effect as soon as possible. Will the Leader of the 
Opposition agree to that timetable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Support for Educators 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, according to a recent study 
of Saskatchewan teachers conducted by the Saskatchewan 
instructional development unit at the U of R [University of 
Regina], a full 90 per cent of our province’s teachers say they 
feel unappreciated by that government. That’s nine out of ten 
Saskatchewan teachers feeling unappreciated by the current 
government. Teachers are passionate about what they do, and 
they’re good at what they do. They’ve been holding up their 
end of the bargain, but this government hasn’t listened to them 
and have made their jobs much more difficult. 
 
To the Education minister: with 90 per cent of our province’s 
teachers feeling unappreciated by that government, will he 
admit that this government’s track record of education has been 
a failure? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can advise 
the member opposite, and I appreciate the opportunity to speak 
to all the teachers in the province, the work that they do is 
absolutely vital. It’s something that is taking our province 
forward. It is part of the plan, the province’s growth initiative, 
of increasing the workforce by 60,000 people by the year 2020, 
also by increasing the graduation rate from just over 70 per cent 
to closer to the national average of well over 80 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to working with teachers for that. 
 
I can advise you as well, Mr. Speaker, that in October we 
announced that two advisors would hold province-wide 
consultations to ask teachers, students, and parents how do we 



4638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

improve the education system? Those people are Patricia 
Prowse and Russ Mirasty who have been working tirelessly to 
do that. They have been travelling around the province hosting 
a large number of meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work that is done by our teachers in the 
province is invaluable. We respect and value them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The reality is there’s fewer educational 
assistants in many classrooms all across this province. That’s a 
big part of why teachers are frustrated with this government. 
And here’s what the report says: 
 

When teachers fill the gaps in services as support staff 
positions are reduced or eliminated, the decline in adequate 
supports affects both students and teachers. Operating with 
fewer educational assistant positions means that intensive 
supports cannot be provided to students. It also 
compromises teachers’ time by adding to the pressure of 
their existing responsibilities. 

 
To the Education minister: is he actually willing to listen to 
Saskatchewan teachers? Has he read the report that’s been 
submitted to him, the one that we’re referencing here today, or 
is he still going to stubbornly dismiss the concerns of 
Saskatchewan teachers as it relates to the impacts of cutting 
educational assistants in classrooms across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I take strong exception to 
the premise of the member’s question. Mr. Speaker, we value 
and appreciate the hard work that teachers do in our province. 
They do great work. They’re the ones that are the experts; they 
are the ones that provide front-line services to our . . . 
[inaudible]. 
 
And we’ve provided substantial increases in funding. Since we 
have formed government, Mr. Speaker, we have increased 
operating funding by over 23 per cent. Since we have formed 
government, there are 566 more regular teachers. There are 159 
more student support teachers, the number of psychologists in 
our province up 37 percent, speech language pathologists up 26 
per cent, occupational therapists up 5 per cent, social workers 
up 12 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also helped teachers that are dealing with 
immigrant students, and the number of teachers that have to 
work with English as a foreign language, those teachers are up 
nearly 17 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue doing 
those type of things and increasing things, and I’d encourage 
the members to support the budget so that we can have those 
things in order in a prompt manner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re raising direct 
concerns of educators in this province, a study of teachers. And 
all we see from that minister is more arrogant dismissal of the 
real concerns that exist in today’s classrooms. It’s evident that 
that minister and that government is unwilling to listen to the 

teachers of this province. This is a recent study that’s been sent 
to that minister. It seems as though he hasn’t even read it. 
 
About 80 per cent of teachers in this study say their workload 
has increased under that government. They’re frustrated with 
the top-down nature of decision making, ramming simplistic 
decisions upon classrooms across the province. And they are 
adamantly opposed to that government’s effort to bring in 
standardized testing because “standardized assessment 
initiatives are not drivers of improved learning outcomes.” 
 
To the Education minister: when will he finally start listening to 
teachers, or is he going to simply keep dismissing their 
concerns about workload, top-down decision making, and his 
ill-advised standardized testing scheme? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
things have become more complex in our province for teachers. 
There’s no doubt the things that teachers are asked to do and 
required to do are more complex because of the nature of our 
demographics changing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that those things are taking place. We’ve 
done a large number of things to try and increase the supports 
that we have for teachers. I’ve indicated earlier some of the 
things that are there. I will indicate some more of them. In 2007 
there was 3,546 EAs [educational assistants]; in 2014 there are 
now 3,601. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will work hard to continue to support teachers 
and ensure that they’ve got the necessary supports so that they 
can do their work. I would encourage the members opposite to 
support us in doing those things. We want to go forward with 
those initiatives and ensure that things continue to get better, 
not just for the teachers in our province but for all of the 
students. 
 
We’ve introduced now, Mr. Speaker, a sector plan. And we 
have had the deputy minister do some work on the sector plan. 
And I want to tell you just a few of the people that they’ve 
consulted with: 31 communities, 756 schools all within the 
province, 295 teachers, and on and on . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what part of 90 per cent of 
teachers being upset in this province does that minister not 
understand? You know, that minister has failed to listen to 
educators across the province. And all they’ve done is ram 
forward with a simplistic agenda on top of classrooms in this 
province, tinkering around with the school day, bringing 
forward a wrong-headed standardized testing agenda, and 
cutting educational assistants in classrooms across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Minister of Education: has he read the study 
that was presented to him from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation that was put together by SIDRU [Saskatchewan 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4639 

instructional development and research unit]? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I had indicated earlier that 
we have a sector plan in place. We’re working forward to 
having that in place in the near future. And I had indicated — 
and I had started, Mr. Speaker, and I ran out of time — the 
number of consultations that took place: 31 communities, 756 
schools, 295 teachers, 106 parents, 193 students, 25 adult 
learners, 50 First Nations and Métis partners, all school division 
directors, all principals were invited to participate, 44 STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] members, participants 
from LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors 
and Superintendents], SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association], post-secondary partners. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
sector plan is receiving a lot of support. 
 
I have a letter that I would like to read, just a short quote from 
Gwen Dueck from the executive director of STF. And I will 
read the quote, Mr. Speaker, and this is dated March 10th, so 
the member opposite might want to update: “Teachers see the 
need for strategic and long-term sector planning and applaud 
the ministry for the leadership shown in this initiative.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the direction that we’re going on. That’s the 
direction we’re taking. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, three times asking that 
minister whether he’s read the study that was submitted to him. 
No answer from that minister. It’s consistent from a minister 
that’s failed to listen to the education sector, to teachers across 
our province. 
 
This isn’t just a discussion about frustrated educators in 
Saskatchewan. That would be concerning enough. This is about 
the quality of education for our kids. Teachers across 
Saskatchewan are committed to providing an excellent 
education for students across our province to open their minds 
and ensure that they’re ready for success into the future. And 
they’re doing a great job of this despite the actions of that 
government. But what’s clear in this study is that that 
government is undermining our education system, making it 
difficult for teachers to do their job. 
 
To the Education minister: what will it take for this government 
to stop undermining our kids’ education system, start listening 
to teachers, and start supporting their very important work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you 
one of the things that we won’t be doing. We won’t be closing 
176 schools like the members opposite did. Mr. Speaker, their 
record was pretty well one a month during their term. So every 
month they’d say, well whose school are we going to axe this 
month? Mr. Speaker, that’s what happens when you’ve got a 
shrinking population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 we’ve increased operating funding to 
school divisions by over 23 per cent. We’ve increased capital 

spending by 264 per cent. We’ve increased the number of child 
care spaces by 48 per cent. We’ve increased funding to CBOs 
[community-based organization] that manage daycares by 19 
per cent. We’ve increased pre-K programs by 98 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that thing, and we’re 
going to continue to listen to teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers in our province do great work. We 
value them. We’re going to continue to work with them. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got a lot of work left to do, but we won’t be 
taking any lessons from the members opposite on this issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Poverty Reduction Measures 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A recent 
report from StatsCan shows that Saskatchewan tops the list of 
Canadian provinces with the highest rate of women residing in 
shelters because of spousal abuse, and Saskatchewan is the only 
province in Canada to have more children than women living in 
shelters. 
 
To the minister: what is this government doing to address this 
heartbreaking reality? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
Interpersonal violence and abuse is a significant concern for our 
government, and not only harms individuals and families but 
entire communities. We appreciate the community 
organizations that partner with interpersonal violence and abuse 
programs, units to make life safer for Saskatchewan citizens 
and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we operate 42 services delivered 
by 32 community-based organizations across Saskatchewan. 
This includes increases to community agencies for wages, 
enhancements, new funding for a new transition house and new 
transition services, Mr. Speaker. This includes development of 
the province’s first new transition house since 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government takes this issue very, very 
seriously. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with 
our community partners to address it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know there are various factors that contribute to the number of 
women and children in shelters in our province, but poverty 
plays a huge role, and the human cost of poverty is tremendous. 
But poverty also costs the government and society a lot of 
money. It contributes to an estimated $420 million in higher 
health care costs, $720 million in increased social assistance 
costs, up to $120 million in increased criminal justice costs, and 
billions of dollars in lost economic opportunity. 
 
Saskatchewan is only one of two provinces in all of Canada that 
doesn’t have a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. To 
the minister: will the government agree today that 



4640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

Saskatchewan needs a comprehensive poverty reduction 
strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
know that lately we’ve been hearing information about the 
poverty strategies that are in place in other areas. And I think 
the members opposite should be aware that according to Stats 
Canada, since 2007 our government has reduced the number of 
low-income people more than any other province in Canada, 
including all of those that have a poverty strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about is action to deliver 
results. Mr. Speaker, we know that working together is an 
important part of what we’re doing, and that’s why when we 
talk about looking at programs like SAID [Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability] taking 11,000 people off the roll. 
We talk about things like the Hub and the COR [centre of 
responsibility], where people have a chance to sit together and 
talk about the issues that are affecting families. We have 
hot-spotting in place, Mr. Speaker. We’re working to ensure 
that we find out why people are needing services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s always more work to do. Through the child 
and family agenda, we have seven ministers that sit together 
and talk about the work we can do to improve the lives of 
children. We agree there’s always more work to be done and 
we’ll learn from other jurisdictions, but we’re not just basing 
that on another report. What we’re talking about is action. That 
is the role of our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not just talking about 
another report. Mr. Speaker, other provinces have had good 
success by implementing anti-poverty strategies, and there is no 
question that Saskatchewan needs a comprehensive poverty 
reduction strategy. And there have been many calls for this over 
the years, including from Poverty Free Saskatchewan and now 
Poverty Costs. 
 
The NDP would be very pleased to work with the government 
to help make this a reality. And as the legislature, we have 
struck an all-party special committee on a variety of topics: 
about tobacco control in 2000, about the abuse and exploitation 
of children through the sex trade in 2001, and most recently 
about traffic safety. To the minister: will this government agree 
to announce initial funding in next week’s budget, then work 
together with the NDP in an all-party special committee to 
develop a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I told the member opposite 
a few minutes ago that the number of low-income people in 
Saskatchewan has decreased more in Saskatchewan than places 
that have a poverty strategy. The number of children in 
low-income families has decreased more than any other 
province. And I really don’t know if we need to take any 
lessons from the NDP because the number of low-income 
people declined in the NDP’s last seven years by 16 per cent, 
has declined by 30 per cent in the last six years under our 

government. 
 
Children in low-income families has declined by nearly 36 per 
cent in the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, you know we 
have spoken to the members from Upstream. We talked about 
working together and we’d be willing to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
We have to talk about the fact that we have results. 
 
We have the lowest unemployment in Canada for the last 14 
months. We have the record number of people that are 
employed. The average weekly earnings have increased by 27 
per cent. We’ve raised minimum wage by 26 per cent. And yes, 
there’s more work to do. In fact some of my colleagues had an 
opportunity to meet with Upstream yesterday and we talked 
about how we can work together with some of the very great 
policies we have in place right now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Passage of Personal Care Homes Legislation 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of question 
period, we were talking about a quality of care in many private 
care homes that simply is not adequate. We’ve talked about 
problems that have existed. We’ve talked about concerns that 
the Provincial Auditor raised and action that was called for by 
this government. But, Mr. Speaker, we have not seen the 
urgency and the seriousness that is needed to address this issue 
in order to ensure that every senior has the quality of care that 
they need. 
 
And when I called for this government to finally release, Mr. 
Speaker, and take action in providing the reports from 
inspections online, they used the excuse that the legislation was 
not in place, Mr. Speaker. Well as an opposition, the legislation 
that the minister referenced, we sent to committee in early 
December, Mr. Speaker. The ball is clearly in this government’s 
court. If they took this seriously, they could call this legislation 
to committee, and we could begin with the important work at 
the committee stage in order to ensure that people in 
Saskatchewan have access to the information that they need. 
We’re prepared to facilitate that and not filibuster, Mr. Speaker. 
I would ask why the government took so long to call this to 
committee if this was a urgent priority of theirs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, our respective House leaders 
set the agenda for committee. Mr. Speaker, our side of the 
House ensures that there is plenty of input for the Leader of the 
Opposition’s House Leader in terms of the timetable of 
committee. Further, members will know what’s in the bill. 
They’ll know the specifics of the bill. I think by and large we 
all agree that this is part of the solution. There’s more, there’s 
other things we need to do, but this is part of the solution. 
 
At the end of question period today, Mr. Speaker, the 
Government House Leader will take to his feet, hopefully to be 
recognized by you. And if he is, he will ask leave of the House 
to bring this bill back, to waive committee, bring it back, get it 
passed, and do precisely what the NDP have been asking for, 
Mr. Speaker. Will they agree? 
 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4641 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s been discussion with respect to Bill No. 111. I would 
ask for the leave of the Assembly to forgo committee and move 
the bill to third reading right now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this bill has been properly moved 
to committee. It was properly moved to committee in December 
3rd. In terms of the government bringing forward the agenda 
that can come to committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: — There is a motion on the floor. This is a 
request for leave; it’s not time for debate. The Government 
House Leader has requested leave to move Bill 111 from 
committee to third reading. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 223 through 224. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
questions 123 and 124. 
 
[14:30] 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 123 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 123, 
An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Public and Private 
Statutes and to make certain consequential amendments. And of 
course this is important stuff that we have before us. And you 
know, it is interesting as we enter into passing of bills and how 
they get managed or mismanaged, however we decide this may 
be. And I know there are fingers pointing . . . 
 

The Speaker: — I wonder if members could take their 
conversations outside of the Chamber, please. It’s difficult to 
hear the debate. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So I 
continue my comments on Bill 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). And I think it’s important that we 
take some time to reflect on these things. 
 
Of course the big issue is, when we see these kind of bills 
before us, what are the unintended consequences? Obviously 
we will have a lot of legislation that often sits on the shelf 
because for whatever reason they become obsolete, irrelevant, 
maybe not having the appropriate type of language for the day. 
But it’s important that we take the time to have a fulsome 
debate about this. 
 
And while we could be in committee today and this 
government, in its management of whatever, it’s missed some 
opportunities and clearly that’s before the House right now. 
 
So I want to take a moment to talk about what the minister, 
back on December 2nd, when he came to his feet and talked 
about amendments to certain public and private statutes and 
they would include The Dental Care Act. And I know I could 
go at length in terms of how important that legislation is and 
what the implications are. We’ll have questions about that in the 
House, in the committee, at the appropriate time, the time at 
which we usually rely on the government side to put out the list 
of bills that we’ll be taking . . . put on the agenda for the 
committee. The Dental Care Act, The Medical and 
Hospitalization Tax Repeal Act, The Mutual Medical and 
Hospital Benefit Associations Act, and The Senior Citizens’ 
Heritage Program Act — they are all repealed. And then of 
course we have consequential amendments including The 
Dental Disciplines Act, The Health Information Protection Act, 
and The Insurance Premiums Tax Act are all amended in 
various ways. And The Pharmacy Act part of it, section 
19(1)(d) is repealed as well. 
 
Going through as we see that there’s an Act to validate a certain 
agreement with regard to Lady Minto hospital at Edam, and that 
is completely repealed. The French version of the Sisters of 
Charity of Notre Dame, that is also repealed. The repeal of An 
Act to provide for Tax Exemption of Certain Property of Sisters 
of Charity, Providence Hospital, Moose Jaw, and then we go 
through the list of a variety of hospitals right across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know for example that it’s important to clean up the 
records and make sure our legislation is as fresh and as current 
as possible. That is the job of the legislature here. But it is also 
to make sure that when we do these, that the proper consultation 
has been done and that these organizations, some of which may 
not be in existence today . . . Some may very well be continuing 
to do their good work, and so I think it’s important that the 
consultation has been done, they’ve been contacted or the 
attempt to contact them is done. But it may be a course of 
history where they’re no longer relevant and that in fact it’s best 
to purge them and repeal them and get them off the record. So 
there will be lots of questions about this. It’s always interesting 
to know the history behind these certain pieces of legislation. 
 



4642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

And when I look at the minister’s comments, the 14 private 
Acts that are connected to community organizations, in 
particular many religious congregations, and they have played 
— and I agree with the minister in this case — significant roles 
in our province’s health care system, and it’s very important 
that we acknowledge that. So if these have no more direct 
impact on our health care delivery, then we need to make sure 
that they’re repealed, that there is no ambiguity left, that this is 
the task before us. So the minister puts this forward for us to 
take a look at. And of course we do have questions for them. 
And I think it’s important we continue to have those 
conversations. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment of 
Bill 123, An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Public and 
Private Statutes and to make certain consequential 
amendments. I do so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 124 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 
Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 
loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again to enter into the debate about Bill No. 124, An Act to 
make consequential amendments resulting from the enactment 
of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). And it 
seems relatively straightforward. This is a much smaller Act, 
and it really talks about the use of the word community clinic or 
clinique communautaire as part of its premises. And it seems 
really straightforward in that nature. 
 
And so you know, as I review what the minister or his 
representative that day was actually . . . how it was presented in 
the House, he talks about the importance of making sure that 
our legislation is current as it can be. 
 
Now clearly what we want to do again is making sure that there 
was consultation and that, particularly when it comes to health 
clinics . . . And of course we’re on the record of being very 
supportive of co-operative health clinics. We think they’re a 
very, very effective way of delivering health services in our 
communities. And we know that there are several in the 
province who have done a very good job of serving their 
communities and their membership with appropriate health 
services. And they’ve played a really strong role in terms of 
advocacy and leadership as we move forward to make sure that 
medicare is a strong principle in Canada and in particular 

Saskatchewan where we have taken a real leadership in that 
area of public health care. And we can tip our hats to our 
co-operative health clinics throughout our province. 
 
So you know, and we do get worried about the consultation, 
make sure that’s happening, but we also get worried that the 
government seems to be spending an inordinate time in terms of 
a wording change, that this is not going to impact an awful lot 
in terms of health care delivery. There are bigger challenges, 
and every day we stand and we ask about that. And we would 
like to see much more than a simple verb tense change in an 
Act. So clearly they need to do more. They need to do more for 
recruiting physicians and health care professionals here in this 
province, make sure our emergency rooms are working 
completely and fully. 
 
And I have to say that, you know, there is a higher expectation 
from the people of Saskatchewan for this government as we see 
record revenues coming in, and yet we see, oddly, health care 
delivery actually slipping. And why is that? And why is that as 
we see more funds being spent that actually we’re not seeing 
the results that we would think should happen? And while we 
all have our own personal stories in terms of health care and 
every one of them is very, very critical as we strive to ensure 
and advocate for better health care in this province. We want to 
be leaders. We have been leaders in terms of health care 
delivery in Canada, but unfortunately that does not seem to be 
the case as it once was. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that while there is much that we 
can go and we can talk an awful lot about health care in terms 
of the challenges that lay before us. And today I asked a 
straightforward question in terms of an anti-poverty reduction 
strategy, the impact it has on health care. 
 
Yesterday we had discussions around mental health in terms of 
what’s happening with that, the mental health and addictions 
strategy that seems to be . . . We have questions about where it 
is, and it should be here. We are in the third session of this term. 
Will that strategy actually see the light of day before the next 
election, and will it get the resources? Will it get the resources? 
Or unfortunately we have concerns that maybe this government 
is not moving as fast as it could. What are the real priorities of 
this government when it comes to health care? 
 
It’s great. We heard the minister say today that she doesn’t want 
just another report. We don’t want to see another report. But we 
want to see the report and we want to see action on the report. 
We want to see action on the mental health and addictions 
report. 
 
So I urge the government to do that, to do that as quickly as we 
can on whatever the issue is, and particularly where we saw and 
we agreed in December to move the bill to committee, the 
personal care home bill to committee back in early December. 
And here we are, months later, and it has seemed to have 
slipped off the edge of the desk of this government. And 
somehow they want to spin it back to somehow it’s our fault 
over here. Forty-nine to nine and yet we have to manage what 
they should be managing as a government? Is not anyone over 
there? Are they asleep at the wheel or what’s happening? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Embarrassing the Premier. 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4643 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes. And we do feel sorry for the Premier as 
we acknowledge he probably was embarrassed because the 
implication was he thought the bill was still before the House in 
debates and he hasn’t been properly briefed and hasn’t really 
been kept up to speed about what bills are in committee and 
what bills are before the House. Today I even looked at the 
schedule that we get from the Government House Leader and I 
was looking for that bill and it wasn’t on there. And so I was 
thinking, most of the bills would be on there and it wasn’t on 
there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to re-emphasize how important we take 
health care in this province. And we see this bill before us and 
we see that there are bigger challenges out there. And while we 
can definitely live . . . And of course, it only makes sense to 
have properly constructed bills and legislation before us, so it 
only makes sense that if this is the only issue with the bill that’s 
being amended, then for sure we should be doing that. 
 
But again it will be the question of when you open up an Act 
. . . And I wonder if this is the case of when the government and 
the Minister of Health talked to the folks who were . . . who are 
affected — and I should make sure I get my tense right, not 
were affected but are affected — by The Mutual Medical and 
Hospital Benefit Association Act. Have they all been consulted 
about ways to improve the Act? Or did they do a grammar 
check and just say, well we see it appears the “is” or “was” are 
out of sync, and that’s the biggest concern we have with the 
community clinics and the co-ops, the health co-ops? 
 
[14:45] 
 
So did they do the full-blown consultation, saying to these 
folks, we are opening up the Act? If you are affected by The 
Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act, if you 
are affected by that Act, please let us know. And they probably 
should have a list of the different groups who are affected by it. 
They should know that group. They should send out a letter. We 
are considering opening up the legislation. It will be before the 
House. Right now the only error we can see in it is a very small 
one. Are there ways that we can improve the legislation today 
so we can make your work better? Because once you open up a 
piece of legislation, we all know — and they should know on 
that side — that it’s an opportunity to improve the work done. 
Here you have an opportunity to improve the work done by, 
you know, the health clinics and any of the groups that would 
be affected by this. Have they done that? 
 
If they have, that’s great. And what was the response? And have 
they listened to it? I would imagine and I would say and I 
would imagine I can understand, I know the Saskatoon Health 
Clinic would be very interested and would have probably a few 
more words than just saying, well correct the tense please on 
this legislation. They would have lots to say because, as I said, 
they are real leaders, real innovators when it comes to providing 
health care to our communities, in our communities right across 
Saskatchewan. And there are several — whether it’s Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, and others — that I’m 
aware of. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I think that it’s important that 
we have further discussion with this, and I know my colleagues 
will have more to say on this. But with that, I would like to 

move adjournment of Bill No. 124, An Act to make 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). I do so move. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 125 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 125, An Act to amend The Traffic 
Safety Act and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation has been brought 
forward by the government in response to a committee that 
went around the province and looked at issues of traffic safety. 
And that’s a laudable task. It’s a task that takes much effort on 
behalf of the members but also on behalf of the staff of the 
legislature. 
 
So we had a seven-member committee go around the province 
and listen to the public about possible changes to our 
legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, the legislation responds to the 
recommendations of that committee except for the 
recommendations that were made in a minority report by the 
two members of the committee from the New Democratic 
Party. And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s an issue there around 
responding to the community. And I’m going to start and talk 
about those particular issues, and then I’ll go into the bulk of 
what’s in the bill. 
 
But what are the points that were raised by the minority report 
of the NDP members in the Traffic Safety Committee? 
Basically what our two members, the member from Saskatoon 
and the member from Cumberland believed was that there 
should be short-term vehicle impoundment that’s done in a 
similar fashion to what’s happened in Alberta and British 
Columbia. And basically it’s an issue around what happens the 
first time a driver is picked up and they have a .05 blood 
alcohol concentration while they’re driving. And effectively in 
British Columbia and Alberta they introduced this legislation 
which added the risk for a driver of having a .05 blood alcohol 
concentration, allowing the policy officer to impound the 
vehicle immediately. 
 
What the minister has done here in this legislation is to say, 
well that can happen the second time but not the first time. And 
that debate or that discussion was a bit of a surprise to our 
members but I think also to the public because what we have 



4644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

seen is that this type of legislation has dramatically reduced the 
number of alcohol-involved traffic deaths in both British 
Columbia and Alberta. And so the question becomes, why 
wouldn’t our minister bring this forward? Why wouldn’t the 
government bring this forward? 
 
Now I went and took a good look at the comments made by the 
minister when this legislation was introduced on December 2nd, 
2013. And I thought that this contentious issue might be 
included in the minister’s speech, which is, as we all know, 
used by the courts who interpret how these rules should be 
used. And unfortunately there really isn’t a rationale for the 
decision of the Premier and of the cabinet and of the minister as 
to why they’ve chosen to have a different law here in 
Saskatchewan than what they have in Alberta and British 
Columbia. 
 
And so the question arises, well how many alcohol-related 
deaths in Saskatchewan could be prevented after this legislation 
is introduced that are the responsibility of the cabinet and 
Premier as they have looked at this particular change to the 
legislation? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s always difficult to look at these kinds of 
things. But I think it’s very important for the rationale for the 
choices that have been made by the government to be put on the 
record, to be described for the public so the public can assess 
why this has been done. I’m not going to try to speculate as to 
why we will have lesser protections for our drivers on our 
highways than they do in Alberta and British Columbia, but that 
becomes the fundamental question. 
 
Now our members on the committee were quite adamant about 
making sure that these provisions were included. One of the 
reasons that they were quite adamant about this is that they 
knew, and I think the government knows, that the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police strongly recommended that 
there be vehicle impoundment on the first offence over .04, not 
.05. And they acknowledge this legislation has provisions for 
impoundment for the second offence for seven days, but they 
state quite clearly, “We believe impoundment on the first 
offence is similar to the Alberta and British Columbia models 
which have proved successful.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have the Chiefs of Police who have looked 
at the legislation carefully. They’ve looked at the reports from 
both the majority opinion and the minority opinion of the 
Traffic Safety Committee, and they have made a strong 
recommendation to actually make it slightly tighter legislation 
in Saskatchewan than is there in Alberta and British Columbia. 
Now we all know how much damage is caused by 
alcohol-related accidents in our province and also the number of 
deaths, and so it’s a bit mysterious to me why the minister 
would not address this particular issue and explain why they 
have made the choices that they have, as opposed to what we 
know works in our neighbouring provinces. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when you go through the legislation 
which is, it was quite lengthy, it does respond to quite a number 
of the changes that have been suggested by the committee. And 
much of it is administrative change around how various 
certificates of safety are used, how you make sure vehicles are 
inspected properly, and how those types of inspection 

certificates are used within an administrative system. And 
obviously that’s things that need to be done. But when it comes 
down to the heart of the bill, which is how are we going to 
protect the public on our highways, there appears to be a place 
where they have stepped back without explanation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it may be that in the committee we’ll end up getting 
some better explanation for the choice that’s been made. But I 
think that there’s a strong prerogative on the government to say 
why they have chosen to do some of the things that they’ve 
done. 
 
Now one of the other aspects of this whole process is that it 
relates to providing information from the public to the 
legislature so that we can do the appropriate amendments here. 
And this doesn’t happen that often, I know. I had the 
responsibility a number of years ago to respond to the 
committee on tobacco use. And it was very much a valuable 
document and valuable advice that came from across the 
province, and it literally allowed us to change the use of 
tobacco in Saskatchewan. And I think most people are quite 
happy with the things that have happened, and now it’s I think 
probably time to look at some new things that happened there. 
 
What we have here again is the result of a committee going out 
and listening to the public, and I think that they got a strong 
message that drinking and driving are not appropriate and that 
the time has come to make stronger or stricter laws as it relates 
to that. And the government almost got there, but then they 
stepped back, and they haven’t fully explained why they’ve 
stepped back on this particular legislation. 
 
Now when the legislation was introduced, there are comments 
about quite a number of different activities that are being done. 
I notice one of them is a standard kind of line that now comes 
forward, and I’m not sure I totally agree with it, but basically 
the minister says that we’d like to shift vehicle registration 
exemptions from legislation to regulations. 
 
And this is a trend that happens in government, but it also is 
something where it makes it more difficult for the public to 
know, for businesses to know what the rules are. And they’ve 
indicated that they’ve done this to allow for the vehicle 
registration regulatory framework to more closely ally with 
what happens in Alberta, but there’s no mention about why they 
don’t follow the Alberta and British Columbia suggestion 
around impoundment of vehicles. 
 
So it appears that there are times when we’ll get similar 
protections or similar ways of registering things in our 
neighbouring provinces, but when there’s actual evidence to 
show that a particular step could save lives of Saskatchewan 
people, they’ve stepped back and not taken that step even when 
the chiefs of police have strongly recommended that that 
happen as well. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now when we deal with these kinds of legislation, we know 
that much of the detail of the actual legislation has been worked 
out with the regulatory body, which in this case is managed by 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and that whole 
registration process ends up being one where we have constant 
changes, you know, almost every year. And this particular 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4645 

legislation does make a substantial number of the changes that 
we will end up having to look at as we go into committee. But 
when we look at what are the practical effects of this, I think we 
have to remind the public at this stage of what are some of the 
things that are there. 
 
I notice that there’s further refinement and further work done as 
it relates to the whole system that we have of an ignition lock, 
or an ability for people to, once they’ve been convicted of a 
drunk driving offence, to drive their car again if they submit to 
a process using an ignition lock. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that’s been developed over the years to help people 
who are ill. I think that’s the only way to describe it. They’re 
not well; they’ve got an addiction problem. But they also end 
up having to work. And one of the things about this ignition 
interlock system is that it can allow people to use their vehicle 
in a safe manner. 
 
And sometimes people don’t understand how this works, but 
practically what happens is when a person gets in the car to start 
the car, they need both the key and they need to be able to blow 
into this Breathalyzer device that’s attached to the lock of their 
car. And if in fact they’ve had any alcohol to drink, it’s not 
possible for them to start their car using their key. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this system is one that wasn’t there not that many 
years ago. And so often people who were making the efforts to 
deal with their addiction problems didn’t have a chance to drive 
in a safe way. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge and I appreciate the effort 
that’s gone into making sure that all of these programs work 
properly and safely, because ultimately for those people who 
have the greatest difficulty with drinking and driving, the best 
method is to keep them safe driving and keep the public safe. 
And so I acknowledge the work that’s done as it relates to the 
ignition interlock system. And I also acknowledge and confirm 
that some of these types, this new technology, and who knows 
what the next type of technology that comes forward, will make 
sure that we have sober, safe drivers on our roads. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the numbers of activities that are regulated 
under The Traffic Safety Act are numerous and they are 
obviously important. We also know that people in 
Saskatchewan travel long distances, they travel at fairly 
significant speeds, and that a combination of alcohol with that 
speed can be very, very difficult for everybody and result in 
many deaths. 
 
So the provisions that are not included in the Act around 
impoundment of vehicles is I think a flaw in the legislation. It 
may be that the minister and the government will rethink this so 
that we’ll actually see some amendments when we get to 
committee that reflect the minority position of the NDP 
members of this Traffic Safety Committee. If that happens, I 
would applaud the government for doing that. I think that’s 
something they should seriously consider. We know that the 
legislation has been out for public discussion and there’s 
substantial support for an impoundment of vehicles on the first 
offence rather than on the second offence, the way it’s set out 
here. 
 
Now there’s another issue that some of the police officers have 
raised that relates to this legislation. And in the legislation there 

is ability for a second reading to be taken that doesn’t 
necessarily recognize how Saskatchewan operates. And 
basically what I’m saying here is that if an RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] officer stops somebody and gives 
them a Breathalyzer test out in a rural community, the ability to 
get to another Breathalyzer test within a reasonable time is 
often not possible. And so I think that some of those provisions 
that have been identified by the police should be looked at as 
well. And so possibly we will see some amendments being 
brought forward that will reflect the fact that we have a very 
sparse population in some parts of our province. 
 
So with those suggestions that we actually go ahead and have 
an amendment that reflects the minority position from the 
Traffic Safety Committee and also that we deal with this 
particular issue raised around the second Breathalyzer test, I 
encourage the minister to look at both those items. I have no 
further comments, and at this point I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 116 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
wade into the discussion on Bill 116, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2013. I’m going to start by looking at the 
minister’s second reading comments, and I’ve got the bill in 
front of me as well, but a good place to find context. 
 
Sometimes when you have a bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s not always 
clear as to what the intent of the government is in just reading 
the language of the bill, but the second reading speech can often 
provide context for the general public, Mr. Speaker, and some 
background details. It’s also good to know with whom the 
government has consulted, and I’ll talk a little bit about that as 
well, and some ongoing concerns. 
 
So looking at the minister’s second reading speech, Bill No. 
116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013, the minister 
outlines that there’s five different groups of amendments or five 
different areas which this bill will be dealing with. And the first, 
Mr. Speaker, is a set of amendments the minister just says, “will 
provide better criteria on which to determine whether 
unincorporated communities and areas have sufficient capacity 
for local governance and municipal status.” 
 
And the minister explains that obviously this first set of 
amendments relates to incorporation criteria, and they propose 



4646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

two things. And one of them is introducing “criteria for the 
establishment of an unincorporated community as an organized 
hamlet.” And the minister points out there is no criteria right 
now to base the minister’s decision on whether a community 
has sufficient capacity to meet the legislative requirements of an 
organized hamlet. 
 
And the second part that this particular group of amendments 
deals with is providing the criteria to incorporate new villages 
and resort villages to be set in regulation. And the minister in 
his comments says: 
 

This is to ensure sufficient capacity for governance and for 
meeting the challenges and opportunities [that come] . . . 
with growth. [Right now] the current criteria for villages 
and resort village incorporation: 100 persons, 50 separate 
dwelling or business premises, and a minimum taxable 
assessment of 15 million. 

 
And this has been in place without change since at least 1930, 
the minister points out. 
 
And the minister points this out, but we’ve heard this as well, 
that many smaller communities still struggle or struggle now 
“. . . to operate independently and generate [their] sufficient 
own source revenue to deliver services, fund infrastructure, and 
retain qualified administration.” There’s been some 
communities in rural Saskatchewan that have seen growth, but 
there’s been some rural depopulation as well. And I know many 
communities find it harder and harder to find councillors, 
people to serve. It becomes increasingly challenging to have the 
numbers of people in place to govern a particular area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, now. 
 
The next area of amendments the minister talks about, he lays 
out in his second reading speech: “They will provide objective 
criteria for action when municipalities are no longer able to 
function and meet their statutory requirements as local 
governments.” So the first set is about the new establishment of 
a local government or a municipality, but the second piece is 
about what happens when you do have that depopulation. And 
he lays out here that: 
 

These amendments propose to require a council to act and 
potentially dissolve its municipality if it’s non-compliant 
with specified statutory requirements for two or more 
consecutive years and if it no longer meets a minimum 
population for two consecutive censuses. 

 
I know from even a practical standpoint, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that may be practical, but I know people are very tied to their 
communities. And even if it becomes increasingly difficult to 
find people to serve and to govern and to have the tax revenue 
to do what they need to do and to provide the services, we are 
attached to our communities, whether it’s . . . I grew up in an 
urban setting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Holiday Park in 
Saskatoon. And I’m incredibly tied to my community of 
Holiday Park. That is my home. It’s been my family’s home 
since the late 1940s, and I feel an affinity for that area. 
 
So I know there’s some sensitivities and we are tied to our 
communities. So even if something might make sense, that 
when you can’t meet your obligations of governance that it’s 

still a very difficult and sensitive issue for many communities to 
think about dissolving their community or their municipality. I 
don’t think you’re dissolving a community but dissolving a 
municipality. That would be an incredibly sensitive issue, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
A third area of proposed amendments that the minister speaks 
about actually are about providing “. . . more flexibility and 
choice for interested urban and rural municipalities to 
voluntarily restructure to form a new type of municipality 
known as a municipal district.” 
 
It’s interesting, having spoken to the city of Saskatoon recently 
and to the city caucus of SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association], I know that obviously some of the 
challenges, or some of the opportunities actually, in and around 
cities like Saskatoon and Regina, you’ve got communities who 
want to work together and are looking at regional plans working 
together, whether it’s Regina and Sherwood Park. Or in 
Saskatoon, you’ve got Saskatoon and outlying areas of new 
cities like Martensville and Warman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
there are benefits that come from working together and having a 
larger plan in place. 
 
But these particular proposed amendments: 
 

. . . provide for urban and rural municipalities to 
voluntarily agree to join to form a new type of 
municipality called the municipal district, recognizing it is 
both urban and rural in nature. [Would we say rurban?] 
These provisions will better enable councils to agree on 
how representation, elections, administration, and services 
will be undertaken in the new municipality, drawing on 
both urban and rural municipality approaches. 

 
[15:15] 
 
In essence, there is some amalgamation involved in this but in a 
more voluntary capacity. Again, people are tied to their 
communities and have very strong feelings about governance of 
their communities. But this particular set of amendments lays 
the groundwork for being able to work collaboratively, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Fourthly, these amendments “. . . provide a new means for 
citizens with concerns about the financial or operational 
management of their municipality to have these concerns 
addressed locally.”  
 
The minister in his comments talks about this, that these 
amendments:  
 

. . . provide citizens with the ability to petition their 
council to conduct and make public the results of the 
financial or management audit. [And the minister points 
out that] this will provide a means for citizens to address 
their concerns locally. [At this moment or] currently the 
legislation provides for annual audits of a municipality’s 
financial statements, the main objective being to confirm 
whether these are prepared in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles [or GAP]. 

 
So this will make the locality of . . . it happen, Mr. Deputy 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4647 

Speaker: 
 
The fifth area of proposed amendments . . . is intended to 
ensure municipal compliance with legislation and 
regulations and to constrain the potential misuse of local 
property tax tools and tax abatements if it occurs. [The 
minister points out that] . . . these amendments will do the 
following: they will provide the authority to prescribe 
limits if necessary on minimum taxes and base taxes, and 
restrict by ministerial order the use of tax tools by an 
individual municipality. [And the minister says that] This 
is to give the government more ability to constrain misuse 
and misapplication of local tax tools if it occurs. 

 
And he also goes on to say that: 
 

These amendments will also add the ability for an owner or 
occupant of property in a municipality and the minister to 
apply to a court to quash an illegal bylaw or resolution. 
Currently this ability is limited only to voters of the 
municipality. 

 
So those are some of the things that these amendments do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know in the consultation, when we think about legislation 
coming forward, you want to know who has been . . . All those 
people involved are impacted by the legislation. Have they had 
an opportunity to weigh in on potential changes? What do they 
think of those changes? Why are those changes coming 
forward? 
 
And the minister lays out in his second reading speech that 
they’ve: 
 

. . . consulted extensively on these amendments with . . . 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and 
. . . with municipal administrator associations. 

 
These consultations, the minister points out, started last April 
and concluded in September: “They involved meetings, 
presentations, and sharing drafts side-by-side of the 
amendments for review and comment.” 
 
So consultation though involves . . . is a two-sided process. So 
it isn’t information going one direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s the opportunity to provide input and hear back how that 
input might be used and provide further input — the back and 
forth. So I’m not sure if that has happened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how fulsome . . . Might we know sort of the time 
frame and we know with whom the minister has consulted, but 
we are not sure how fulsome that process is and if there’s room 
to continue. 
 
I know, hearing back from SUMA on this particular bill, Bill 
116, SUMA has said that of course they support transparent and 
accountable municipal operations and the principle of municipal 
autonomy, and in fact these amendments may further these 
goals. But they point out that the regulations, that again the 
devil is always in the details. And these could further these 
goals, provided that the regulations are well constructed with an 
emphasis on the needs and abilities of urban governments.  

So SUMA has said this bill may be good and do what it says 
it’s going to do, but the regulations will be key. And I know 
SUMA has said that they will continue to monitor the 
amendments with respect to, and particularly with respect to the 
proposed petition for financial and management audits — they 
have some concern about that — and the regulatory framework 
with respect to municipal districts. 
 
So I know SUMA and other bodies will continue to look at how 
this progresses and what the regulations look like. And we will 
have many questions in committee about how this will shape 
up. And I know that I will have colleagues who will be 
interested in weighing in on the discussion on Bill 116 as well. 
So until we get to committee, I think for me, I will move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 116, The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 117 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Pardon me 
here; I’m just organizing my notes. I wasn’t quick enough in the 
turnaround there. I’m pleased to speak to Bill No. 117, an Act 
to make a consequential amendment resulting from the 
enactment of The Municipalities Amendment Act. 
 
Basically these are changes that need to happen in order for Bill 
116 to happen as well. It is a companion bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So I think my comments on Bill 116 stand, and so 
with respect to Bill 117, I will move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 117. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 118 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



4648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
Bill 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. And I guess 
opening comments, I guess I want to give some credit to SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
and for the campuses that SIAST does operate and for many 
good programs that SIAST does offer Saskatchewan residents 
and for years the good work that SIAST has done. I mean at the 
end of the day we’ll talk about the changes and the amendments 
that they’re being asked, in this legislation, to bring forward. 
 
But I want to talk a bit about, I guess some of the good work 
SIAST has done. And I know, I have family members, I have 
community members that I represent that have attended SIAST. 
Whether it’s been in partnerships, whether in the trade, they 
have offered some good programs, courses, for individuals. 
Whether it’s to upgrade your education, go into a course, trades, 
SIAST has done this and has done a great job of it. 
 
I think we can all agree, under many administrations, SIAST 
has been an institute that has been in our province. And many 
people see when you look at the campuses — whether it’s 
Woodland; you know, Palliser; all the different areas you look 
at — the good work that SIAST does. 
 
But having said that, you know, clearly it has been . . . Lots of 
great work that they have done, have given opportunities to a 
lot of individuals. And if you look at some of the success, at the 
end of the day, I think it’s important to recognize the success 
that it’s given families, our young people an opportunity 
whether they stay in the province or they’ve moved on and 
they’ve gone on to other jobs within our, you know, Canada. 
And I guess, you know, some have left Canada even. 
 
I think the quality of the work that these young people or 
whoever it is . . . It could be somebody that later on in life 
decided to have a second trade or to have a course or to move, 
you know, their job for whatever reasons, cuts. But having said 
that, I just want to recognize that SIAST has done some 
excellent work. There’s many individuals very proud of the 
courses they take, the ability and the dreams that they’ve had. 
And SIAST has helped them: the institute, the staff. 
 
And sometimes, you know, it’s easy to criticize. But sometimes 
to recognize the good work of the staff — whether it’s the 
cleaning staff, whether it’s the instructors, tutors, you name it; 
administration staff, support staff, and every different capacity 
— to make sure that our Saskatchewan residents have an 
opportunity at a good education, have a good opportunity at 
trades, at a course, and to provide for their families, and have 
pride. And I think truly that has been accomplished and no one 
can take that away. 
 
But having said that, you know, you look at it and I know we’ll 
have some questions. And I know my colleagues . . . I’ve asked 
about different things about the change, and it’s a name change 
they’re talking about. And I’m concerned, well will . . . And if 
the names are changing, will that lose some of, I guess, the 
recognition SIAST has? By changing on buildings or 
communities where SIAST operates, changing the name, will 
that take anything away from SIAST? 
 

And I mean obviously the government and I believe SIAST has, 
and I hope this has happened, has worked together and 
consulted in a positive way. SIAST has asked for this and that’s 
fine if that’s gone through that process. We just want to make 
sure that’s happened. And I know we will ask those questions 
and we have the opportunity to consult, and I’m sure 
government will.  
 
And if SIAST does want this change, and it’s going to give 
them an opportunity to belong to . . . I guess I’m trying to 
understand the whole process, but there are other institutes in 
other provinces that belong to a certain group and they have I 
guess opportunities to give certification, accreditation. They 
have different I guess opportunities, accreditation, or 
certification. So we want to look at that, and there’s a group, so 
they would belong to that group. I don’t know if all those 
groups that belong or the institutes that belong to this have 
changed their names. In this case, it looks like this is being 
requested. The change to the legislation would be changing the 
name. 
 
And like I’ve said, is there going to be costs? And we see a time 
when tuition rates and anyone taking courses and stuff, is it 
going to put any more costs to the students? And by changing 
all the naming and stuff like that . . . So I don’t know and I 
mean this might be a good thing. 
 
But at the end of the day I always look at the costs. Whether it 
goes back to our students, whether they’re from northern 
Saskatchewan, you know, we have to look at that. And right 
now everybody is struggling with the cost of living to make 
ends meet when you’re a student — paying your rent, paying 
your utilities, providing food. For those that are families and 
maybe they come from a northern community, a rural 
community, where they have a family and they have to cover 
their costs while they’re going to school and finding rent, they 
might have two households that they’re trying to keep going 
and the costs. 
 
So any time we see any costs occurring in any way to students, 
and I know it can be the smallest costs — and with a name 
change to this bill — but any, any costs that puts on to the 
student unfortunately causes them grief and can create 
challenges for them. So I just caution that. And I hope in 
committee we can find out and at the end, that it isn’t the 
students if this change comes, whether it’s stationery or 
whatever changes that are come with the cost. 
 
We know sometimes government changes it from a government 
agency, a ministry, or a department. We’ve seen the great cost 
that’s gone on there, and sometimes it’s huge. It’s not just a 
simple thing as saying, wow it was just some letterhead that 
was changed and there’s not really . . . But there are huge costs 
and complications that come when some of these changes come 
in. 
 
So we’re hoping that, you know, and we wish SIAST well as it 
moves forward. And you know, as long as the due diligence is 
done, the consultation has been done with SIAST and its 
partners to make sure that they support this, that they’re 
comfortable with it. And I know we’ve raised, you know, a few 
questions from this point. But in committee we’ll get a chance 
to talk more about it and really, as our critic, define exactly 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4649 

what changes will come. And later on changes come in different 
ways, whether it’s regulations. So we’ve seen different things 
happening and it’s to understand that process, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But having said that, at this point I talk, and I know my 
colleagues talk that it’s mainly a name change. We’ve talked 
about some of the areas where they will have an ability to give 
accreditation or degrees which they had already. So at this 
point, we’ll wait and see what comes out of it, and at a 
committee we can decide and ask those tough questions and get 
clarification in committee from the minister and the ministry to 
see exactly what changes will happen and what the costs will 
incur on our students. And you know, will it take away from the 
recognition SIAST has earned and the good recognition? We 
hope that doesn’t happen. 
 
And we can ask some questions in committee, and I know our 
critic will and members that join the committee will ask those 
questions. And that’s a good place to go and get clarification. 
And it’s important to get clarification before it comes back for, 
you know, the good work that needs to be done to moving it 
forward. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate on Bill 118. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on the debate, Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
Consequential Amendments Act. And I guess I just previously 
made comments about the Act, the changes that are coming in. 
This consequential amendment just comes in making could be 
some name changes within that, could be some of the 
documents that need to be changed just to be in compliance 
with the legislation that will follow later on. 
 
So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 119. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 120, An Act respecting Lobbying. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that’s new legislation for 
Saskatchewan, and it’s an attempt to respond to a number of 
suggestions around how this can be dealt with. I think I’ll quote 
our Minister of Justice where he says on November 25th, on 
page 4187 in Saskatchewan Hansard: 
 

I believe this bill strikes the appropriate careful balance 
between allowing continued access to public office-holders 
while ensuring that such paid lobbying activities is 
routinely disclosed to the public to ensure transparency and 
accountability. 

 
I appreciate when the minister sets out what he’s trying to do in 
legislation. I think he’s done that quite clearly there. But this 
bill has a number of interesting aspects to it. 
 
I think I’m going to start off with a bit of a story. A number of 
years ago, members from the legislature here in Saskatchewan, 
and one of them was Mr. . . . I think Wayne Elhard was along 
and — the member from Cypress Hills — Ms. Brenda Bakken 
who was a member from Weyburn, and there was I think one 
more. We all went on a legislative exchange to Des Moines, 
Iowa, to the Capitol Building for the state of Iowa. And one of 
the . . . There were a whole number of surprises when we went 
on that trip, but one of the biggest and most interesting surprises 
was what they call their open meeting policy. And it still exists 
today because some of us went down there just recently and that 
policy is still there today. But what they had and still have in 
Iowa is the fact that any one of us, as legislators, would have to 
post at the legislature who we’re meeting with for coffee, if we 
meet with each other, every day, all the time. 
 
It basically is saying, you people are the representatives of the 
people of the province and who you meet with should be open 
information for everyone. The only thing that was protected 
was caucus meetings. So if you met as a caucus, that meeting 
was closed. But with the open meetings, what it meant was that 
if another member on the opposition and I were going to sit 
down and talk about something, if it wasn’t a caucus meeting 
we’d have to say, here’s where we’re going to meet, and 
anybody could come and listen to what we talked about. Same 
if we ended up talking across the floor. That kind of 
information would be there and open. 
 
And you end up asking, well what’s the purpose of that type of 
a policy? Well the basic point is that we are entrusted by the 
public as legislators to make decisions on their behalf, and 
therefore the public should have the right to know who is 
lobbying us, who is pushing us to do one thing or another. 



4650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

Now when I was down there in Des Moines, I went to some of 
the committee meetings that were there, and they have many, 
many committee meetings that are part of their structure. And 
you’d have basically chairs for the people who were part of the 
committee, the members of the legislature, and all around there 
were people standing, watching. And depending on the issue, 
you could have up to 60 people in a small room, with most 
people standing, listening, and watching. And part . . . that once 
again, when you ask, well who are these people, they would 
say, well those are the lobbyists. And then you’d ask, well 
lobbyists for whom? And when you did further discussion, it 
was, well that lawyer there is the top paid lobbyist in the state 
of Iowa and he has these clients. Those ones over there, they’re 
public interest lobbyists. And so everybody kind of had an idea 
who was there and who was making suggestions. 
 
Now practically we have in our legislature a lobby. That’s out 
. . . the big rotunda area. Well in Des Moines, Iowa, that 
rotunda is absolutely filled with lobbyists, with people who just 
hang around the lobby trying to buttonhole legislators and the 
governor and anybody else who might come by. And as was 
shown when we were down there just in early February, that’s 
the place where every day there would be major events 
organized around pizza, around chicken, around whatever, to 
influence some of the legislation that was being brought 
forward. 
 
And they don’t have the same system in 2014 as they did 12, 13 
years ago because basically they can put all their notices of 
meetings online. So people look online. They look on their 
BlackBerrys. They look on their other devices to see who is 
meeting with whom. So they don’t have all the paper notices 
around, but they still have this same system of very open 
information for the public. 
 
And so when we look at this particular legislation, it’s a first 
step towards what some people would call open and 
accountable government. But there are many examples, like the 
one in Iowa, that go much broader than what’s here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation comes I guess kind of like 
many things that happen around here, with a bit of a public 
discussion by the Premier around, well maybe we should 
respond to some suggestions. We have some lobbyist 
legislation. We entered into a process which allowed for a 
committee of people from the legislature to work at looking at 
what other places do, and we got a report which came forward 
that took some tentative first steps towards lobbying legislation. 
 
And I’m not necessarily criticizing them for that, but what I’m 
identifying I think here in this Chamber is that there are many 
more things that can be done if you want to go to a full, open 
disclosure as it relates to lobbying. And so we may end up 
having to have more discussion. 
 
Now part of the challenge or the difficulty in Saskatchewan is 
that all of us meet with and talk to our neighbours and others, 
and many times those conversations have aspects of what are 
defined in the legislation as lobbying because people will say, 
well why don’t you do this? Or why isn’t something being done 
here? Or I want this kind of thing to happen. And it’s not 
always clear whether that’s something that’s done in concert 
and done together in an organized fashion or whether it’s just 

the conversations that people have. 
 
And so this particular legislation, you know, attempts to define 
what lobbying is, and I think it’s got a definition that reflects 
the fact that we’ve carefully looked at the definitions in other 
places. 
 
And so I think it’s well worth discussing the actual definition in 
the Act which is part of section 2(i), and it’s the definition of 
lobby. And it says, “means, subject to subsection 4(2).” And I 
guess we better look and see what section 4(2) says, but 
basically subject to 4(2) which sets out when submissions are 
made in a public committee or a matter of public record or 
they’re made around to a public office-holder — that’s to an 
MLA in a formal fashion or to an MLA on behalf of an 
organization or by a constituent. Those things are protected 
from public disclosure. 
 
But if basically then lobbying is this definition: 
 

(i) in relation to either a consultant lobbyist or an in-house 
lobbyist [and we can go and look at the definitions of 
those], to communicate with a public office holder in an 
attempt to influence: 

 
(A) the development of any legislative proposal by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, a government institution 
or a member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Then (B), going back to an attempt to influence: 
 

the introduction of any Bill or resolution in the 
Legislative Assembly or the amendment, passage or 
defeat of any Bill or resolution that is before the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
Then (C), an attempt to influence: 
 

the development or the enactment of any regulations 
within the meaning of The Regulations Act, 1995 or any 
order in council. 

 
Then (D), an attempt to influence: 
 

the development, establishment, amendment or 
termination of any program, policy, directive or 
guideline of the Government of Saskatchewan or a 
government institution. 

 
And then (E), an attempt to influence: 
 

the awarding, amendment or termination of any grant, 
contract or financial benefit by or on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan or a government 
institution. 

 
And then (F), an attempt to influence: 
 

a decision by the Executive Council or a minister of the 
Crown to transfer from the Crown for consideration all 
or part of, or any interest in or asset of, any business, 
enterprise or institution that provides goods or services 
to the Crown or a government institution or to the public; 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4651 

or 
 
(G), an attempt to influence: 
 

a decision by the Executive Council or a minister of the 
Crown to have the private sector instead of the Crown 
provide goods or services to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Now we can go and look at all of these things, but we can hear 
in the language here that any attempt to, example, go for a 
public-private partnership is included here as something that 
needs to be looked at carefully as to who is pressuring the 
government or who is pressuring the minister to have services 
provided in a private fashion as opposed to a public fashion. 
And then you go through the whole legislation and recognize 
that there are many, many issues and many things that happen 
and many decisions that are being made. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan we’re not used to having people look 
over our shoulders as we have conversations about all of these 
things. And this legislation introduces a new character, a new 
part to what happens. And I don’t think that’s a bad thing, but 
it’s something that we would all end up having to get used to, 
whether either on government side or on the opposition side. 
But clearly it affects government much more than what happens 
otherwise. 
 
Now part of the commentary around the legislation — I know 
some part of the commentary from my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana as this legislation was introduced — is that it 
has some pretty nice definitions. It follows other places, but 
there’s some pretty large exemptions as to who doesn’t have to 
comply with the legislation. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And so it appears that the way the legislation has been written 
in Saskatchewan is that we have good legislation, but it pretty 
well excludes all the lobbying in Saskatchewan. So this bill 
would exclude lobbying by employees, officers, and directors 
of interest groups, lobby organizations, other non-profit entities, 
except those that represent businesses or management, union or 
professional interests, and it would also exempt businesses 
whose employees, officers, and directors collectively lobby 
Saskatchewan public office holders less than 100 hours in a 
year. 
 
And based on what we know about the lobbying that’s 
happened in Saskatchewan, there are very few groups that 
would be caught by this definition. And so what we have is nice 
structure but a great big wide hole or a big barn door where you 
can drive through most everything that happens. And it clearly 
doesn’t have the very dramatic open and accountable kind of 
structure that you have in the state of Iowa and other states to 
the south of us. 
 
So what’s happened here? Now I think in a way, and this is my 
own sort of personal reflection on this, is that it wasn’t really 
something that was top of mind for Saskatchewan people 
because most people had a pretty good idea who was doing the 
lobbying and who wasn’t doing the lobbying, especially those 
of us here who work in this building but also the press and 

others. But when the Premier mused about, we should have 
some lobbying legislation, all of a sudden it became an issue, 
and so this whole process was entered into. 
 
But when the report came down from the group looking at other 
places, it was a sense, well maybe this is more than what we 
bargained for. And I think that that’s what we got. We got 
legislation that’s got lots of rules, lots of things that are there, 
but the actual implications of having the legislation are very 
slight. They won’t affect many people. And in fact they may 
affect some people or groups that really weren’t intended to be 
included. 
 
And so it’s interesting to try to legislate in this area no matter 
what you do. And obviously Mr. Guy Giorno, who was in some 
ways a trigger for a lot of this, has some opinions. He also has a 
consulting business that looks at how to advise people to deal 
with lobbying issues. But I think he reflects quite clearly that, 
you know, the rules are pretty good, but most lobbyists won’t 
be affected at all. 
 
Now one area where I appreciate some of his comments were 
that those places that do have lobbying statutes do have a 
strategy to deal with what are called Astroturf organizations, 
grassroots organizations. And that’s the situation where I guess 
we experienced . . . One of the bigger areas is with the tobacco 
industry where they fund all kinds of organizations that appear 
to be public organizations but that really don’t have much 
substance behind them. And those kinds of organizations you 
call Astroturf because they have no roots. 
 
And so basically our legislation doesn’t deal with anything like 
that although it does say that we should report that. But I’m sure 
that that’s one that will be interesting to watch as we look at it 
as we go forward because we know there are a number of 
organizations that appear to be member organizations that when 
you really ask questions about them — who are their members; 
where do they get their funding? — what happens? And so I’m 
willing to be surprised by the fact that maybe our legislation 
will draw out some of these groups and allow them to be 
identified, and maybe it’ll be clear who it is that’s funding them 
and why they’re doing things that they’re doing. So I think that 
may be important. 
 
Now it’s not dissimilar in a lot of ways from our freedom of 
information legislation over the years. We know that our 
Saskatchewan legislation was relatively early in the process. A 
number of provinces have worked with freedom of information 
legislation, have much better legislation than we now have. My 
understanding is that the Minister of Justice and officials are 
looking at that, and hopefully we’ll get a 21st century version of 
that. 
 
But it’s not always clear where that can be used and how it can 
be used, the freedom of information legislation. Maybe this Act 
respecting lobbying will also have a similar effect that the rules 
will be there. Some enterprising individuals or groups will see 
some opportunity to get access to information around how 
certain decisions have been made, and it will actually surprise 
both the government and the public that it has some of the 
effects that it does. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the legislation I think is legislation that 



4652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

will assist some parts of what’s . . . [inaudible] . . . in 
Saskatchewan so that we do have a more open and accountable 
situation, but unfortunately I think the exemptions are just too 
great. Some of the rules that have been set out here are too 
unenforceable, if I can put it that way, and that it will be a 
second iteration of this, a second version of this or maybe even 
a third that finally gets at some of the specific issues that are of 
concern to the public. 
 
When this legislation was brought forward, clearly some of our 
bigger institutions in the province were concerned — whether it 
was the University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina 
— because they have so many people who give advice, give 
suggestions, lobby around particular activities of the 
government. I think there’s some fairly broad exemption for the 
activity that comes from them. I think there are maybe a few of 
the companies in Saskatchewan that might be a bit surprised 
that they get caught in some of these rules, and we don’t know 
exactly how that will happen. But I think that’s interesting. 
 
I think here, we as members of the legislature and particularly 
cabinet ministers in the government will have some rules about 
what kinds of jobs they can take after they leave politics. And 
that may be an area where we need to have further discussion. 
Some of the federal rules are quite extensive, where you end up 
having to wait five years, I think it is, before you can go and 
lobby within the federal government. And that may be too long. 
 
I think this bill has six months for former MLAs, political staff, 
etc., that you have to have as a cooling-off period, and for 
ministers, one year. You know, maybe that’s not enough. 
Maybe it’s too much. But I think there’s a debate there about 
how those provisions work and how they affect what happens. 
And we’ll maybe even have some discussion around some 
aspects of that as we move forward with this into committee. 
 
Another area of discussion or contention relates to this 100-hour 
a year involved in lobbying. And the way it’s defined presently 
does give a pretty wide berth for most activities that take place 
in the province, and that I think will probably have to be looked 
at in more detail as we move forward. 
 
So the enforcement mechanism that’s set out here sounds pretty 
dramatic but I think, as my colleague from Regina Elphinstone 
said yesterday, it’s like a great big dog on a leash with no teeth. 
And so we’ll need to see whether the toothless enforcement 
regulations will have any effectiveness at all as we deal with 
this because ultimately that’s the question. What’s the penalty if 
you break the law? And so far it appears it doesn’t apply to 
many people. The penalties look quite severe, but the actual 
chance of getting to the point where a penalty applies to you 
because you’ve done something is a real long, long shot, long 
chance that you would ever get any kind of penalty at all. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I made a number of comments about 
this. I know some of my colleagues are going to want to further 
comment on this legislation, so at this point I will adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Glad to join the debate on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. It’s a pretty substantial 
piece of legislation, fairly complex in some regards, and 
certainly very interesting in many regards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The provisions in law around alcohol and gaming are almost as 
old as this province — older in fact, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
the first of the regulations that the North-West Territories was 
seized with very early on. Of course alcohol was the object of 
various of those regulations, and of course we’ve seen different 
iterations of the legislative and regulatory regime since then. 
But this, this is a fairly substantial piece of legislation, and in 
terms of significant rafts of reform would I think measure up 
with significant airs of change in other times. 
 
But I guess just to explain a bit about the approach I’ll be taking 
to the Act in the second reading speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’ll provide a few sort of thoughts off the top just on the broad 
strokes of the bill. We’ve got some more specific sort of 
consideration of the minister’s second reading speech, again a 
good sort of touchstone when you’re considering where a 
government is going with a given piece of legislation. 
 
[16:00] 
 
There’s some commentary around the way that this government 
has conducted itself on a very much related topic, that being 
horse racing and the impact that has had in my home 
community, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then I’ll be looking at 
the bill itself, going through sort of a clause-by-clause 
discussion thereof. 
 
But I guess the first thing I’d say off the top, there has been a 
significant amount of work done with the sector partners in 
terms of the hospitality industry in terms of considering where 
the legislation needs to go in the future. I don’t think this 
legislation necessarily comes out of nowhere, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think there are a few different paths that lead us to 
this point. I know that members opposite have conducted a 
regulatory review as regards liquor and liquor, in particular, 
regulations in this province. And we see some of that work 
represented here. We know that last year the minister came 
forward with different proposals, some in regulations, some in 
policy, some in law. But again it was a fairly significant raft of 
activity on the part of the government, and we see that again 
reflected here today. 
 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4653 

But I guess I’d be remiss if I didn’t state off the top that with 
. . . on the one hand we see this big push in terms of activity on 
the alcohol and gaming regulatory framework. I know that 
we’ve got some work under way by this government in terms of 
the addictions needs and sort of the gap analysis and the way 
that various of our addictions services are, I think, 
oversubscribed in this province, Mr. Speaker, people needing 
treatment that aren’t able to get it. And there’s a broader sort of 
work of review that’s going on in conjunction with that. 
 
But again I think when the minister came forward with the 
package, again a substantial package of proposals regarding 
gaming and alcohol in this province last year, that that would 
have been an appropriate time to come forward with a 
significant raft of proposals certainly on gaming and addictions 
treatment, Mr. Speaker. And again we apparently go wanting 
for that big push from the government to this day. 
 
Something else that’s interesting about the legislation in just 
sort of a general sense, Mr. Speaker, again there’s some fine 
things in this legislation. There’s some housekeeping things. 
There’s some, I think, useful amendments. There is some items 
that are responsive to various of the sector partners. But that as 
well takes place against the backdrop of as what has happened 
in the horse racing industry in this province and the fact of what 
took place around West Meadows Raceway, having had to 
cancel their season for standardbred racing and the fact that — 
and this is the words of the West Meadows press release at the 
time, Mr. Speaker — it stated: 
 

The province of Saskatchewan is a rich province. It is 
plenty big to share two Home Market Areas as it has 
through several decades, so that both industries have an 
opportunity to grow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the argument that the individuals . . . that this is a 
passion for them, but it’s also a livelihood, a way of life in 
terms of the folks that put together the West Meadows track 
again out northwest of Regina here, but the way that they 
ultimately came to grief. And again this is from a Leader-Post 
story dated August 7th, 2013 wherein they announced their 
cancellation. The sign that accompanied the announcement, 
“Horse racing cancelled. Sask Party picks winners and losers.” 
Regina loser — to provide a partial quote there, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of what those folks put up. 
 
And what they’d said at the time as regarding the experience of 
dealing with this government, they talked about, again this is 
from the then president Jane Grainger, announcing that they 
were cancelling that season. The then president Jane Grainger 
stated that it was “probably the most difficult announcement” 
that she had had to make. And in terms of what she’d said, in 
carrying on in this article again from the Leader-Post: 
 

Grainger says minister for SLGA Donna Harpauer 
‘sacrificed one track for another’ when it comes to West 
Meadows, and that meetings to plead their case for a 
licence have ‘gotten nowhere.’ 
 
‘After two years of exceptional racing with record crowds 
and handles bet, SLGA has turned their backs on us,’ 
Grainger wrote in an email. 
 

Close the quote from the story altogether, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again these are folks that are very passionate and in terms 
of, you know, of a really interesting side of the gaming industry 
in Saskatchewan in terms of horse racing, in terms of 
standardbred racing, this was a pretty exciting development in 
terms of the Regina region. 
 
But the way that this government has carried itself out, or has 
carried itself, is to pick winners and losers, and that’s again not 
my estimation of it. It’s the good folks at West Meadows 
raceway that again put up their own sweat and blood and money 
in terms of this investment. And so if the minister doesn’t like 
that, she need not take my word for it. She can refer herself to 
the correspondence that she’s had directly with the folks at 
West Meadows. 
 
In terms of the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, again a fairly 
substantial piece of legislation, fairly wide-ranging, and in 
terms of the scope of the legislation, again it sort of goes pillar 
to post. There’s some good things in here, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
some things that we have further questions about. There’s some 
things that are more housekeeping in nature and there’s some 
things that, quite frankly, are not just housekeeping but they’re 
almost sort of archaeological in terms of the work that they do, 
in terms of again the question of regulating alcohol throughout 
the history of this province has been undertaken. 
 
But in terms of the legislation itself, first off, dealing with the 
explanation for existing provision no. 3 and the amendments to 
section no. 2, the explanation states that: 
 

. . . section 2 will add definitions to facilitate amendments 
to the Act, including a new definition for Indian Band to 
facilitate changes that will allow SLGA to issue a liquor 
permit to an Indian Band. New definitions for on-reserve 
certificate of registration; on-reserve charitable gaming 
licensee; on-reserve employee; on-reserve registrant; and 
on-reserve supplier are necessary to support amendments 
that will authorize a First Nation Gaming Licensing 
Authority that has entered in an agreement with SLGA to 
register on-reserve charitable gaming employees. Finally, 
the detailed definitions for gaming employee; gaming 
supplies or services; and supplier are being moved to 
regulation to better enable SLGA to adapt to changes in 
the gaming landscape. 

 
That’s one that’s of particular interest, Mr. Speaker. Again in 
that explanation you see some good and you see some cause for 
further questions. 
 
And one of the questions that we have, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly given events of the past weeks, past months in this 
province, one of the questions I would have, and it’s something 
that we’ll certainly be raising in committee, the question of how 
this impacts online gaming in Saskatchewan. Does this have 
any impact or does this move activity from legislation into 
regulation that would better enable the people of Saskatchewan 
to keep track of what’s happening with the question of this 
government’s approach to online gaming in Saskatchewan? 
That’s one question we’ve got. 
 
Another question we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is, this is in terms of 



4654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

the specific designation around Indian Band — fair enough — 
in terms of further evolving the authority for First Nations 
gaming licensing and for the Indian gaming regulator. Again 
those would seem to be fair enough, but how those will come to 
pass, Mr. Speaker, and the individuals that are anticipated to be 
covered by that change in legislation and again the fact that 
various of the activities under this legislation has been moved 
from the legislation into regulation. again gives us some 
questions that certainly demand an answer. 
 
Moving on through the legislation, Mr. Speaker, a change 
around the conflict of interest provisions in the Act. In the 
explanation provided: 
 

Amended clause 11(1)(b) clarifies that an SLGA employee 
may be registered as a gaming regulator. Current clause 
11(1)(b) prohibits an SLGA employee from being a 
gaming regulator, which contradicts the definition of 
“registrant” in section 2 of the Act. This amendment is 
housekeeping in nature. 
 
The section is also amended to ensure that a person who 
contravenes subsection (1) cannot be charged with an 
offence under the Act. The conflicts of interest outlined in 
subsection (1) are often accidental or minor in nature when 
they do occur; however, the Act imposes potentially 
serious consequences. Going forward, SLGA can address 
these issues through appropriate workplace discipline 
policies. 

 
So again you’ve got a mixture there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
terms of housekeeping, in terms of things that will have real 
force, and then things that will be moved into policy, altogether 
out of legislation. Again we’ll be looking to see how that is 
given force and effect. 
 
Next up, Mr. Speaker, in terms of amendments to section 19, 
again from the explanatory notes. These: 

 
. . . coincides with amendments to section 39.1 and will 
give SLGA discretion to assesses a combined monetary 
penalty and suspension against a permittee or registrant 
where warranted. Section 39.1 has been interpreted to only 
allow a suspension where a permittee or registrant refuses 
to pay a monetary penalty assessed against them. This 
change will better enable SLGA to ensure the terms of the 
Act are being followed. 

 
Proposed new subsection 3 will clarify the power of SLGA 
to issue off-sale endorsements through a sealed bid 
process. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be fairly mechanical, 
fairly straightforward in nature and again, in and of itself, 
probably worthy of support. 
 
Moving along, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the proposed new 
section 20.1 allowing: 
 

. . . SLGA to establish subsidiary corporations for the 
purpose of assisting it in carrying out its powers and duties 
under the Act. The Act, as currently drafted, does not allow 
SLGA authority to create or own a subsidiary. 

I guess we’ve got questions there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
what kind of subsidiaries. What kind of activity is envisioned 
there? What current parts of the mandate with SLGA are not 
being sufficiently serviced so much so that you require the 
spinoff of a subsidiary? These are questions that again demand 
a good answer. 
 
In terms of the section regarding certain interests prohibited, the 
explanation and explanatory notes for the legislation states: 
 

The proposed new subsection (b) clarifies that a 
Commission member who contravenes subsection (a) 
cannot be charged under section 139 of the Act. The 
conflicts of interest outlined in subsection (a) are often 
accidental or minor in nature when they do occur. 
However, the Act imposes potentially serious 
consequences. The section is intended to provide guidance 
in appointing members of the commission, and not to bring 
about the type of penalties outlined in section 139. 

 
[16:15] 
 
Again, seemingly pretty straightforward work of drafting to 
clarify the intent and force of a particular clause in the 
legislation, making sure that the penalties are not rolled into the 
provisions around appointment of members of the commission. 
But again we’ll be interested to find out the experience from 
SLGA in terms of where this conflict has arisen. In previous, 
what’s the experience been, Mr. Speaker? And we’ll be looking 
to follow that up at committee . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Oh, I will. I will. Very good. Okay. Thanks, Mr. Speaker, just a 
little encouragement from members opposite. We’ll carry on 
with the discussion here on the legislation. In terms of: 
 

 . . . the exception of adding the ability to review 
on-reserve registration decisions to the Commission’s 
powers, amendments to sections 26 and 27 are largely 
housekeeping in nature and: 

 
clarify that registrants have a right to request a review of 
conditions imposed on a registration; 
 
correct section references; 
 
allow the Commission to rehear an application regarding 
the issuance, suspension or cancellation of an on-reserve 
charitable gaming licence or certificate of registration. 
Currently, this section only applies to a licence, 
horse-racing licence, permit or certificate of registration 
issued by SLGA; 
 
clarify the method of service of notice for the various 
types of applications heard by the Commission; and 
 
clarifies that service by courier is acceptable if it is left 
with the permittee or manager on duty at the time of 
service. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, pretty straightforward and would seem to 
be a reasonable suggestion. But we’ll be looking to gain further 
confidence on that point on the legislation in committee. 
 
In terms of the next amendment, it “would move subsection 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4655 

28(5) to section 27, consolidating notice requirements for 
commission hearings within a single section.” Again, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the challenges of drafting legislation 
appropriately is to make sure that you’ve got that clarity and 
that focus in the respective clauses. And that would seem to be 
a straightforward amendment being proposed there. 
 
A similar observation could be made of the amendments 
proposed to section 29, housekeeping in nature, and updating 
the existing legislation. 
 
In terms of the amendment to subclause 30(a)(i), it: 
 

. . . corrects an inconsistency within the Act. Gaming 
registrants have a right to seek a review by the commission 
of terms imposed on a certificate of registration, but clause 
30(a)(i) as currently drafted fails to include a “certificate of 
registration” as a reviewable document. 

 
Carrying on through the quote here, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The amendments to clause 30(b) include on-reserve 
charitable gaming registrants as being eligible to apply to 
the Commission for a review of a decision by a First 
Nation gaming licensing authority. 

 
Again, in the one hand it seems to be fairly straightforward, Mr. 
Speaker, as regards the clarification around the application of 
this Act to a First Nations gaming licensing authority. We will 
have, again, more specific questions about that in committee as 
regards the consultation that we would presume has taken place 
between this government and impacted First Nations as 
regarding the duty to consult. But we’ll certainly be asking 
further on that in committee. 
 
Next up, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 

The amendments correct an erroneous cross reference to 
subsection 146(5), where the proper reference should be 
subsection 146(9). The amendments also include a 
reference to section 147.3, allowing for an on-reserve 
charitable gaming registrant to apply for a review to the 
commission where new terms have been imposed on an 
on-reserve certificate of registration. 

 
Again in terms of embedding more precise language as regards 
First Nations in the legislation and the changes or the 
clarification that arise from process attached to that, Mr. 
Speaker, would seem to be fairly straightforward, but we shall 
see. 
 
In terms of amendments to section 32, these will: 
 

. . . allow the Commission to dispose of a matter where an 
applicant for review fails to appear at the hearing by either 
adjourning the hearing; dismissing the hearing; or 
considering the application on the basis of the information 
before the Commission. Currently, when an applicant 
requests an oral hearing but fails to appear at the hearing, 
the only available option for the commission is to consider 
the application based on filed material.” 

 
Again as these matters are brought to the commission’s 

attention, it’s important to have means to properly dispose of 
them. It’s important to have the process by which these matters 
are disposed of being clearly understood, and this would seem 
to be in aid of that end, Mr. Speaker, and it would seem to be a 
fairly straightforward proposition. 
 
In terms of: 
 

Existing sections 33 and 34 which related to suspensions or 
cancellations by SLGA have been combined into one 
section as part of amendments to the Act to more clearly 
describe processes for SLGA when issuing sanctions and 
abilities for the Commission to consider review of those 
decisions. In addition, amendments will: 
 

coincide with amendments to sections 19, 37.1 and 39.1 
that clarify that SLGA or a First Nation gaming licensing 
authority may issue a suspension/cancellation either 
alone or in conjunction with a penalty; 
 
clarify the process SLGA must follow in issuing a 
suspension or cancellation; 
 
establish a three year limitation period for SLGA to issue 
a suspension or termination, which is in line with the 
current three year limitation period to assess a penalty 
pursuant to section 39.1; 
 
clarify remedies available to the Commission if an 
applicant fails to appear at an oral hearing; and 
 
clarify notice provisions. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, disciplinary proceedings and suspension or 
termination of licences, it’s very important that those things are 
well understood in the legislation, that they’re well defined in 
the legislation. And this again would appear to be in aid of 
those ends. 
 
In terms of the next provisions up for consideration, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Existing sections 34.1 and 34.2 which related to 
suspensions or cancellations by a First Nations gaming 
licensing authority have been combined into one section. 
In addition, amendments will: 

 
include reference to a registration issued by a First 
Nation gaming licensing authority (currently the 
sections only refer to on-reserve charitable gaming 
licences); 

 
coincide with amendments to sections 19, 37.1 and 39.1 
that clarify that SLGA or a First Nation gaming 
licensing authority may issue a suspension/cancellation 
either alone or in conjunction with a penalty; 

 
establish a three year limitation period for SLGA to 
issue a suspension or termination, which is in line with 
the current three year limitation period to assess a 
penalty pursuant to section 39.1; 

 



4656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

clarify remedies available to the Commission if an 
applicant fails to appear at an oral hearing; and 

 
clarify notice provisions. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, given the clarification of duties that attach 
to First Nations gaming licensing authorities, these would seem 
to be reasonable changes and would be attendant to that change 
in law. 
 
Carrying along here, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the next: 
 

Proposed subsection 35(2) is complementary to the 
provisions that will provide authority to a First Nation 
gaming licensing authority to register on-reserve 
charitable gaming employees and suppliers and provides 
that the Commission can direct a First Nation gaming 
licensing authority to issue, renew, vary or cancel an 
on-reserve certificate of registration. The current 
subsection only provides the Commission with these 
powers to direct a First Nations gaming licensing authority 
with respect to on-reserve charitable gaming licenses. 

 
It would be good to know, Mr. Speaker, what’s the context 
from which this emerges. We presume that it arises from 
discussions and observed experience with the Indian gaming 
regulator, but it’s always important to know the precise details 
out of which a given piece of legislation arises, out of which 
given amendments might arise, Mr. Speaker. So I guess, what 
are the experiences to date in which various certificates, 
on-reserve certificates of registration, might have been renewed, 
varied, or cancelled? What is the particular experience as that 
has worked its way through the province? 
 
Next up in terms of “. . . subsection 36(1) will expand the 
subsection 35(3) to apply to on-reserve certificates of 
registration, in addition to licenses and certificates of 
registration.” Again dealing with the means by which SLGA is 
capable of licensing various activities. 
 
Again next provision is section 37, housekeeping in nature, 
updating references in the section to coincide with amendments 
to section 26. 
 
Next up, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Proposed 37.1 applies to immediate suspensions by a First 
Nation gaming licensing authority and mirrors existing 37 
which applies to immediate suspensions by SLGA. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, more richly evolving the consideration of 
the First Nations licensing authority and its powers under the 
Act and more clearly delineating them within the legislation. 
That in itself would seem to be entirely reasonable. But again, 
we’ll have questions on these matters in committee. 
 

The amendments to section 39.1 will provide clarification 
of SLGA’s authorities to issue administrative sanctions 
against permittees or registrants that fail to comply with 
the Act, Regulations or terms and conditions. Along with 
amendments to other sections, changes to 39.1 will better 
set out the service and notice requirements, update section 
references and provide the Commission with authority to 

dispose of an application where an applicant does not 
appear at an oral hearing. 

 
Again, would seem to be fairly straightforward and again 
helping the Act to more appropriately deal with matters of 
concern that are brought to the commission and how they might 
be discharged with. 
 
Subsection 42(1), again sort of the consequential amendment 
type amendment. 
 
Changes to section 22 of the bill thereby amending the French 
version of the Act, and it being housekeeping in nature. 
 
Again the matters contained herein sort of running the gamut. 
 
And then: 
 

The proposed new section 47.1 will clarify that a franchise 
may issue special occasion permits, in accordance with the 
terms contained in an agreement with SLGA. Currently, 
there are no provisions in the Act that expressly allow a 
franchise to issue special occasion permits. This 
amendment will eliminate confusion and is housekeeping 
in nature. 

 
Then, Mr. Speaker, that would certainly seem to be the case 
with that proposed amendment. Next up, dealing with section 
48, Mr. Speaker, of the legislation, the where-prohibited 
provisions in the legislation. There’s an amendment that: 
 

. . . extends the physical areas covered by subsection (2) to 
include First Nation reserves. This amendment corrects a 
current inconsistency within the Act, as reserves are not 
legally part of municipalities, and do not fall within a 
prohibition operating pursuant to section 49. 

 
[16:30] 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, an important distinction to be made in law 
for sure, to specifically reference First Nations and how that is 
considered properly under law. The old section 2 dealt with: 
 

(a) the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District; 
(b) a provincial park or a regional park established 
pursuant to The Parks Act, or The Regional Parks Act, 
1979; 
(c) an area that, in the opinion of the authority, is a 
summer or winter resort area; or 
(d) a national park of Canada, subject to any regulations 
made pursuant to the National Parks Act (Canada). 

 
And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to understand how First 
Nations are contemplated under law. And it would be good to 
know, just referencing the allowance that is made there in terms 
of the national park of Canada, how those sorts of issues, in 
terms of the individual First Nations jurisdiction and regulation, 
are dealt with under law, given that this is now more 
specifically being considered in this legislation and what sort of 
consultation went into ascertaining that. 
 
In terms of the sections 57 and 58, this is more of a 
consolidation piece, Mr. Speaker, but they state that: 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4657 

Most of the detailed requirements of sections 57 and 58 are 
being moved to the Regulations. This will better enable 
SLGA to make changes to the application requirements in 
response to feedback from stakeholders in the future. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, these sections 57 and 58 have a lot to do 
with sanctions that are available under the Act and to whom 
they apply. And it’d be good to know from the government, in 
terms of the specific instances that are there that prompt this 
action, is this in fact a case where these would be better served 
in regulations? Or is it, you know, what is it about the Act that’s 
so constrained the hand of government that they need to move 
them into regulations to enable more responsiveness? Again 
that’s the kind of context that we’ll be looking for under closer 
examination of the legislation in committee. 
 
Up next, Mr. Speaker, in terms of: 
 

The amendment to section 59.1 coincides with 
amendments to section 60 that clarify that an Indian Band 
is eligible to apply for a permit. The new clause (2)(c.1) 
provides that SLGA can consider evidence regarding the 
members of council of the applicant band in determining 
whether or not an applicant is of good character. This 
clause follows a similar format to the existing clause for 
corporations and partnerships. 

 
Again it’s interesting to see the elevation and the consideration 
of individual governing units on First Nations being considered 
alongside the existing legislation for corporations and 
partnerships. We’ll be interested to see what the specific 
application of that and how it’s anticipated to work out under 
the Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again:  
 

The amendment to section 60 will allow an Indian Band to 
obtain a liquor permit. Currently, Indian Band are not a 
type of entity that may qualify for a liquor permit under 
the Act. 

 
Again updating the provisions of the Act allowing for that more 
fulsome recognition of First Nations in the legislation, but how 
that works out and what basis of consultation that stands on are 
things that we will be interested in better understanding, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The amendment to section 61 will clarify that small 
manufacturers (brew pubs, micro breweries, micro 
distilleries and cottage wineries) may own and operate a 
licensed restaurant. 

 
Again, quite frankly I’ll be very interested to see how this 
works out, Mr. Speaker, as I would presume are you, in terms 
of the microbrewery, micro distillery interests that are 
seemingly growing stronger by the day in this province, and not 
to mention the cottage wineries, lest we forget them, Mr. 
Speaker. But how this aids and enables the activities of those 
interests, it will be very interesting to see how that works out, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be following that with great interest and 
perhaps even appetite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again some of the various amendments concerning matters 

which are more housekeeping in nature, you know, changes to 
numbering and the like, in terms of difference of the 
amendments under consideration in this part of the legislation. 
One that’s of particular interest, Mr. Speaker, is section 67, 
which is: 
 

. . . being repealed and removes the ability of SLGA to 
require a permittee to carry set amounts of beer produced 
by Saskatchewan manufacturers. This provision is no 
longer relevant and is not enforced. 

 
An interesting one of a measure from a bygone era, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps speaking to a more protectionist era, but it 
would have been interesting to see, you know, when was the 
last time that was actually brought into any kind of force in the 
sector here in the province. 
 
Next up, again another sort of interesting piece of this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the medical use permits. And this 
amendment: 
 

. . . removes the requirement for medical use permits and 
reduces the administrative burdens, both for SLGA and 
medical professionals. The actions of doctors, pharmacists 
and other medical professionals are regulated by their 
respective governing bodies, which ensure that activities 
related to the use of beverage alcohol for medicinal 
purposes are still regulated. Medical professionals will still 
be required to purchase all beverage alcohol from SLGA 
pursuant to section 82. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, perhaps rooted in a more bygone era 
where, you know, under different experiences of different 
degrees of prohibition where if people wanted to get a drink, it 
very much involved a trip to the doctor and the kind of, you 
know, circuitous path involved getting a drink there. You know, 
thank goodness we’re in a much more straight-ahead day and 
age, Mr. Speaker, where you don’t need to go to the doctor to 
get a permit to get your own little quart of medicinal this or 
medicinal that. 
 
And again, it’s reflected in section 81 where it is being 
repealed: “With the removal of medical use permits from the 
Act, section 81 is no longer relevant.” Again, Mr. Speaker, fair 
enough. A trip to the doctor should be on its own and a trip to 
the bar should be a trip to the bar. 
 
Explanation concerning the amendment to section 82, “. . . 
coincides with amendments to section 77, which removes the 
requirement for medical professionals to obtain medical use 
permits from SLGA.” Again, Mr. Speaker, perhaps derived 
from this more bygone approach to getting a drink in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I’m sure some legitimate 
applications of medical use as well. 
 
Then the amendments to section 83, removing: 
 

. . . the requirement for a non-consumptive use permit for 
businesses or individuals that require beverage alcohol for 
uses other than as food or beverage. This will reduce 
administrative costs for both SLGA and 
businesses/individuals that require beverage alcohol for 
non-consumptive purposes. 



4658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

Again fair enough. I’m sure the Bunsen burners of the province 
are shouting out with joy at that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, this one of particular interest to me, explanation for 
the amendments to section 85 will: 
 

. . . remove the requirement for educational institutions to 
obtain a permit for the purpose of serving beverage alcohol 
in connection with mixology or bartending courses 
conducted by that institution. This will reduce 
administrative costs for both SLGA and educational 
institutions. 

 
Now I never got my degree in mixology, Mr. Speaker, but I 
actually have a friend who’s got a degree in mixology. And I’m 
sure he’d be happy to know that the kind of hoops that his 
course had to jump through to get the raw materials for their 
course work have been removed and that this is now going to be 
an easier proposition in terms for all those hard-working 
mixologists and bartenders out there. So be glad to see that take 
effect, Mr. Speaker, and be interested to see the specific context 
from which that change arises, but again, it seemed to be fairly 
straightforward on the face of it. 
 
Clause 90(e), this amendment: 
 

. . . will expand the scope of that clause to allow the sale of 
any form of cooking beverage alcohol by a merchant, such 
as a grocery store. This is limited to beverage alcohol that 
is denatured and not fit for consumption on its own. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a fairly straightforward 
proposition. We’ll see how that is implemented. 
 

Amendments to subsection 99(1) simplifying notification 
procedures where SLGA intends to establish a franchise in 
a municipality in which a store or franchise does not exist. 
Currently, SLGA must engage in detailed notice 
procedures where a store or franchise was in operation but 
recently closed. The amendments would require notice 
from SLGA only where there has been no store or 
franchise in operation for over 180 days, resulting in 
reduced administrative costs for SLGA and shortened wait 
times for a business seeking a franchise. 

 
And again this is one where I think about a case I’ve heard of, 
where a licence was given adjacent to a First Nation and the 
way that concerns have arisen from that. And what were the 
precise terms of consultation with the surrounding community 
in the granting of that franchise or that licence, how were they 
followed? And again I don’t think they’ll be impacted, in the 
main, by this Act, but again communities should have say in the 
provision of these licences, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important to 
very much consider their interests in the granting of these 
licences. So we’ll see how that one plays out, Mr. Speaker, and 
what the specific context from which that measure arises. But 
we’ll be looking for that one in a more detailed way from the 
minister. 
 
And again under: 
 

The amendment to subsection (3) removes the reference to 
medical use permits and coincides with amendments to 

section 77 that remove requirements for medical use 
permits. A person lawfully prescribed beverage alcohol by 
a doctor will continue to be able to consume that beverage 
alcohol in any place it is necessary. 

 
That’s going to be interesting to see how that works out again. 
“A person lawfully prescribed beverage alcohol by a doctor will 
continue to be able to consume that beverage alcohol in any 
place it is necessary.” I don’t know if anyone here has got a 
prescription, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll be interested to see how 
that plays out through various workplaces and community 
gathering points in the province. But again that it’s even 
contemplated directly under alcohol and gaming regulations or 
legislation here in the province arises from that different era 
where medical use permits were a much more vital part of the 
legislation, bigger . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I can’t hear, 
Mr. Speaker. I can only surmise that he’s offering me a 
beverage at the end of this, but we’ll see . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You’re still using medical permits? Okay. All 
right. Okay. Well there we go. 
 
Again information being provided that medical use permits are 
very much in use, and we’ll see. Again these are the kind of 
questions that we’ll be asking of the minister to provide that 
more detailed understanding, and of course, Mr. Speaker, is not 
just someone who avidly following the goings-on in this sector 
of the economy and culture, but former SLGA minister himself. 
I’m sure he’s followed this with great interest. But again the 
kind of questions that we’ll be bringing to bear to get that more 
precise understanding under the consideration of this 
legislation. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Next up, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The amendments to section 113 will clarify that a 
franchisee cannot allow minors to act in the sale or 
handling of beverage alcohol, consistent with the 
limitations imposed on commercial permittees. Previously, 
this has been addressed by agreement between SLGA and 
the franchisee, but there was no statutory provision 
prohibiting this practice. This does not represent a change 
in practice for franchises but creates legislative parity for 
franchisees and permittees. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to be fairly again one of 
the challenges of drafting legislation that’s responding to the 
circumstances as they present in the field. And that would seem 
to clarify an existing oversight in the law as regarding that 
difference between treatment for the franchisees and permittees, 
and again would seem to be a fairly straightforward proposition. 
 
Next up, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The amendments to section 115 will allow SLGA to 
employ minors for the purpose of monitoring the 
compliance of SLGA stores, franchises and permittees 
regarding the service of beverage alcohol to minors. 
Currently, it is difficult to monitor whether or not 
franchises, SLGA stores, and permittees comply with ID 
requirements because SLGA cannot employ minors to test 
compliance, but rather, only youthful looking adults. This 



March 11, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4659 

change will better enable SLGA to focus on the public 
safety aspects of liquor regulation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the request ever came up to 
the minister’s office to send you out, you know, the youthful 
person that you are, to see if you could test some of the carding 
provisions under the legislation. But again an interesting 
provision in the legislation. But also it’d be interesting to know 
what challenge this has posed for the SLGA, how they’re going 
to handle the requirement for engaging the appropriate minors 
to do this work. The mind swims, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
way that the agency will handle this. But again it would seem to 
be a fairly straight-ahead proposition, and we’ll be interested to 
see how it plays out. 
 
The repeal of section 121 will: 
 

remove the requirement that a permittee does not install or 
allow the installation of tables and seating that exceeds an 
amount set by SLGA. This provision is no longer relevant, 
as SLGA no longer regulates capacity. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’d be looking for a more 
precise answer on the part of the minister in terms of why the 
matter of capacity is struck from the legislation altogether. You 
know, having some frequency in various restaurants and finer 
dining and drinking establishments in the city and the province 
of Saskatchewan, I can imagine, but it’ll be interesting to get 
the precise consideration from the minister on that point. 
 
Concerning the repeal of section 123, it will: 
 

. . . remove the ability of SLGA to require written reasons 
from a permittee when a person is forbidden entry or asked 
to leave a permitted premises. This is a business decision 
of the permittee that does not concern SLGA. 

 
Again we’ll see, you know, what the specific experience of this 
provision has been, whether or not this is in fact something that 
SLGA has stopped enforcing some time before, Mr. Speaker, 
and whether or not this is just dealing with an artifact in the 
legislation that need no longer apply. But we’ll see. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got questions, and we’re hoping that the 
minister and officials have the answers. And that will certainly 
be a question we have in that regard. 
 
“The amendment to section 125 clarifies that employees of 
permittees are also prohibited from selling or supplying 
beverage alcohol to a person who appears to be intoxicated.”  
 
Again there, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for a more precise 
understanding from the minister and from officials as regards 
how this has been carried out to date, whether or not this is 
adequate in terms of the strengthening of the provisions in 
legislation. 
 
And again there are, you know, as recent as this past month, 
we’ve seen circumstances where occasions arise where 
individuals have had too much to drink. And what is the 
responsibility that the licence holders or the permittees have in 
those regards? So we will be looking for a greater 
understanding from the minister on this particular provision and 
how the different details, upon which this I’m sure has been 

prompted into action, have been considered. And are there other 
steps that the ministry or that the SLGA is taking to deal with 
that provision, be it through policy or through education or 
through the different conditions that attach to the provision of 
permits or licences or through registration? 
 
In terms of section 126, these amendments: 
 

. . . will expand the scope of that section to prohibit a 
permittee or an employee of a permittee from allowing a 
person who appears to be intoxicated to consume or be in 
possession of beverage alcohol at the permitted premises. 
Currently, permittees are only prohibited from selling or 
supplying beverage alcohol to an intoxicated person. This 
change will better enable SLGA to regulate public safety in 
permitted establishments. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, echoing the previous amendment and 
working to reinforce that responsibility that comes along with 
the permits or the licence and safeguards that need to be in 
place. 
 
As regards the amendments to section 135, it will: 
 

. . . remove the requirement that representatives and agents 
of an alcohol manufacturer be registered with SLGA. 
Instead, manufacturers will be required to provide the 
identities of all agents and/or representatives to SLGA. 
This amendment will reduce administrative burdens for 
SLGA and manufacturers. 

 
So how this, again how this works on the ground, Mr. Speaker, 
works in practice is something that we’ll be interested in getting 
a better understanding of and how this for example would affect 
your friendly neighbourhood Great Western rep or your, you 
know, pick your rep out there from the industry, Mr. Speaker. 
Will be interesting to see how that plays out in practice. 
 
Section 141 is amended to: 
 

. . . allow the value of prizes for which municipalities may 
issue a charitable gaming licence to be established in 
regulation, better enabling SLGA to respond to changes in 
the charitable gaming industry. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be fair enough. But what the 
current value is and how that will be expanded is certainly 
something we’ll be looking for. We’ll see how that is responded 
to. Again, Mr. Speaker, moving different provisions in the Act 
from legislation into regulation, we’ll see how that plays out. 
But past being prologue, we have some pause for concern 
around that. 
 

Amendments to section 142 will remove the requirement 
that local authorities that issue licenses provide an annual 
report to SLGA regarding licensing activities. Instead, 
local authorities will be required to maintain general 
licensing information for three years and provide such 
information for inspection by SLGA at SLGA’s request. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, seemingly fair enough,. But we’d be 
interested to know what are the number of authorities that are 
duly constituted as such and how many of them have been 



4660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2014 

issuing these annual reports and what the anticipated sort of 
savings around reduced workload that SLGA is anticipating 
from this change in the legislation. 
 
Subsection 146.1 will: 
 

. . . permit SLGA to consider an applicant’s associates and 
employees when making a determination of good character 
pursuant to subsection (1). This will allow SLGA to 
conduct more thorough investigations prior to granting a 
certificate of registration, similar to SLGA’s authority 
under section 59.1 to examine the background of associates 
and employees of an applicant for a liquor permit. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, a very important provision on the part of 
the government, on the part of the state, and again something 
that we’ll be looking to see how that plays out and is utilized by 
SLGA in the granting of licences. 
 
There’s a new part VII.01 that: 
 

. . . include provisions granting First Nation gaming 
licensing authorities (namely Indigenous Gaming 
Regulators (IGR)) who have entered into an agreement 
with SLGA authority to grant certificates of registration for 
on-reserve charitable gaming employees and on-reserve 
suppliers, together with other necessary provisions 
regarding IGR’s authority in this area. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, IGR [Indigenous Gaming Regulators Inc.] 
arising from the gaming framework agreement, and we’ll have 
more specific questions as regards the application of the new 
authorities accrued to First Nations gambling or First Nations 
gaming licensing authorities and the way that works in 
conjunction with Indigenous Gaming Regulators. But we’ll 
again look to gain that clarification from the minister. 
 
Then we’ve got subsection 154(1): 
 

The amendment will clarify that the owner of a 
conveyance seized in accordance with subsection 154(1) is 
responsible for the costs of towing and storing the 
conveyance. Currently, it is unclear who is responsible for 
these costs. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for a specific sort of 
understanding from the minister on how that provision arises, 
and why it is included in the proposed legislation. 
 
Again we’ve got some changes that are more housekeeping in 
nature, more sort of consequential amendments flowing from 
other changes in the Act. 
 
We’ve got changes regarding sections 156 to 160 respecting the 
disposition of seized alcohol being repealed from the Act. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to make good sense given 
that . . . Well I guess there’s a question around SLGA liquor 
inspectors seizing alcohol and how that is then handled. But 
we’ll see how that is explained by the minister. 
 
So I guess there are some other changes towards the end of the 
bill here, Mr. Speaker, that again are more sort of housekeeping 
in nature, more clarifying different parts of the Act. But to end 

where I started, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that is 
fairly complex, that’s got some interesting connections to the 
history of this province, particularly as regarded the medical use 
permits or different things like that under the Act. 
 
But the greater evolution of the place of First Nations under the 
legislation is something that we’ll be looking to . . . that on the 
face of it is good to see in the legislation, but we’ll be looking 
for a more precise understanding from the minister and officials 
as regards to the application of that, how it impacts broader 
questions in front of the province such as again that 
jurisdictional question and questions such as online gaming. 
 
But for now, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place and move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, An Act to amend The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4631 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4631 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4631 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4632 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4632 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4633 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4633 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4633 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4634 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4634 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4634 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women in the Legislature 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4634 
 First Nations Agency Receives Accreditation 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 
 Artifact or Artifiction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 
 Regina Company Raises Funds in Silicon Valley 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4635 
 Women Build Launched in Prince Albert 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 
 Huskies Women’s Basketball Team Wins Canada West Title 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4636 
 Effects of Carbon Levies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4636 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Inspections of Personal Care Homes 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4637 
 Support for Educators 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4637 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4637 
 Poverty Reduction Measures 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4639 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4639 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 
 Passage of Personal Care Homes Legislation 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4641 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4641 
 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4642 
 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4643 
 



 

 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4645 
 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4647 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4648 
 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4649 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4649 
 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4652 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




