
























































Hansard: December 01, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 21A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6137 
 December 1, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask for leave to make an extended introduction please. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to colleagues for the leave. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 
group of people who are seated in your gallery today, in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are representatives of several financial 
institutions that are supporting SAGES, the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings, along with a parent who 
is participating in the program. 
 
They are — and I’ll just ask them to give a wave — Dawn Bell 
of Saskatoon, vice-president of corporate trust and registered 
plans for Concentra Trust; Pamela Bryden of Regina, manager, 
financial planning, Regina and Parkland region for RBC Royal 
Bank; Bob Taylor of Regina, district vice-president, 
Scotiabank; and Brian Baker of Saskatoon representing the 
Canadian Scholarship Trust plan. As well, Mr. Speaker, joining 
them is Melissa Klapak of Regina, a mother of two children 
who has contributed to a registered education savings plan that 
has attracted the SAGES financial incentive. 
 
The Saskatchewan advantage grant for savings, Mr. Speaker, 
will help Saskatchewan families save for their children’s 
post-secondary education. And over 10,000 children so far, Mr. 
Speaker, from Saskatchewan families have received more than 
$2 million from the SAGES program since it was officially 
launched earlier this year. A total of 10 financial institutions are 
now offering SAGES, with another nine committed to offering 
the program in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank these individuals for their 
support of the SAGES program which is helping families across 
Saskatchewan save for their children’s education, and I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these leaders from 
the financial sector and Ms. Klapak here today to mark the 
10,000 editions of SAGES that have gone forth. Certainly any 
instruments that can be put in the hands of students and families 

to make post-secondary education more accessible, more 
affordable is welcome and good to see. 
 
So we’re glad to see the partners here today in terms of marking 
this day, and we’re glad to see what seems to be a very 
successful and popular tool for students to take some control 
over their own destiny and to get that critical post-secondary 
education under their belt. With that I’d join with the minister 
in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today we 
announced the community safety officer program, an alternative 
enforcement option for Saskatchewan communities. Seated in 
your gallery today are a number of people who made this 
announcement possible. From North Battleford, we have 
Community Safety Officer Jerry Koliniak —give us a wave; 
thank you — Mayor Ian Hamilton, and Chief Albert Headrick 
from the North Battleford Fire Department, who was key in the 
development of their program. As well, some of our other court 
partners in the program are Ray Orb, acting president; and 
Doug Steele, vice-president of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities; and correction and policing officials 
Louis Lauziere, senior policy advisor; and Hugh McLaughlan, 
program manager for policy and governance. 
 
Also joining us today is Constance Hourie, assistant deputy 
minister of Social Services who also played a role in this 
program when she was with policing and corrections. 
 
I would like to thank all of you for your collaboration on this 
program and ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
minister in welcoming the officials to the legislature today. It’s 
good to see another program moving forward that is a 
co-operative program, and you can tell that just by the 
introduction today. It’s when police can work together with the 
local communities, with Social Services, with Health, then we 
know that there can be some solutions that are good for all of 
us. So thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the west gallery there’s 21 students from Vanier Collegiate in 



6138 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

Moose Jaw. And we’d like to welcome them, along with their 
teacher, Mr. Doug Panko, and the chaperone James Kleisinger. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Panko is no stranger to this gallery. He brings 
his students just about every year, but it’s always special to see 
the young people come in. They met with the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow and I before, and there was really no 
hard questions. Just shows to be a testament of the teaching 
staff there to fill them up, and I am sure that they’ll all get good 
passing marks. So we’d like to welcome them to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce nine very special young people up in the west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. They are the nine students from Mrs. Robertson’s 
kindergarten class at the Regina Christian Academy. Give us a 
wave, boys and girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by Mrs. Robertson of 
course and three parent chaperones: Connie Taylor, Alexandria 
Albert, and Lorena Melnychuk. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these very special young 
people. Not that the people from Moose Jaw aren’t important, 
but these are first-timers to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce Ed Mantler. Ed has travelled 
with me several times out recruiting. Ed works for Saskdocs, 
Mr. Speaker, and has recruited throughout Ireland, Belfast, 
Dublin, as well as Manchester, and throughout the world. Very 
skilled at what he does, travelling everywhere to be able to 
recruit for rural Saskatchewan as well as urban Saskatchewan. 
So I just wanted to welcome him to his to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce a number of guests that 
have joined us, seated in your gallery, after a historic 
announcement earlier today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier today we released the mental health and addictions 
action plan, a 10-year inter-ministerial action plan to address 
the complex and often connected nature of mental health and 
addictions issues in this province.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, joining us today — and I’ll maybe ask if 
they give us a wave when I introduce them — Anita Hopfauf 
who’s the executive director of the Schizophrenia Society of 
Saskatchewan; Ed Mantler, who members will know and have 
just heard, I think members know Ed from his time as head of 
Saskdocs in the province, but he’s actually moved on to a new 
position as vice-president of the Mental Health Commission of 
Canada; as well as Terry Gudmundson who’s a project lead at 

the Ministry of Health on the mental health and additions action 
plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also joined in the gallery by our 
commissioner, Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder and her husband, 
Kelly Winder. Mr. Speaker, thank you only goes so far but, Mr. 
Speaker, to these individuals and to all those that provided their 
voice in the commissioner’s work, to the over 4,000 people that 
submitted to the commissioner in her work, but most especially 
to Fern for the time that she took away from her own clinical 
practice and most especially from her own family, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, thank 
her for her work as our commissioner. And I’ll be introducing a 
ministerial statement later in the proceedings, but I would ask 
all members to help me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister on behalf of the opposition in welcoming 
these guests. We’ve got Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder, Ed 
Mantler, Terry Gudmundson, and Anita Hopfauf here at the 
legislature today because of this 10-year action plan. 
 
Thank you for all that you do when it comes to advocating for 
raising awareness, reducing stigma of, and ensuring that 
governments do what they need to do to ensure families and 
those who are suffering with mental health issues have what 
they need to lead the most productive and fulfilling lives. So 
thank you for all that you do. And Dr. Stockdale Winder, thank 
you so much for all of the work that you’ve done in leading this 
project. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
guests to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition that calls for greater protection for Saskatchewan 
citizens from developers who default on fixed-price contracts 
with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And we know that in September this year this government 
walked away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable 
housing project here in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and then rent the units at full market 
price. When asked to explain how the government could allow 
the developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without any 
penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, 
“You’re assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 
people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 
realities within our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6139 

private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
here in Regina and across the province as it relates to the 
dangerous conditions created by that government on Dewdney 
Avenue with the heavy-haul truck traffic. Certainly it’s 
important to see a timely completion of the west bypass and, in 
the interim, there’s a requirement for urgent actions to protect 
community property and people. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned constituents of 
mine as well as someone from Indian Head. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m proud to stand in my place and present a petition on a 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 
senior governments. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Estevan, from Saskatoon. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition condemning this government’s dangerous 
smart meter program. In the prayer that reads as follows, the 
petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
take responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 
information about safety concerns with its smart meter 

program, including through the immediate resignation of 
the Minister Responsible for SaskPower and a fully 
independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 
that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Yorkton, 
Moose Jaw, and Meath Park. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition of people who 
are opposed to service job privatization in the correctional 
service, and they’re people from across the province. They’re 
concerned that the government wants to privatize the food 
services in corrections and young offender facilities and that 
they haven’t properly thought through all of the consequences 
of that. So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan may be 
pleased to cause the government to cancel its privatization 
in the corrections and young offender facilities in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And these are signed by people from Saskatoon and Regina. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 
individuals who have signed this petition are concerned that 
Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita in all of Canada, and Saskatchewan’s emissions have 
continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes as reported by 
Environment Canada in October 2013. Slashing programs such 
as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy 
efficiency program has set this province on a backwards course. 
So in the prayer that reads as follows, these individuals are 
requesting: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a 
real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by a number of individuals from 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Member Elected to Canadian Football Hall of Fame 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
100-plus years of Canadian professional football, there have 



6140 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

only ever been 16 players, professional players, who have made 
it into the CFL [Canadian Football League] Hall of Fame in 
their first year of eligibility, and none of them were offensive 
linemen. That all changed on Friday, Mr. Speaker, when the 
member for Regina Dewdney, on his first year of eligibility, 
was elected to the Canadian Football Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now his jersey number, number 60, joins 23 and 
34 because only Lancaster and Reed have ever been selected to 
the Hall of Fame, as Riders certainly, in their first year of 
eligibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Dewdney we know played 
great football at the university level for the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] Huskies before being drafted by the Riders in 
the ’95 CFL draft. He spent 17 years playing for what can 
objectively be called the best team in the CFL, I think. During 
this time he won the CFL all-star honours five times. He 
received the west division laurels on seven occasions. He was 
named the league’s top offensive lineman in ’04 and ’05 and 
then in ’08, closer to the end of his career, he was the runner-up 
for that particular recognition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you talk to the member for Dewdney, you’d 
never know about all of this because he’s also a humble man. 
He’s a hard-working man. He’s a great community leader. 
Never mind politics — he’s a source of pride, not just for Rider 
nation but for the province of Saskatchewan. We heartily 
congratulate him on being elected to the Canadian Football Hall 
of Fame. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

World AIDS Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly to recognize that today is World AIDS [acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome] Day. Twenty-six years after the 
first World AIDS Day, there’s still much to be done to fight the 
stigma and exclusion that many people living with HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] face. People who are HIV positive 
continue to face many barriers in the workforce, in schools, and 
when finding a place to live. 
 
World AIDS Day is a time for us to commit to face and 
confront the marginalization of those who are living with HIV 
and AIDS. Another important part of World AIDS Day 
involves awareness about prevention. We know that infection 
rates are declining but there’s certainly room for improvement 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
One person is infected with HIV every three hours in Canada, 
but the infection rate in Saskatchewan is three times the 
national average, and Aboriginal peoples are disproportionally 
affected by HIV and AIDS. More needs to be done to ensure 
that marginalized people have the tools and resources they need 
to stay healthy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 
World AIDS Day, and I hope that all members will work 
together to help build a province, a country, and a world free 
from HIV and AIDS. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, today is World AIDS Day. 
HIV/AIDS touches the lives of many people across the world, 
and it does remain an issue here in Saskatchewan. Today I want 
to reinforce our government’s commitment to reduce HIV rates 
in our province and support people living with this illness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our $10 million HIV strategy has made a 
difference in reducing the number of Saskatchewan residents 
living with HIV and AIDS. The latest statistical report shows a 
35 per cent decrease in newly diagnosed cases from 2009 to 
2013, even though testing has been increasing. And there have 
been no cases of mother to child transmission of HIV in the 
province since 2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is now increased access to testing, treatment, 
and care. This includes areas of the province where these 
services were previously not available. Some locations even 
offer rapid testing that gives preliminary results within minutes. 
Early detection is vital to living a long and healthy life. If you 
or someone you love could have contracted HIV, please make 
sure to get tested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank all partners — health care 
professionals, front-line service providers, community-based 
organizations, and others — for their great work to prevent and 
treat HIV. We will continue working with them to make further 
progress in addressing HIV. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

SaskBooks Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on November 20th I had the 
honour to attend the 25th anniversary of an important 
organization for writers and readers in our province, the 
Saskatchewan Publishers Group or SaskBooks. Authors, 
publishers, and book lovers came to the Artesian in Regina for a 
celebration of literature and to hear a keynote address from 
Regina native Jack David, the president, publisher, and 
co-founder of ECW publishing in Toronto, one of the most 
successful publishing houses in Canada. 
 
Members of SaskBooks include Benchmark Press, Coteau 
Books, DriverWorks Ink, Dunlop Art Gallery, Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, Gopher Books, Hagios Press, Hear My Heart Books, 
Indie Ink Publishing, JackPine Press, Les Éditions de la 
nouvelle plume, the Native Law Centre of U of S, Nature 
Saskatchewan, Parkland Publishing, Pio-Seelos Books, Purich 
Publishing, Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre, Thistledown 
Press, the U of R [University of Regina] Press, Wild Sage 
Press, and Your Nickel’s Worth Publishing. These publishers 
print more than 100 books a year for readers in Saskatchewan 
and around the world. 
 
Thanks go to Heather Nickel, the president of SaskBooks, and 
the co-executive directors, Jillian Bell and Brenda Niskala, for 
organizing the event. I hope that all members will join me in 
congratulating SaskBooks on their 25th anniversary and thank 
them for all the work they do to tell our province’s stories. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6141 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

2014 Movember Challenge 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After a month of 
growing moustaches that I’m sure our respective wives could 
only describe as awesome, the Minister of Health, the Minister 
of Rural and Remote Health, the Minister of Finance, the 
Minister of Agriculture, the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, the member from The Battlefords, the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone, and myself finally get to shave. Or in my 
case, I need to shave before Danielle lets me in the house on 
Thursday night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was worth it. I’m extremely proud to say that for 
the 2014 Movember challenge, Team Stewart raised over 
$11,000 to go towards research and support for prostate and 
testicular cancer. Mr. Speaker, we are very thankful to everyone 
who took part in our campaign and that donated. We could not 
have raised this money without the support and contributions 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also take the time to remind 
everyone that Movember is an awareness campaign as well as a 
fundraiser. This year an estimated 670 Saskatchewan men will 
be diagnosed with prostate cancer and over 1,000 Canadian 
men will be diagnosed with testicular cancer. Early detection is 
vital, and we encourage all men to schedule regular checkups 
with their doctor. The more awareness we can raise, the more 
lives we can save. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join in me in thanking the 
people of Saskatchewan for donating $11,000 to Team Stewart 
for this year’s Movember challenge. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Community Safety Officer Program 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today the Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 
announced the rollout of the community safety officer program 
that provides an alternative enforcement option to communities 
in this province. Going forward, every municipality can apply 
to the ministry for the ability to employ a special constable in 
their community. CSOs [community safety officer] will work in 
collaboration with local police addressing low risk to harm, 
high priority policing needs. This includes patrolling streets 
with speed limits no greater than 90 kilometres, enforcing 
liquor laws and bylaws, and serving as a crime prevention 
community liaison. 
 
North Battleford piloted the new program and has become the 
model for other interested communities. CSOs will free up the 
police in participating communities which will allow them to 
focus on cases that are more complex and higher risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has not worked alone to develop 
this program. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] identified the need for this kind of 
police coverage. They provided value input throughout the 

entire process. Saskatchewan Polytechnic is also working with 
us on finalizing a six-week core curriculum. Graduates are 
expected to be working by mid-2015. Our government is 
committed to working with communities and our policing 
partners to find new approaches to reduce crime in 
Saskatchewan. This new program provides another option to 
keep our communities safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly 
join with me in thanking those who helped develop this 
important program. Your fine work will serve as a model for 
other jurisdictions going forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Government Programs Support Education 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to recognize National Education Savings Week and 
to remind families of the benefits of saving for their children’s 
post-secondary education. Earlier this year our government 
officially launched the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAGES provides financial incentives for families 
to save for their children’s education. Under the program, the 
Government of Saskatchewan provides a grant of 10 per cent on 
contributions made since January 1st, 2013. This funding is put 
into a registered education savings program to a maximum of 
$250 per child per year. I am pleased to report to date over 
10,000 Saskatchewan children have received just over $2 
million under the program. We also expect the increase of the 
number of families signing up for SAGES as more financial 
institutions participate in the program. 
 
In addition to SAGES, we have also introduced the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship to encourage high school 
graduates to pursue post-secondary education. This scholarship 
has been given to over 10,000 students. And after 
post-secondary students graduate, they become eligible for even 
further financial support through the graduate retention 
program. To date more than 50,000 post-secondary graduates 
have benefited from the graduate retention program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has made a strong commitment to 
post-secondary education. I would ask all members of this 
Assembly and encourage their constituents to look into these 
programs that are designated to ensure that post-secondary 
education is affordable for all Saskatchewan families. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Monitoring of Long-Term Care Patients 
 
Mr. Broten: — Art Healey lives in the Rose Villa long-term 
care facility. He has Alzheimer’s disease. He recently wandered 
out of the facility in freezing-cold weather without proper 
clothing. His wander-band bracelet was working, but he was 
still outside in the cold for more than half an hour before he was 



6142 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

discovered. Art’s family is very worried that their father or 
another senior in care will end up freezing to death before this 
government finally starts paying attention to the problem. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Art’s family 
wrote to the Premier and the Rural Health minister; what has 
the government done about it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in a general sense when we 
get these inquiries as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] or members of Executive Council, we want to find 
out answers on behalf of the family to inquire as to these events, 
Mr. Speaker. That would be, I would hope, I would hope that 
was the case with Art’s family. 
 
I would say that in a more, a much more broader sense, a more 
general sense, the government has responded with respect to the 
increased needs in long-term care with investments both in the 
re-opening of new beds, Mr. Speaker, capital renovations of 
some existing facilities and, perhaps even more importantly, 
investing in human resources. I think now 750 more people 
working on the frontlines providing long-term care for roughly 
the same complement of patients. 
 
I think we’ve heard over the last number of weeks, by questions 
raised by the opposition and frankly input that we are receiving 
from our MLAs, that more is needed. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
responded with some emergency funding in respect of that. The 
budget process is under way currently, and though we expect 
this next budget to be a tight one, long-term care needs to be a 
priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the message to the government. It’s one that 
we’ve heard loud and clear. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw a Throne Speech 
that devoted no new resources for seniors’ care. And families 
are concerned, families like Art’s. This is not the first time that 
Art has been found wandering outside of this facility or the one 
that he was in prior to this. So it’s understandable, Mr. Speaker, 
that his family is tremendously concerned. In the letter that 
Art’s daughter sent to the Premier and the Rural Health minister 
she said this: “The problem is the lack of adequate staffing at 
these two facilities which allows for exits to not be monitored 
for patients and residents with this condition.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Does he dispute 
what Art’s family is saying, or does he recognize that 
short-staffing is putting the lives of people with dementia at risk 
this winter? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to note that officials have looked into this very specific case at 
the brand-new, relatively brand-new long-term care facility that 
our government has funded at Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, I can 

inform members of the House that officials of the region have 
informed a Ministry of Health official that the region has 
contacted the security company, and a representative is coming 
to the facility to have a look at this particular . . . at the door, at 
the system, at the entry and exit systems and the WanderGuard 
alarm system. So clearly there’s a challenge here that needs to 
be looked at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also been noted by the staff that work 
at the facility, at least what I’m given to understand, that this 
particular door isn’t always latching closed. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I think appropriate signage is put in place and greater 
vigilance from the staff to ensure that that’s closed, Mr. 
Speaker, and securely so. Between these two things, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d hope that the situation would be relieved in what 
is a brand-new facility, Mr. Speaker. But obviously this would 
be a real concern to the family, not just of Art, but others that 
are in care at this particular home. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the issue that the family identifies 
is the short-staffing that would allow someone with dementia to 
exit the building. The family is clear. They state that Art’s 
wander band was on and that it was working. The problem was 
the lack of workers to notice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s what the family says, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier and 
Rural Health minister received this letter, so it shouldn’t be a 
surprise. “Talking with other family members of current 
residents, this escaping is not just isolated incidents. My father 
is not the only person that is getting out due to the lack of staff 
monitoring these exits.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my specific question to the Premier: does the 
government track these incidents? How many seniors with 
dementia have been found wandering outside of their care 
facilities in freezing cold temperatures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do want to state for the 
record, with respect to the member’s preamble that associates 
the entire accountability or responsibility for this particular 
issue with the staffing there, that that’s not the information that 
the region is reporting, that the facility is reporting. Mr. 
Speaker, let me be very clear about that here in the House. The 
WanderGuard alarm is only triggered, is only triggered if the 
door is closed when a resident with a WanderGuard bracelet 
attempts to leave. There has been a problem with this particular 
door. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, both by having it more readily staffed but 
also voluntarily staffed and also better signage and perhaps 
some work on the door itself, I think there’s hope that the 
matter can be resolved. But we have . . . The member is right. 
The WanderGuard bracelet is working. The challenge is it’s not 
set off if the door is not securely locked. And that is the 
challenge with this particular, very specific incident, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6143 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there needs to be enough staff in 
place in order to ensure that doors are closed, in order to ensure 
that the right information, Mr. Speaker, is acted upon when 
there is a problem. And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t an isolated 
incident. In speaking with Art’s family, Mr. Speaker, this 
happened in the summer, and they know of other residents, Mr. 
Speaker, that this has happened to. 
 
Art’s daughter, Millicent, has many concerns about the quality 
of care in Rose Villa and about serious flaws with the new 
facility. But her biggest concern, Mr. Speaker, is that a resident 
with dementia is going to freeze to death because there aren’t 
enough workers to notice when a resident leaves the facility and 
is wandering around outside. 
 
And she goes on to say in her letter, Mr. Speaker, “I implore 
you to please address and correct this serious issue before 
someone simply walks out this winter and freezes to death.” 
Mr. Speaker, but the family did not receive a reply from the 
Premier. The Rural Health minister’s staff simply informed her 
that they would pass the concerns on to the facility 
administrator. Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how is 
this acceptable? What will it take for this government to take 
this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly we take this type of situation seriously in long-term 
care. Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, the region has 
identified that there is an issue with the WanderGuard system. 
What happens, Mr. Speaker, if the door is not properly latched, 
even if the WanderGuard bracelet is working, if the door hasn’t 
been latched and somebody does leave the facility that has the 
bracelet on, it will not trigger it. 
 
So the officials with the region are bringing out officials from 
the company to see if there’s any way to modify the system. But 
they’re also ensuring that there’s signage up so that staff, that 
family members coming to visit, and volunteers of the facility 
know that those doors need to be secured when they do leave so 
that we don’t have the situation such as this where a resident 
gets out without it setting off their WanderGuard system. But 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, we do take this serious. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Staff Levels in Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Those on the front lines of health care and 
seniors’ care tell us that a big part of the short-staffing problem 
is that this government routinely doesn’t replace workers who 
call in sick and workers who are on maternity leave and 
disability leave. Internal government documents show that this 
is a deliberate strategy. Professionals like hospital pharmacists 
say this approach is threatening patient safety, and nurses and 
care aids say this approach is severely undermining the quality 
of care they are able to provide.  
 
To the minister: will he admit that this government has 
deliberately created much of the short-staffing challenge in 
health care, and does he recognize that it’s hurting patient safety 

and quality of care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will admit that this government has substantially funded health 
regions to a level never seen before in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, so that they can do the good work of hiring over 400 
more doctors in this province, Mr. Speaker, of 2,400 nursing 
positions, Mr. Speaker, be it the RNs [registered nurse], LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse], RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse], 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the story that I think the member 
opposite is referencing, Mr. Speaker, I can say that regions 
believe that attracting and keeping qualified health providers in 
all categories, Mr. Speaker, is a priority. It certainly is a priority 
to this government. As it relates directly to pharmacists, RQHR 
[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] had approximately 50 
pharmacists. There are, I believe, three to four positions that 
they are trying to fill, haven’t yet been able to fill, Mr. Speaker, 
but as the RQHR official said, “The thought that we would 
actually not hire somebody if there was somebody available is 
just wrong.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Internal government documents show that the 
senior health administrators get bonuses if they preside over 
short-staffing. They actually get more money if they don’t fill 
vacancies and if they don’t replace sick workers. And health 
care professionals and front-line workers tell us this is putting 
patient safety at risk, and it’s undermining the quality of care. 
To the minister: how can he justify paying bonuses for that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, that is simply not the case. 
Senior officials, CEOs [chief executive officer] are not paid 
bonuses for not filling vacancies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
CEOs are tasked with providing the day-to-day management of 
the health regions and fortunately, Mr. Speaker, under this 
government, they’re doing so with an average of 52 per cent 
more dollars to fill those vacancies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, Saskatoon Health Region under the former 
government, their last year in office, $640 million, Mr. Speaker, 
was their budget. This year, Mr. Speaker, $1 billion in funding, 
a 57 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, this has allowed the health 
regions and our Cancer Agency . . . which by the way, the 
Cancer Agency has an increase in their budget 98 per cent from 
when the members opposite were in the government. This is 
what has allowed health regions to fill those positions, Mr. 
Speaker, whether they be nursing, whether they be physicians, 
whether they be the allied professions. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
record on this side of the House, as opposed to the members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Santa Maria care aids who spoke out last 



6144 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

Monday were clear that they’re increasingly working 
short-staffed. They blame this deliberate short-staffing strategy. 
And contrary to this government’s spin, the care aids say that 
the only increase in workers they have seen are what they call 
overseers and paper-pushers. More money for bloated 
administration, but the front lines are starved. 
 
To the minister: will he commit today to review this policy of 
deliberately short-staffing our health care facilities, and will he 
stop giving bonuses to senior administrators who make the 
problem worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 
know, the member opposite will know that in long-term care we 
have about 8,700 residents, not unlike what the members 
opposite faced — not earlier in their government because we 
know that 1,200 beds were closed, Mr. Speaker — but towards 
the end of their government, about 8,700 residents in this 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, in long-term care alone on the front 
lines, special care aids are up 9.7 per cent. LPNs are up 37 per 
cent. RNs in long-term care is up 9.3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that 
brings us to nearly 750 more front line, full-time equivalents 
from when the members opposite were the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that we take very seriously. 
That’s why we have added to the front lines in health care and 
in long-term care, unlike the members opposite that closed beds 
and laid off staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Contracting Process for Lean Consultants 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last week we learned that this 
government paid John Black to develop its lean pet project. And 
it paid John Black himself to pitch himself to be the consultant 
for that project and then, not surprisingly, it handed over the 
$40-million project to John Black. 
 
To the minister: is he still pretending that this was a competitive 
process? And if so, which other consultants did the government 
pay to pitch themselves and to develop their very own projects? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we did look at a number of different 
companies during the competitive process . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the 
Leader of the Opposition only has to go to Public Accounts. He 
will see that Kaizen Institute Lean Advisors was paid $200,000 
in 2010-2011 fiscal year. Lean Advisors, Mr. Speaker, in 
2011-2012 was paid $95,000, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 
the members opposite don’t have to believe me in the fact that 
we did go out and in fact contract with other consulting 
organizations in developing this plan, Mr. Speaker. They only 
have to look at the public accounts of the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve received the original RFP 
[request for proposal] that that government put out, and get this: 
it had a note meant for John Black written right into it. No 
wonder local lean consultants didn’t even bother to bid on the 
contract because they knew exactly what this government was 
up to. 
 
To the minister: how can he possibly pretend that this was truly 
a competitive process when there was a note to John Black 
written right into the request for proposal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate the 
member opposite tabling what he’s referencing to, because you 
how it works in this House, Mr. Speaker, when members 
opposite bring to light, Mr. Speaker, issues. We always have to 
do a little bit of fact checking on this side of the House just to 
see exactly what in fact the note said. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of groups that were 
hired . . . that were looked at all through this process, Mr. 
Speaker. We looked at organizations that ThedaCare, for 
example, had used which was not JBA [John Black and 
Associates], Mr. Speaker. There was a competitive process. 
That’s how it was allocated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to paving the way 
for JBA to get a fat cash cow contract, this government did just 
about everything except put out the RFP on February 14th with 
a sweetheart note to John Black saying, be mine, valentine. 
Other potential lean consultants asked about the note to John 
Black that was contained in the RFP, and here’s what the 
government said back: “They are irrelevant and should have 
been removed. Please disregard.” 
 
So this government paid John Black to develop its lean pet 
project. It paid him to pitch himself to be the contract for that 
project, and it left notes to him right in the RFP. We are 
supposed to believe that the process which led to the hiring of 
this $40 million American lean consultant was all above board 
and fully competitive. To the minister: how can he possibly 
expect us to believe that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
considering the fact that there were multiple bidders in the RFP 
that actually would have looked at the RFP and then decided to 
put forward their bid, Mr. Speaker, that’s how I know that it 
was a competitive process. It was a competitive process. We 
looked at a number of different organizations prior to the 
four-year contract, Mr. Speaker, but as well during that RFP 
process, and did make the decision to go with JBA. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6145 

Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SaskPower 
minister has sent his head of carbon capture and storage on so 
many out-of-province trips that the travel bill now adds up to a 
whopping $388,000. To the SaskPower minister: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Boundary dam 3 project is 
one that has been advanced by this government, given the fact 
that Saskatchewan has some 300 years of coal supply down in 
the southeast part of our province. It is with respect to the fact 
that the federal government has implemented tougher emissions 
regulations around coal-fired power plants. And Boundary dam 
is now up and running and operating just fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of all of that, we have indeed promoted 
the project around the world. There were some 250 guests at the 
opening of the project down in Estevan here recently, Mr. 
Speaker. They are there because they believe it is one of the 
leading projects in the entire world around carbon capture and 
storage. We have promoted it and yes, we will continue to 
promote it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, over the last five years, the 
SaskPower minister has sent his head of carbon capture and 
storage on more and more out-of-province trips, so much so that 
the annual travel bills have increased by 266 per cent. Last year 
alone, the out-of-province travel tab was over $122,000. My 
question is for the SaskPower minister. Where exactly did the 
minister send his official, and will he table detailed itineraries 
for those trips today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has received 
invitations from the world over for people representing 
SaskPower to attend functions, to speak about the carbon 
capture project in China, in the United States, in Germany and 
Brazil and in India — literally the world over they have 
received invitations to — because around the world they 
recognize that SaskPower is the leading company in terms of 
carbon capture and storage. And they want to know from the 
experts at SaskPower about how to build these facilities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the minister is not 
willing to table that information. It’s a simple question, and he 
didn’t provide an answer. 
 
Recently in the Financial Times of London, SaskPower’s head 
of carbon capture and storage says that carbon capture has 
major viability challenges and that SaskPower couldn’t even 
give a rough estimate for how much it costs to generate 
electricity out of Boundary dam. 
 
So to the SaskPower minister: is it really worth hundreds of 

thousands of dollars of public money to send a senior official 
around the world saying that carbon capture has major viability 
challenges and that the government doesn’t even know the basic 
costs associated with it yet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Just as the Minister of Health indicated 
earlier, I think we’ll want to fact check about what was actually 
said. That member has a tendency of wanting to put words in 
people’s mouths that were never said, and there’s evidence of 
that on the floor of the legislature for all of us to see from 
before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a great project. It’s recognized around the world. People 
from around the world have come and viewed the facility. 
Literally company after company after company are interested 
in the technology that is proven out by SaskPower with respect 
to this project. It’s a fantastic project, and we would invite the 
members opposite to get on board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, the SaskPower 
minister spent nearly $45,000 on an international trip focused 
on carbon capture. These travel bills just keep piling up, but 
what’s not piling up is any transparency or accountability. This 
government is still refusing to table its 30-year analysis of the 
viability of its Boundary dam carbon capture project. 
 
So to the SaskPower minister: has the government not done that 
analysis, or is it just trying to keep that analysis hidden from 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the travel related to this 
project that is done by myself or by our ministry is publicly 
released. It’s not hidden in any way, shape, or form. As a result 
of the changes that have been made in travel disclosure in this 
legislature, all of that information is available so anyone can 
take a look at it, Mr. Speaker, and that is the appropriate thing 
that has been done. 
 
And that is in sharp contrast, sharp contrast to the way members 
opposite used to travel around the world. And I would just 
invite the members to take a look at the travel related to the 
member from Lakeview back over there if you want to talk 
about misuse of travel dollars in this legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in a letter dated November 12th 
from SaskPower’s vice-president of resource planning, it says 
that any analysis of the Boundary dam project must be done 
over a 30-year period. And with a project of this size — 1.4 or 
$1.6 billion, depending on who you’re talking to — surely the 
government has done that analysis. It must at least have 
projections. Even if it’s a preliminary analysis, the 
Saskatchewan people deserve to see it. So to the SaskPower 
minister: why won’t he table that analysis today? What is it he 



6146 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

doesn’t want Saskatchewan people to see? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the project opened a few short 
weeks ago here in Saskatchewan. Now we’re in the testing 
phase of the facility. They will be doing a complete analysis in 
terms of the whole project, the costs related to it and all of those 
kinds of things. And at an appropriate time in the future when 
that analysis is ready, we’ll be happy to present it to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would just ask, when we’re on the topic of travel, if the 
member opposite would care to lean across and ask the member 
from Lakeview about travel. Perhaps he would want to talk 
about the Conference of Western Attorneys General when he 
wasn’t the attorney general at all, Mr. Speaker. Billed seven 
nights of hotels to the people of Saskatchewan, had three guests 
stay in the hotel room — a bill of a total $2,399 was billed to 
the taxpayers of this province. And at that time, Chris 
Axworthy was the minister responsible at the time and not that 
member. So when you’re asking about travel in this legislature, 
perhaps you should lean across the aisle and ask him about his 
travel. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — No answers from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re asking about the financial analysis for a $1.6 billion 
project that affects the ratepayers of Saskatchewan. There’s no 
answer coming from this minister. 
 
The government is sending its head of carbon capture around 
the world at a cost of $338,000. The minister’s taking $45,000 
trips halfway around the world, all supposedly to tell the 
Saskatchewan story, a story that according to the Financial 
Times of London isn’t nearly as compelling as this government 
likes to claim. 
 
There are major viability challenges, and the government won’t 
even be upfront with the basic costs associated with the project. 
So no wonder more and more people are starting to question 
this project. This government needs to release the full 30-year 
economic analysis so Saskatchewan people can judge the true 
merits of this project. To the minister: why won’t he do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, companies from around the 
world, governments from around the world have looked at this 
project, and all have been in agreement that this is a 
leading-edge project for the entire world. This project has the 
equivalent of taking 250,000 cars off the highways here in 
Saskatchewan. It is a great project and certainly something that 
this government is very proud of. 
 
Now something that the members opposite maybe aren’t quite 
as proud of, I suspect, Mr. Speaker, and that’s when they were 
in government opposite, they lost money hand over fist when it 
came to projects. If you just . . . A fibre optics company in 
Chicago, $16 million down the drain. And then there’s the old 
granddaddy of them all which was SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. Who in the world . . . 
As a kid, every kid in the country put potatoes in the ground 
and then harvested those potatoes. But it was only the special 
hand of the NDP [New Democratic Party] that could lose 
money hand over fist doing that. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Mental Health and Addictions Action Plan Report 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 
government took a step forward on our journey to improve our 
response to people struggling with mental health and addictions 
issues. Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder, the commissioner of the 
mental health and addictions action plan formally submitted her 
report to government. 
 
In preparing the report, Dr. Stockdale Winder and her team 
conducted extensive public consultations across the province. 
The commissioner and her team heard from over 4,000 
individuals on how to improve mental health and addictions 
services. 
 
The response is a reminder of just how important this work is to 
Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, mental health and 
addictions issues directly affect one out of every five 
Saskatchewan residents. Indirectly we know that they affect 
many more, as parents, family members, and caregivers feel the 
impact of mental health or addictions issues on their loved ones. 
 
The mental health and addictions action plan calls for a more 
coordinated and timely response to people who are struggling 
with mental health and addictions issues. Mr. Speaker, our 
government endorses this report, and the recommendations will 
guide our efforts to improve mental health and addictions 
services over the next 10 years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re already making improvements across 
the system, and the recommendations affirm that direction. For 
example, the police and crisis team in Saskatoon teams up a 
mental health professional with a police officer on calls where 
individuals are experiencing a mental health crisis. 
 
The action plan to address bullying and cyberbullying is 
supporting Saskatchewan children and youth to feel safe and 
accepted at schools, in their community, and online. And when 
the new Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford integrated 
correctional facility opens in 2018, it will better meet the mental 
health needs of patients who require in-patient rehabilitation. It 
will also enhance the province’s ability to provide programming 
to offenders with mental health issues. And the community 
mobilization model, or Hub and COR [centre of responsibility], 
provides coordinated and integrated responses to support 
individuals and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I want to thank Dr. 
Stockdale Winder for her dedication and leadership as 
commissioner of the mental health and addictions action plan. 
Addressing and improving services across many sectors is 
complex work, and it will take the efforts of many ministries 
and organizations collaboratively working together. By working 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6147 

together, I believe that we can make a difference in the lives of 
people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say 
thank you to the minister for sending his comments over a little 
bit earlier. But I think the big thank you needs to go to Dr. Fern 
Stockdale Winder who’s put a great deal of work into this 
effort. A big thank you needs to go to all the organizations, 
some of them are represented here today, all the organizations 
who provided their input into this, developing the strategy, and 
last but not least, all those individuals and families who shared 
their stories. Those individuals who have mental health 
challenges, it’s not always easy, Mr. Speaker, to come forward 
and talk about what your own experience has been and what 
could be different, and to those families who in times were 
sharing stories of loved ones who they’ve lost to mental health 
and addictions. 
 
This plan, I’ve had a brief opportunity to review it, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a fulsome plan, Mr. Speaker. I think some of the 
things that jumped out at me at first read are the piece around 
housing, the piece around seniors’ action, Mr. Speaker, the fact 
that we don’t have . . . We will have an increasing number of 
seniors who are in long-term care who have very little or no 
mental health support, Mr. Speaker, the issue that we struggle 
with, that we’ve raised in this legislature and this committee, 
the issue of people living in acute mental health facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, sometimes for years at a time in a hospital setting. 
People are living in hospital settings because there aren’t the 
resources in the community for them to have a proper house, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
A couple of other things that jumped out at me at first blush, 
Mr. Speaker, is the piece around emergency rooms and making 
emergency rooms better places, but access for those who are in 
crisis, better access for those who are in crisis. Anybody who is 
experiencing suicidal ideation or is in psychosis, going into an 
emergency room is an awful experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Australia . . . I know Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder mentioned this 
in her report, but there’s a really great option, a third-door 
option for mental health, Mr. Speaker. So I appreciate all the 
work that this commission has put, that Dr. Stockdale Winder 
and others have put into this. I’d like to see, I’m eager and 
hopeful that this government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 
Intergovernmental Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 170, 
The Fire Safety Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I request leave to put forward a motion regarding 
changes to standing committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to make changes to committees. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Committee Membership 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the name of Colleen Young be substituted for that of 
Darryl Hickie on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That the name of Colleen Young be substituted for that of 
Darryl Hickie on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the name of Darryl Hickie be substituted for that of 
Bob Bjornerud on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That the name of Darryl Hickie be substituted for that of 
Bob Bjornerud on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 



6148 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today and move second reading of The 
Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government takes seriously the responsibility 
to protect the privacy of people’s personal health information. 
These amendments to The Health Information Protection Act, 
or HIPA, will help strengthen the protection of personal health 
records and they will increase the accountability of trustees and 
employees in protecting those records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments result from our support of the 
recommendations of the health records protection working 
group. This past spring, the group made 11 recommendations. 
Four of these recommendations require legislative changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to HIPA include a strict liability 
offence. Mr. Speaker, if records are found abandoned or 
unsecured, the trustee responsible for the records will need to 
show that they took all reasonable steps to prevent their 
abandonment. This change means there won’t be a need to 
prove that the trustee intended to abandon the records. 
 
The next amendment makes it an individual offence for wilful 
disclosure of personal information. This makes it clear that 
HIPA offences for intentional disclosure of personal health 
information apply not only to trustees but to the individuals 
who are in the employment of trustees, or employees of 
trustees. 
 
The third amendment is a snooping offence. A specific offence 
will be established for inappropriate use of personal health 
information by employees who access information without a 
need for that information. 
 
And the final amendment includes taking control of abandoned 
or unsecured records. A specific provision will be added to 
HIPA for a system to be put in place to quickly respond to a 
discovery of abandoned or unsecured records and to take 
control of those records. 
 
In addition to these amendments, we will examine the other 
recommendations made by the group, including creating a 
single repository for abandoned records, making private record 
storage solutions available, and clarifying the definition of 
trustee for physician practice arrangements. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank and acknowledge the health 
records protection working group for their many hours of work. 
I appreciate the recommendations that they put forward to 
ensure that patient records are kept secure and confidential. We 
share the working group’s commitment to ensuring that patient 
records are kept secure and confidential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is providing leadership in making 
the changes needed to strengthen the privacy of personal health 
records of Saskatchewan residents, and this is another example 
of how we continue to put the patient first in all that we do. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 
the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
once again pleased to stand in my place to give the opposition’s 
perspective as the first opportunity to discuss this particular bill. 
Obviously Bill 164 is a sensitive spot or a sensitive issue for the 
provincial government, as we’ve seen evidence in the past of 
how the provincial government had not secured nor protected a 
lot of the personal health information of many Saskatchewan 
residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is obviously something that is a very serious matter. And 
the people of Saskatchewan should know that when you look at 
The Health Information Protection Act itself, while at the outset 
it seems that it’s really something that the government has taken 
seriously, we have seen evidence over the last number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, where people’s private health information have 
been found in public places such as dumpsters, easily accessible 
to a number of people that may be wanting to snoop around and 
certainly people that might want to use that information for 
their own purposes, whatever those purposes might be. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re not going to do is be critical of 
the committee themselves. I think the committee is trying to 
find the ways and means in which they are able to protect 
people’s private information. Some of the issues I think are 
really important when we talk about people’s private health 
information, Mr. Speaker, is to really begin to ask the 
government some very serious questions around The Health 
Information Protection Act. 
 
For example, if you look at the number of clinics, Mr. Speaker, 
the number of private clinics, the number of different types of 
health clinics that are out there, whether it’s a walk-in clinic or 
whether it’s a specialty clinic or whether it’s a public clinic, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s a doctor’s office, there’s a wide variety of 
people in the province of Saskatchewan that have health 
information records from a number of patients and, Mr. 
Speaker, I would assume that many of these patients may have 
seen a doctor a number of times over their lives and may have 
gotten to a number of different organizations or different 
entities that provide health care, whether it be a public hospital 
or whether it be a private clinic. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important to begin to determine all 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6149 

the medical information that is out there from the variety of 
sources, whether it’s clinics or hospitals or doctors’ offices, 
whatever the case might be, or labs. Mr. Speaker, it’s important 
for us to try and find out how much information is out there, 
and by that I mean how many different groups or organizations 
or doctor’s office or clinics, how many people do keep records. 
Is it 1,000 different entities? Is it 20,000? This is some of the 
information I think is really, really important for us to try and 
determine as to how many people out there are keeping record 
of different patients upon their visit. 
 
And when I say are keeping records, Mr. Speaker, obviously 
I’m talking about all the entities, whether it be a doctor’s office, 
whether it be a walk-in clinic, whether it be a specialty service 
or whether it be the cancer ward or whether it be a medical 
checkup, whatever the case may be. A lot of people in the 
province of Saskatchewan go to a number of sources for 
medical appointments and medical tests and so on and so forth, 
so we need to know how many organizations out there in 
Saskatchewanland really, truly, actually keep records of 
people’s private health information. And that’s a number I think 
is really important and really relevant to this particular Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Had the minister come along and indicated that there’s 20 or 
30,000 different organizations out there, including doctors’ 
offices, that do collect medical records, at least it would give 
the people of Saskatchewan, and certainly ourselves as 
opposition, an indication of what numbers are out there in terms 
of who’s keeping private medical information of the patients 
that they’re seeing. 
 
Now I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker — and this is why it’s 
important to ask these questions right at the outset — I’m 
assuming that some of the medical records could be as simple 
as an X-ray. It could be as significant as exploratory surgery. It 
could be a number of different ailments, whether it’s arthritis or 
whether it’s a cancer test, whatever the case may be, Mr. 
Speaker, which particular processes or which particular health 
services that people need are involved with this particular 
process. Are they all keeping these records, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s one of the most important lessons that we want to 
implore the people out there, is to find out exactly all the 
information that you need to find out from legislation of this 
sort. 
 
And the important first step is to determine who’s keeping all 
the medical health records in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Which organizations are they, and how many different records 
have they got at their offices? And this is really, really 
important, Mr. Speaker, because if you’re not familiar with the 
numbers, if you’re not familiar with what information they’re 
keeping, how could we begin to track all that information to 
The Health Information Protection Act if we don’t know all the 
people that are providing these services to a number of 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you know, if one were to go into . . . 
Some of the examples I would use is, we know a lot of people 
that travel to the city. Sometimes there’s an emergency situation 
where they go to the hospital. Sometimes they’ll go into a 
walk-in clinic. Sometimes it’s for a number of different 

procedures, whether it’s a drug test or whether it’s just a health 
test overall. There’s just all these services out there, Mr. 
Speaker. And exactly what information are they entitled to 
keep, and how long is that information kept at that particular 
place? 
 
And I understand from discussions with a number of different 
organizations out there that if you have a doctor that you can 
consistently and regularly see, then that doctor, does that 
particular doctor’s office retain the rights to all your 
information, all the files that he has on you? Because I 
understand from, the way the system works is that if you’re 
seeing a particular doctor and you’re the patient, that all the 
files and all the information attached to your business to that 
particular doctor becomes his or her property. And I don’t say it 
in a negative way, Mr. Speaker, but obviously those files and 
that record, information, is the property of the doctor in 
question. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to clarify that. 
 
So in saying that, what discussions has the government had in 
terms of dealing with the Saskatchewan Medical Association to 
ensuring that they do have the intent of strengthening the 
protection of the health records of the province of 
Saskatchewan? And are these doctors engaged, Mr. Speaker? 
Are they engaged to the extent that they should be engaged? 
And these are some of the questions that we often ask in this 
particular process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hear the minister speaking about 
strengthening the private health records information to ensure 
people aren’t out there digging out a number of private, 
confidential health issues that a number of people don’t want 
public. And rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people don’t 
want to share their health information with anybody because, 
quite frankly, it’s nobody’s business. It’s between them and 
their doctor. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you see, when you see as we’ve seen 
in the last couple of years, when we see a lot of medical records 
found in dumpsters in back alleys, that’s not the proper disposal 
method, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the manner in which people’s 
private, confidential health information should be taken care of. 
This is obviously a huge concern, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
we’ve got to find out who has these records to begin with and 
making sure that they know that there are some serious 
penalties attached to disposing of records in an unsecure 
manner and an irresponsible manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, that goes back to my earlier point. We have got to 
know who’s keeping records and how many records are out 
there because, as we know, people use a wide variety of 
services and a number of doctors. And do they all have records 
of the patients that they see, and how long do they keep them? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that we would ask in this 
particular process is, how many people are involved with the 
collection of health information, and what is their current 
disposal policy? That’s really, really important. How long do 
they keep these records of different people that come to see 
them? And are the records all-encompassing in terms of any 
visits, whether it’s to a specialist or whether it’s for a dental 
checkup or whether it’s for cancer screening, whatever the case 
may be? An individual could use a wide variety of services and 



6150 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

also see a number of doctors and specialists. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So all these people that you’re engaged with, Mr. Speaker, who 
keeps those records, and how long do they keep those records? 
And that’s one of the key things that we want to point out as 
information that we think would be very, very valuable in 
determining the effectiveness of Bill 164, which is An Act to 
amend The Health Information Protection Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, once you begin to clear the picture in terms 
of who’s collecting all this information and data on different 
people that use health care systems, the minister talked about 
three or four particular issues: one of them being around a 
liability offence, one being around wilful disclosure by a trustee 
or by employees. There’s also provisions in the Act around the 
snooping offence and making sure that people aren’t going into 
files that they’re not allowed and authorized to do. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they also talk about taking control, taking control of 
abandoned or unsecured records. We think that’s obviously 
something that should be done, and also looking at a single 
service in which you can turn all the medical information to to 
be destroyed or to be taken care of appropriately so no 
information is left from that particular service. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the last bit of information that the minister spoke about 
was around the whole qualifications and role and 
responsibilities of the trustees. 
 
So this committee that put forward some of these 
recommendations around HIPA, they’ve done some incredibly 
good work at the outset. I think they’ve gotten a lot of 
information in front of the public. We need more information, 
Mr. Speaker, and it would be really, obviously a great starting 
process for us in the opposition to have some of the questions 
answered that I asked previously. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again on the liability offence, we need to find 
out, what are the parameters of prosecution in the event that 
somebody does not properly dispose of medical records, as 
we’ve seen evidence of a couple of years ago? We found just 
stacks and stacks of private health information of different 
people from different areas — not just the city but from all 
different areas — that were dumped into a dumpster, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s not responsible. That’s not a responsible 
position to take. In fact it’s really, really irresponsible in every 
way, shape, or form, and we need to find out exactly which 
organizations have done this on a continual basis and to pay 
extra close attention to those individuals that certainly do this in 
that particular fashion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is the provisions around the wilful 
disclosure. Obviously employees or trustees that may have 
access to all the medical records, we want to make sure that . . . 
What are the offences for that? Is there fines? Is there 
incarceration? Is there job loss? It’d be really, obviously 
important for us to know, from our perspective, those details, 
you know, of this Act. And it all goes as well to the snooping 
offence. Like who would be charged with that? What are the 
prosecution terms? And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have to go 
back to the earlier point that I made. How many thousands of 
people have access to thousands of records of hundreds of visits 
by many, many people of Saskatchewan? 

It is a complex bill. It is a complex problem. It’s a complex 
situation because if you were to extrapolate the amount of 
people that use health services by the amount of doctors that are 
out there, by the amount of services that are out there, you can 
see that this involves millions of documentation and, Mr. 
Speaker, by a number of people. And you can see that this is 
certainly a major, major problem that needs to be addressed if 
you’re going to really protect people’s medical private health 
records. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to see that detail. We need to see 
exactly how many documents we’re dealing with, how many 
doctors we’re dealing with, which specialists we’re dealing 
with. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to know that in the event that 
there is irresponsible use or wilful negative use of this 
information by an employee or a trustee or anybody in a 
medical profession, what are the liabilities and what are the 
offences to be described in this Act? And that’s going to be one 
of the most important things that we want to find out. 
 
And how was the consultation done? And again going back to 
my earlier statement, Mr. Speaker, has there been engagement 
with the medical community organizations like the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association; the Saskatchewan 
Association of Licensed Practical Nurses association; SUN, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Mr. Speaker; as well as the 
HSAS [Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan]? All the 
different organizations and groups that are involved with the 
health field, Mr. Speaker, have we consulted them and have we 
spoken to them? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the HIPA bill itself talks about strengthening 
the protection of medical records of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The minister alluded to a number of 
recommendations they got from the committee, and we looked 
at the information that was presented. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
a lot more questions we have on this particular Act. 
 
And that’s why it’s important to tell the people that are out 
there that may be listening, if you have any particular concerns, 
information, or processes that could help us along to ensure that 
we’re not finding medical records in dumpsters anymore, that 
information would be valuable to us as the opposition, valuable 
to the government I think overall, but most valued by some of 
the patients whose information might be compromised. So we 
would encourage people that are listening to do their part, to 
come along, and to do what is necessary to do the best we can 
to protect people’s private health records. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again, a lot of areas that we’re speaking of. 
We need more information, more consultation, more focus on 
finding the solution to this particular bill, and obviously we 
would do so over the next several months to make sure people 
have that opportunity to participate. So on that note, I move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 164, which is An Act to amend The 
Health Information Protection Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6151 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hazard 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my privilege to rise and introduce the second 
reading of Bill No. 165, An Act to amend The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 
 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 established the 
foundation for the regulation and licensing of alcohol and 
gaming products in Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act, or IILA, 
governs the movement of beverages across . . . alcohol across 
provinces’ borders. The IILA provides that most alcohol 
imported into a province must be imported by an agency of the 
government into which the alcohol is being imported; however, 
recent amendments to the IILA enables each province to allow 
direct-to-consumer alcohol shipments. 
 
In August our Premier announced that our government would 
bring forward legislation to allow Saskatchewan residents to 
have some alcohol shipped directly to them. This move not only 
provides opportunities for consumers to seek out and purchase 
unique products; it also demonstrates Saskatchewan’s 
continuing commitment to removing barriers to interprovincial 
trade within Canada. 
 
The changes being proposed in the Act will allow for 
implementation of this policy direction. Specifically it will 
allow Saskatchewan to enter into agreements with Canada and 
other provinces regarding direct-to-consumer alcohol 
shipments; allows individuals to import alcohol for personal 
consumption from other provinces where such agreements 
exist; and create regulation-making authority regarding issues 
such as type and amount of alcohol, type of seller, and province 
from which the product originated. 
 
With this bill, we are setting the framework to allow 
Saskatchewan consumers access to a much broader selection of 
Canadian wines and craft spirits than previously available. 
Implementation of these changes will also require amendments 
to The Alcohol Control Regulations, 2013. I am pleased to take 
the first step towards implementing by introducing this bill. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and move 
second reading of Bill 165, the Act to amend The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 2014 
(No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m pleased to stand in my place to present our initial 

comments on Bill 165. And, Mr. Speaker, at the outset it looks 
as if the whole process of allowing people in Saskatchewan to 
have direct delivery of alcohol to their homes is something that 
has been pressing for the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is one of the things that’s really important is that we 
have to begin to ask the questions of, how many different 
organizations and how many different people have asked this 
service to be extended to the province? It is something that is 
really important. This is important information overall that we 
would need to know, Mr. Speaker. Has there been a demand for 
it? Has there been a market for it? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s really important is 
that we want to be able to talk to organizations that have 
traditionally been involved with the sale of liquor in the 
province of Saskatchewan, whether it is the Hotels Association 
of Saskatchewan or whether it’s the local breweries, Mr. 
Speaker, or whether it’s the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority] senior management as well that are 
involved with this particular process as well. 
 
It’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker, to know that every 
action that the government undertakes, there is always a 
reaction. So obviously we need to find out which organizations 
or which individuals and what was the demand for this 
particular service that compelled the province of Saskatchewan 
to put forward changes to SLGA in the sense of doing away 
with the requirement that IILA had in place previously when 
they noted that most alcohol imported to a region — in this case 
Saskatchewan — must have the required support of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well that provision is gone, Mr. Speaker, and according to the 
minister, they’re able to import spirits and alcohol from 
different provinces I’m assuming. There was no mention of 
different countries. Generally the comments were confined to 
Canada, so I’m assuming that many of the alcohol that’s being 
shipped directly to people’s homes here in the province of 
Saskatchewan is only impacted by the federal, or by the country 
of Canada. So we need to know if that’s the case and to 
ascertain that and to determine that. Questions of that sort must 
be answered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one would certainly look at this, and there’s 
two initial thoughts that I would have on this particular bill. 
When you look at the movement of alcohol between the 
different provinces, that now it is easier to do that as a result of 
the changes of this particular Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it’d be 
obviously a really nice, fresh change if the province of 
Saskatchewan now would use the same kind of focus and effort 
as they’ve done to be able to move alcohol from province to 
province without rules, if they were to apply the same effort and 
standards to moving grain, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the 
things that I initially think about when we talk about the 
incredible grain transportation . . . or the backlog of not being 
able to get the grain, you know, to the ports. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the producers that we hear on television 
and newspapers talk about the incredible loss that they suffered, 
and there was huge estimates of all the money lost as a result of 
the provincial government being unable to push and unable to 



6152 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

make the different parties that were in the business of moving 
grain being able to move that grain. 
 
So one of the first things I would say is that it sure seems that 
there was focus on being able to move alcohol between the 
different jurisdictions, when they are a complete failure on 
being able to move grain as effectively as they should have. 
 
The other thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is this 
obviously is going to impact the future of the 
government-owned stores. Obviously SLGA, the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, they receive great revenues from 
the people of Saskatchewan, in particular our 
government-owned liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. Does this impact 
their operation? One would assume that it does. And once again 
we have to ask the question, does this really debase and does 
this really devalue the government-owned liquor stores, Mr. 
Speaker? And this is a question that we’ve obviously got to ask 
many of the employees. And we also have to check, you know, 
from the public accounts as to how this affected different 
organizations and different provinces in the past. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And a good example of that is the province of Alberta. We 
obviously understand that they’ve gone to an unregulated 
process. In the past the Alberta government did own some of 
the liquor outlets. They got away from that. And the whole 
premise was that the cheaper liquor available and, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously from all the information that we have that this is not 
the case, that Alberta didn’t really benefit all from the free 
market system that we see the Sask Party trying to establish 
here when it comes to the free-flowing ordering of alcohol from 
different provinces to our people here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot needs to be said about this particular bill. 
We want to get more information as to how this affects SLGA’s 
bottom line overall. We know that between gaming revenues 
and the sale of liquor through liquor stores in the province of 
Saskatchewan that are owned by the people of Saskatchewan, 
they generate a great amount of revenue for the province. 
SLGA, much like the Information Services Corporation which 
the government privatized over there, they have generated 
hundreds of millions of dollars, a good benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and now we see and we’ve always said that their 
plan was to privatize as many Crown corporations as possible. 
We’re seeing evidence of that. The Information Services 
Corporation was the first one. And now we’re seeing that the 
liquor stores are now in the Sask Party’s sights in terms of 
trying to get rid of. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people in Saskatchewan don’t realize 
the incredible amount of revenue that the province gets from the 
operations of SLGA. Now how does this affect the bottom line? 
Now one would assume that having liquor being able to be 
imported to your home community if you’re a resident of 
Saskatchewan, one would assume that you wouldn’t need to go 
to the liquor store to buy it anymore, any particular alcohol, that 
you’d be able to have this direct delivered to your home. So 
again, Mr. Speaker, you can see that this is not going to 
complement the liquor stores owned by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

And now is that a detriment to their operation? We need to 
know what the total loss might be. We need to know what the 
impact of all the import that’s being allowed now of some of 
the alcohol and, Mr. Speaker, we need to know how many 
people are taking advantage of this particular service. And is 
this part of a larger picture? For example, is this part of the New 
West trading partnership? We don’t know those details, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons why we have to make 
sure that we ask the questions and we reach out to those that 
have good information. 
 
So one of my key points I want to close on this particular bill 
with is that if people out there have information, we would 
encourage those employees that work at the Saskatchewan 
liquor stores now to come forward with information how this 
might affect the bottom line of many of the government-owned 
liquor stores in the province of Saskatchewan. Does this affect 
the private contractors, the small, local community agents that 
may be acting as agents for SLGA? Does this affect them as 
well, Mr. Speaker? So we need . . . I’m certain that this will. 
 
And have they consulted with these organizations? I know this 
particular government will not consult with any of the union 
movement. They will simply stay away from it. They will do 
what they want arbitrarily, and that’s it, Mr. Speaker. But have 
they spoken to their own local agents, the people that are selling 
alcohol on behalf of SLGA, you know, at the local community 
level, whether it’s the smaller community or some of the larger 
centres? Has consultation occurred with them? Have the hotel 
association been consulted with this as well? 
 
I can tell you that those organizations have a lot of good 
information. They’re a great source of advice, and we need to 
know whether this issue and this change are going to affect their 
bottom line, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know that information, and 
that’s why it’s important to reach out after we’ve heard the 
contents of the particular bill. And, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
reaching out over the next couple of months in talking to 
organizations out there. We know that there are some concerns. 
We realize that. But we want to be able to qualify those 
concerns by getting the right information, getting the right data, 
and getting the qualifiers to come to the Assembly to explain 
why this bill and this free-flowing option for liquor to be 
imported into the province of Saskatchewan directly to people’s 
doors, we need to know whether the impact is positive or 
negative and who it’s positive for and who it’s negative for. We 
need to get all of that information and, Mr. Speaker, that’s one 
of the purposes of us being able to speak to that bill today, to 
encourage people out there to participate and give us that advice 
and information. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more that my 
colleagues will be saying on this following the research of this 
particular bill. And it’s important, as I mentioned, that we pay 
attention, close attention, to all the bills that are being 
presented. And on that note I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 165, which is An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6153 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 166, The Local Government 
Election Act, 2014. The Local Government Election Act governs 
all local elections throughout the province including elections 
for mayor, reeve, and councillors in all types of municipalities 
including cities, urban, rural, and northern municipalities. It 
also governs school board elections, which are usually 
conducted by municipalities on behalf of school divisions. This 
Act is typically reviewed and amended between elections and is 
now being amended prior to the October 2016 general 
municipal elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill marks a great improvement that was long 
overdue. First some background. In 2005 the brand new 
municipalities Act was passed, replacing The Rural 
Municipality Act and The Urban Municipality Act. At that time 
the provisions governing rural elections needed a new home and 
were tacked on to the end of The Local Government Election 
Act without any attempt at integration with those provisions 
governing urban elections. As a result there were many 
repetitive provisions, and slight variations existed between 
urban and rural provisions as a result of history rather than 
policy. 
 
With these amendments the Act has been entirely rewritten and 
the language updated and simplified throughout. The urban and 
rural provisions are now housed in the same sections and 
combined whenever possible. Differences between urban and 
rural provisions are retained when it makes sense and is 
requested by the sector, such as for voter eligibility and 
determining in which division or ward a voter should vote. 
Staggered elections are also retained for rural municipalities so 
that elections for even-numbered RM [rural municipality] 
divisions are followed by elections for odd-numbered divisions, 
and reeve, two years later. 
 
In many cases provisions that currently only apply to urban 
municipalities are extended to RMs for consistency and 
convenience. Many of the amendments to this Act since 2005 
have had the objective of providing RMs the same options as 
urban municipalities when running elections. Now most 
provisions apply to all municipalities, providing more options 
for rural voters such as polls in hospitals and personal care 
facilities for residents or curbside voting for voters who cannot 
enter an inaccessible polling station. 
 
Additionally in urban municipalities, candidates may now 
submit nomination papers by mail or fax, and the returning 
officer may directly authorize advance polls rather than the 
council, whereas before these options were only available to 
rural municipalities. These amendments will make the Act 
easier to use and reference, especially by those administrators 
and elections officials who serve both urban and rural 
municipalities. 
 
A number of wording changes also ensure clarity where issues 
have been encountered in previous elections. In particular those 

provisions for eligibility to vote and the division in which to 
vote for rural municipalities have been simplified and clarified. 
Other clarifications include a six-month deadline for councils to 
fill vacancies by holding a by-election unless the vacancy 
occurs in the same year as a general election. 
 
Amendments also include some minor policy changes to 
improve the democracy and integrity of the electoral process. 
This bill clarifies procedures for determining the sufficiency of 
petitions for referenda and plebiscites. It also protects the 
neutrality of municipal employees during a referendum while 
allowing designated spokespersons to promote a particular 
position. 
 
This bill will remove eligibility requirements for advanced 
polls. Voters will no longer need to meet certain requirements 
for voting ahead of election day, but may vote for reasons of 
personal preference and convenience. 
 
This bill will introduce residency exceptions for students and 
members of the Canadian Armed Forces. Because students and 
members of the Armed Forces are likely to temporarily live in a 
place other than their usual place of residence, they may vote in 
the municipality in which they reside regardless of how long 
they have lived there. The residency exceptions and advanced 
voting are consistent with the election Act, 2014 which governs 
provincial elections. 
 
Consultation on this bill started with a follow-up survey after 
the 2012 municipal elections, canvassing municipalities for any 
issues they may have encountered and identifying areas for 
clarification and possible amendments. Discussions followed 
with municipal associations and other stakeholders to determine 
which amendments to proceed with and to affirm our intention 
to move ahead with consolidating the urban and rural 
provisions. 
 
Among others, we heard from the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, or SARM; the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Associations, or SUMA; and the Saskatchewan 
Association of City Clerks. The New North and the school 
board associations were also consulted but they did not request 
any amendments. I would like to thank the many stakeholders 
who have provided valuable insight and feedback over the past 
year as we have moved through this process. 
 
As a result of these amendments, this Act will be easier to use 
and understand by officials throughout the province that rely on 
it to run orderly, consistent, and secure municipal elections. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 166, 
The Local Government Election Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The Minister of 
Government Relations has moved second reading of Bill No. 
166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
just want to point out that while the minister was standing and 
speaking about this particular bill, Bill 166, The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014, and some of the language the 
minister used, Mr. Speaker, and it is a bit amusing. Because one 



6154 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

of the things that’s really important, and I like when they use 
the words of democracy and integrity of the electoral cycle, this 
is the same government that have increased the number of 
MLAs by three, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is one of the things that we said on this side of the 
Assembly. We begin to smile because obviously, Mr. Speaker, 
when they talk about democracy and integrity of the electoral 
cycle, what they’re not talking about is themselves. Mr. 
Speaker. They are talking about the mayors, the reeves, and the 
school board election processes. They’re also talking about the 
municipal elections, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s urban or rural. 
And they’ve got all these rules, Mr. Speaker, that these folks 
have to follow to make sure that, as in their words, they protect 
the integrity of the electoral cycle and promote democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when it comes to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, 
they have arbitrarily increased the number of MLAs by three. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? They felt it might improve their chances of 
getting these three new seats and to begin to gerrymander the 
process of determining where these ridings would be, Mr. 
Speaker. So any time the minister gets up and talks about 
democracy and integrity in the same sentence, Mr. Speaker, we 
in the opposition begin to smile because we obviously know 
that is just absolutely not the intent, Mr. Speaker. And they may 
be putting provisions that are really difficult on a lot of the 
reeves or the mayors or some of the school board members that 
might want to run, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t follow the same 
rules themselves. 
 
They will do what they have to do to try and retain power, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the biggest and most glaring examples that 
we’ve seen in this Assembly, of how they’ve arbitrarily 
increased the number of MLAs by three when there was no 
need to do so. Nobody asked for more MLAs and more 
politicians. 
 
What they’re asking for is more front-line workers to begin to 
address the whole notion around health care and the pressures 
that many senior citizens find themselves in when they’re in 
care homes, Mr. Speaker. They’ve asked to deal with the 
housing shortage in many of these communities. They’ve 
helped them deal with the whole notion of infrastructure needs, 
whether it’s major highways or water and sewer. This is what 
the government should do, Mr. Speaker. Instead of trying to 
hire more politicians, Mr. Speaker, they should be hiring more 
front-line workers to begin to deliver good services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we looked at Bill 166, The Local Government Election Act, 
and the language that was used to promote a few changes, Mr. 
Speaker. We would encourage the government not to use that 
particular language because obviously they don’t respect the 
language of democracy and integrity, Mr. Speaker, or of the 
electoral cycle. 
 
[15:15] 
 
But hold it. They’re talking about municipal elections. They’re 
talking about rural elections. They’re talking about urban 
elections. So all the rules around these elections, there are 
provisions in place that they want to see happen, the 

Saskatchewan Party government does want to see happen to 
ensure that the electoral process is straightforward and 
understood, and that they’re going to get rid of any of the rules 
that are misunderstood. They’re going to try and get rid of the 
processes that may be repetitive in nature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about the eligibility to vote for many of the students 
and those that are in the Armed Forces. And these are things 
that we would certainly encourage as well, Mr. Speaker, 
especially around the whole notion of students that are out from 
their home communities and especially the Armed Forces, Mr. 
Speaker. I often speak about the importance of recognizing 
these two particular groups because they are, as was indicated, 
they are part of many communities, and they do have the 
opportunity and right to vote. Because they’ve moved 
elsewhere either for duty or for schooling, they should not be 
discouraged from voting. And we would respect that provision, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, you look at the bill itself. If it’s talking about giving 
students more opportunities to vote and those in the Armed 
Forces better opportunities to vote, then who in the province of 
Saskatchewan would argue against that? We in the opposition 
strongly encourage that, because after all democracy is 
something that we all have to protect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would point out that the provisions identified in this 
particular Act, it really brings in a lot of different organizations 
into the fold. The minister talked about consultation. We want 
to see if there was general agreement from some of the 
organizations impacted. The minister also talked about the 
different Acts that were the same for, whether it’s a SARM 
election or SUMA election. We want to find out what kind of 
provisions that the minister is actually amalgamating into one. 
These are some of the questions that we have on this particular 
bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, if it’s a simple case of allowing those that are out for 
educational purposes, like as I mentioned, students’ and Armed 
Forces’ ability to vote, we would encourage that, Mr. Speaker. 
We would strongly encourage that because they are really, 
really important parts of our community, especially when it 
comes to the members of the Canadian Armed Forces. They’re 
there protecting democracy, so why should we deny them the 
opportunity to participate in that democracy because they have 
simply moved elsewhere to do their service? And the students 
as well, Mr. Speaker, they have a right to express their opinion 
and cast a vote for whomever they wish to support. So, Mr. 
Speaker, none of those provisions do we find in any way, shape, 
or form are argumentative, from our perspective.  
 
We would just ensure people out there knew that this is the 
same government that promoted the implementation of three 
new MLAs, despite the overwhelming evidence, Mr. Speaker, 
of the contrary in showing that there are many other provinces 
— and especially Alberta as the example — where they have a 
huge concentration of constituents in one confined area. It’s 
almost twice as many as what the Saskatchewan Party 
government MLAs are dealing with, and yet why do we have to 
justify three more MLAs that the Saskatchewan Party want to 
put in place, Mr. Speaker? We find that absurd. We find that not 
necessary. It’s not necessary at all and very wasteful. 
 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6155 

And yet we sit by and we sit back, and a year later, here comes 
the Saskatchewan Party government using the words integrity 
and democracy in the same sentence, Mr. Speaker. That is 
something that, from our perspective, is a laughing matter when 
we see what the Sask Party has done in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the other thing that’s also important, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, it’s important for us to allow members of the Armed 
Forces to vote. It’s important for us to allow the students that 
have relocated from some of their home communities to further 
their education, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But once again alarming to us, and certainly to myself as an 
Aboriginal member of this Assembly, is some of the provisions 
they’ve put in some of the northern communities around the 
eligibility to vote. We really watched this issue really carefully, 
Mr. Speaker, because one of the points in the last election is 
that when the Saskatchewan Party proposed ways in which 
people would be allowed to vote, Mr. Speaker, they made a 
bunch of provisions. And from our perspective, we looked at 
the provisions, and we basically were quite shocked at what the 
Saskatchewan Party was trying to do, Mr. Speaker. And one of 
the arguments that they made, the Saskatchewan Party made in 
making tougher rules, tougher rules to vote, Mr. Speaker, is 
they cited, they cited abuse, abuse of the electoral cycle. 
 
So we turned around and said, okay we’re not going to ask the 
Saskatchewan Party for advice on what they . . . what we view 
as their voter suppression tactics. We asked the questions of the 
electoral office saying, has there been rampant abuse of people 
voting in areas that have done so in the past, and is there abuse 
of that system? And the provincial election officer said, no there 
was no abuse. There was no call for the provincial government 
to put these new rules around elections as there was no such 
abuse. 
 
And it was very clearly identified, Mr. Speaker, that all these 
rules . . . There was some concern that you had to provide photo 
ID [identification] before you’re given a ballot, Mr. Speaker. 
These are some of the things that I think people in 
Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to 
realize the Sask Party is all about. They want to be able to 
thwart the process to allow people free and equal opportunity to 
vote. 
 
So we asked the question, we asked a question, why would you 
put in all these different rules on the electoral cycle for the 
province of Saskatchewan that are different from the particular 
Act that we’re talking about today, Mr. Speaker? And from our 
perspective, why would you make it more difficult, more 
difficult for people to vote? 
 
You know, many people don’t have photo ID, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’ll give you an example. In my home community, many elders 
have never driven a vehicle in their lives. They don’t have a 
driver’s licence. They may have a social insurance card. They 
may have a health card. They may have a few other pieces of 
ID. But they have lived in these communities most of their life, 
and they voted every election. And now because of the Sask 
Party’s rules, they’ve got to try and . . . they had to present 
photo ID in order for them to cast their ballot. 
 
So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, we make provisions for those in 

the Armed Forces that are protecting our democracy. Yet on the 
other hand, the Saskatchewan Party puts in these silly rules that 
actually thwart democracy, making it more difficult for people 
that don’t have photo ID to be able to cast the ballots. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen evidence of that in northern communities. 
 
And we asked, we asked the elections officer, who’s an 
independent elections officer, the Saskatchewan Party 
government said this was a problem, people were abusing the 
voting privileges by not giving proper ID. So we asked the 
question, why is that a problem? And the electoral officer said, 
no it was not a problem. 
 
So why did the Saskatchewan Party government put all these 
rules in that stopped people from voting? Mr. Speaker, that was 
a deliberate plan, in our perspective, called voter suppression. 
And that’s exactly what they had in mind, Mr. Speaker. So 
many people that immigrated to Saskatchewan, many of the 
elders that don’t have photo ID, many of the people that have 
just moved here, Mr. Speaker, don’t have photo ID. There are 
tons of examples of people that wanted to be able to vote, that 
as a result of the rules that the Sask Party put in place, Mr. 
Speaker, they cannot. They cannot, and that’s a crying shame. 
 
And to me, I think that’s an affront to democracy. And that’s 
why, when I hear any Sask Party member talk about democracy 
and integrity in the same sentence, Mr. Speaker, you know, I 
like to call it what it is in this Assembly, but obviously it’s 
important that we refrain from that particular language, Mr. 
Speaker. But this is exactly my sentiment. 
 
So number one is, who asked for these changes to the electoral 
Act, Mr. Speaker? The provincial elections officer didn’t ask 
for it. There was no group or organization that came out of the 
woodwork complaining about people abusing the election cycle 
by not providing the proper ID, Mr. Speaker. There is nobody 
in the whole province of Saskatchewan that wanted these rules 
in place except for the Saskatchewan Party. There’s nobody in 
the province of Saskatchewan who wanted three more 
politicians, except for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
Except for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, that’s who 
wanted them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if you want to talk, if you want to talk about accountability 
and you want to talk about democracy, you want to talk about 
integrity in the electoral cycle, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge 
the Sask Party government to release the transcripts of their last 
. . . in the last election when they were using the phone bank 
service to call a number of Saskatchewan homes, talking about 
the First Nations and resource revenue-sharing matter and the 
issue that they manipulated to their political advantage. Would 
they release the transcripts of that tape recording, that many 
people of Saskatchewan heard, from the Saskatchewan Party 
phone bank? Are they prepared to release that transcript today, 
Mr. Speaker?  
 
I would challenge them to release the transcript, what was said, 
what message was given to the people of Saskatchewan through 
their phone bank, Mr. Speaker. On the election of 2011 when it 
came to First Nations and it came to resource revenue sharing, 
what was their message from their phone bank to many 
hundreds and thousands of homes of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? And they won’t release that 



6156 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

information. They won’t release that information. 
 
And that’s why when they talk about integrity and democracy 
in the same sentence, we on this side of the Assembly know 
exactly that’s not what their intention is, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
silly for them to use that particular language at all, Mr. Speaker, 
when they’re not allowing people to vote, when they make up 
problems to try and suppress votes to their political advantage, 
when they create new seats for three new MLAs when nobody 
asked for new MLAs, and when they run phone banks, Mr. 
Speaker, when they do these robocalls much like the federal 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, when they do these robocalls to 
create divisions amongst the people of Saskatchewan. And they 
don’t have the courage to release the transcripts of that recorded 
message from their phone bank, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have 
the courage to do that, Mr. Speaker. To me that’s thwarting 
democracy. That’s thwarting democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I’m challenging the entire Sask Party bench, 
release the transcripts of your robocalls from the last election 
where you’re talking about giving the First Nations resource 
revenue-sharing opportunities and, Mr. Speaker, we ask them to 
do that today. And I can guarantee you today that they will not 
do it, Mr. Speaker. They’re ashamed of it. They’re going to hide 
it. They will not release those transcripts. We need to see those 
transcripts. We need to know what they’re telling the people of 
Saskatchewan through their phone bank, Mr. Speaker, through 
their phone bank. We want to find out. 
 
So whether it’s the electoral cycle, Mr. Speaker, trying to get 
more politicians in here, whether it is trying to suppress votes as 
they’re doing, or whether they’re trying to divide the people of 
Saskatchewan, we see that the Saskatchewan Party have taken a 
lot of lessons from Harper and company, Mr. Speaker, in 
Ottawa. And, Mr. Speaker, they have on every, every front tried 
to thwart democracy when it comes to their interests, and yet 
they insist on certain processes when it comes to the local 
governance of our RMs, of our communities, and of our school 
boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These RM councillors and reeves, and the mayors and councils 
of many of these communities, of our cities, of our smaller 
centres, and the school divisions, Mr. Speaker, they operate 
under great scrutiny. They operate under great expectations. 
And they’re confined many times by the amount of resources 
they get out of this government, Mr. Speaker, and yet they’ve 
got to do all the jumping through all the hoops to meet what 
they, the Saskatchewan Party, deem are responsible, democratic 
practices. 
 
And yet if you look at their record, Mr. Speaker, it is a shameful 
record. It is a shameful record from every perspective, of 
loading up numbers to get more politicians, to thwarting the 
people that wish to exercise their democratic right to vote, and 
certainly to providing divisive statements when it comes to 
trying to represent all the people’s interests in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s the Saskatchewan Party record, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ll hide for it for the rest of their lives, Mr. 
Speaker, as they will not release those transcripts. 
 
We want those transcripts. And we’ve asked the electoral 
officer office themselves that in the future, in the future, if any 
party should use that option to divide the people of 

Saskatchewan, that there should be a full investigation, that 
there should be a full investigation of what was said on those 
recordings so the people of Saskatchewan can finally see for 
once in your lives the amount of manipulation and the lack of 
courage that the Saskatchewan Party government have when it 
comes to democracy and integrity of the democratic system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they ask of the school board members. They ask of the rural 
members. They ask of the urban members, of whether you’re an 
RM, a village, a town, a city, or whether you’re a school 
division. We want you to jump through all these hoops to prove 
that there is integrity in the local election system, but they sure 
don’t practise what they preach, Mr. Speaker. That’s our 
fundamental argument on this particular bill today. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So people of Saskatchewan, we would encourage them to pay 
extra close attention to anything that the province of 
Saskatchewan or the Saskatchewan Party uses in any legislation 
that they bring forward and any Act that they bring forward or 
any rule or regulation they bring forward, Mr. Speaker. If they 
use democracy and integrity in the same sentence, then pay very 
close attention to that, Mr. Speaker, because once again they’re 
coming back to try and thwart that democracy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot of people and organizations across the 
province of Saskatchewan frown upon that, and they think that 
it’s old school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I spoke about the value of democracy, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of times. And when you talk about those that served in 
the Armed Forces, I’m very proud of the number of people 
within my family that served in the Armed Forces, Mr. Speaker. 
I shared that, and I shared it on many occasions in which I was 
very proud of the service that they had given to their country, 
and they were proud as well. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great 
career for young people that are looking at an opportunity to 
travel, to learn, and to create friendships, and certainly to show 
their support and patriotism to their country. 
 
So serving in the military and in the Armed Forces is something 
that’s a great honour and privilege. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important because their message was that there is no condition 
that they have given to anyone to serve their country. They just 
served their country because they thought it was their duty to do 
so. Now if they came back home and they tried to vote and they 
didn’t have photo ID or one of their family members didn’t 
have photo ID, would they be allowed to vote, Mr. Speaker? 
Would they be allowed to vote? And that’s one of the important 
points that I want to raise is that if we are thwarting the efforts 
of people that should be voting, allowing them the right to vote, 
that’s exactly what many people in our Armed Forces fought 
for: democracy. They want to see a democratic system set up. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Party are trying 
to thwart that democracy because, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t help 
in their self-interest. Their self-interest is to try and manipulate 
the process as to not letting people vote or creating divisions 
amongst those that do vote. And, Mr. Speaker, that kind of 
action, activity, will catch up sooner or later, and that old 
phrase, what goes around comes around, I think will certainly 
apply in many instances when it comes to this particular 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6157 

government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the moment the minister talks about 
democracy and integrity in one sentence, right away I tell 
people to watch out because once again they’re up to their old 
tricks, their old habits, and they’re trying to do something that 
would position them a lot better politically at the expense of 
democracy. We’ve seen that happen time and time again. 
 
So from the same government and same minister that are 
promoting more politicians, the same minister is in government 
that’s talking about putting tougher rules for people to cast their 
vote, Mr. Speaker, and the same minister and government that 
won’t release the transcripts of their phone bank message to the 
people of Saskatchewan on election night. This is the 
government that’s sitting across from the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And while we see the bill itself, when they talk about 
democracy and integrity, it only applies to the reeves, to the 
mayors, to the councillors, to the school divisions of our 
villages, of our towns, of our urban areas, of our rural areas, Mr. 
Speaker. It doesn’t apply to the senior government called Sask 
Party because they can do what they want to manipulate, what 
they have to manipulate in order for them to retain power, Mr. 
Speaker. But that train has left the station, and people are really 
watching what happens next election. 
 
And I dare say, and I dare say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to 
be continuing to press the elections office to make sure they 
monitor this kind of activity in the future. They’ve got to 
monitor that kind of activity in future, Mr. Speaker, because we 
think that this kind of action and activity is actually hurting 
democracy and thwarting the efforts of many people that have 
provided the democratic right to cast their vote, people like our 
veterans and people that have served in the military and those 
that continue serving in the Armed Forces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important that we raise these issues. It’s important that 
we pay attention to what they’re doing. And we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, what the Sask Party tells the local government in terms 
of integrity. They put these rules down, and our local leaders 
will do what they have to do. But my only advice to them is 
that, you know, don’t follow the Saskatchewan Party’s lead, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to democracy, and don’t follow 
them when it comes to the integrity of the democratic cycle. 
Use your own judgment because many times local leadership 
make better decisions, better decisions than the minister and the 
Sask Party government that have manipulated the electoral 
process to a point where people are just getting tired of it. And 
they want answers, and they want answers fairly soon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve pointed out that there are many differences. There are 
many differences in our province. And the other part of the bill 
that I think we have to pay attention to, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
minister talks about amalgamating some of these rules to make 
sure we do away with the provisions that are not relevant in 
certain instances and that we keep the ones that are relevant to 
many and bring everybody under one tent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s many differences in 
our province in terms of the demands on certain municipalities, 

the roles of certain . . . like an RM versus a small village. There 
are just all kinds of these rules out there. And that’s why it’s 
important to pay attention to what is being proposed, and that’s 
one of the key points that I would raise. 
 
Yes, SUMA and SARM will pay attention to this but, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to make sure, we want to make sure that we 
hear from as many mayors and reeves and councillors as 
possible on what they perceive as issues that would be 
concerning to them as the minister proposes and proceeds with 
Bill 166. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan itself, as I often 
speak of northern Saskatchewan, they have some extenuating 
circumstances that many local leaders have to deal with, and 
we’re not talking about the cost of goods to transport north. 
We’re talking about the isolation factor as well. We’re talking 
about the transportation costs. There’s a number of factors of 
attracting professional people to do business that a northern 
community has to undertake in northern Saskatchewan to 
ensure that it stays vibrant, Mr. Speaker. They have unique 
challenges. They have unique circumstances. And they certainly 
want to be able to have a focus on those issues by government. 
 
And what we’re seeing here is that there’s a movement away 
from northern affairs overall. And some of the provisions under 
northern affairs, Mr. Speaker, would apply in this instance. And 
I think it’s important that we read into the record what exactly 
is being changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the whole notion is, if you look at some of the parts of the 
Act, they spoke about the importance of the minister working 
closely with the northern communities and advocating for the 
northern communities. Now obviously if they’re doing away 
with northern affairs, does that advocacy stop at the minister’s 
level? This is what’s really important, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
clear that the Minister of Northern Affairs should’ve been there 
for many northern communities. Now it’s obvious they’ve done 
away with northern affairs. There’s no longer a focus on 
northern government, Mr. Speaker. We’re all under one tent 
despite the significant differences in operating a local 
government when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many northern communities don’t have the luxury 
of natural gas service in their community. The cost to provide 
and make sure they maintain certain systems like water and 
sewer, community maintenance, garbage collection, and so on 
and so forth, Mr. Speaker, these are tremendous strains on a 
local community. And they want it to be . . . They never 
complain about it, but it would be sure nice if they were 
understood and it was accepted that these are some of the 
challenges that have to operate under. 
 
And what they have done is they have changed this particular 
process to really not give a lot of attention to northern 
Saskatchewan communities, and that’s a crying shame, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s some great leaders out there that are 
doing wonderful things with some of the meagre resources that 
the Sask Party government has given them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot to say to on this particular bill. 
We want to make sure, we want to make sure that when they 
talk about democracy and integrity that this sends off alarms, 



6158 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

alarm bells on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why? Because we’ve seen how they’ve dealt with the 
provincial electoral cycle. They have manipulated it. They have 
instituted voter suppression tactics. They have created positions 
for three new MLAs when not one single soul in the province of 
Saskatchewan asked for more MLAs. And what’s worse, Mr. 
Speaker, is they didn’t do it based on population. They took 
anybody over the age of 18 and up, and that’s how they 
determined where these MLAs were to be, and they created new 
ridings for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re sitting in the back saying, oh my goodness. This is 
too obvious in their efforts, Mr. Speaker. And once again we sit 
here and we say, my goodness; here they go. What rules they 
make for the local government Act, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
follow on their own front. 
 
So a lot of time I tell the local leaders, just do what you think is 
necessary. Follow the law. Operate within your budgets, and do 
a good, hard, honest job, and you needn’t worry about your 
future. And don’t take advice about democracy and don’t take 
advice about integrity on that democracy from the senior 
government called the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have thwarted democracy on every front 
that they’re able to do so, and we in the opposition certainly 
have seen evidence of that, time and time again. 
 
So we have a lot more to say on this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker, but at this point I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. This Act makes an 
amendment to one bilingual Act, The Education Act, 1995, 
because that Act refers to The Local Government Election Act 
and the provisions dealing with the election of school board 
members. The Local Government Election Act governs all 
municipal elections throughout the province as well as school 
board elections. 
 
No changes are being made to how school board elections are 
run. The amendments only change the name of the Act and the 
section number being referred to so that the references remain 
accurate. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The Minister of 

Government Relations has moved second reading of Bill No. 
167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
what’s really important is that, as I said at the outset of the 
previous bill, we want to pay very close attention to anything 
the Saskatchewan Party government may want to promote in 
terms of democracy, Mr. Speaker. And I think the key thing that 
we would want to point out in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, 
is that when we look at the operation of many of the municipal 
governments throughout the province of Saskatchewan . . . As I 
said at the outset, we have had a lot of experience of sitting 
down with some of the local leaders and asking what their 
aspirations would be when it comes to their actual operation, 
you know, as a community. 
 
And I want to focus a bit of my time and attention on the 
northern communities because I understand them well. A lot of 
people may not know this, but I served on the SUMA board for 
a couple of years. We learned a lot about the local elections 
issues and the local government of the southern part of the 
province through a lot of the different organizations and people 
that presented at SUMA. And being on a board for SUMA for a 
couple of years, I was exposed to a lot of the information of 
some of the local municipal bodies, whether they’re a small 
village or whether they’re a hamlet or whether they’re a resort 
community or whether they’re a large centre, Mr. Speaker. 
They have had a lot of challenges in front of them. 
 
And one of the key things that we hear on a continual basis 
from a lot of the communities, and it really applies in northern 
Saskatchewan and that’s why it’s important that we pay a bit of 
attention to The Municipalities Act whenever they bring an Act 
forward, is to take this opportunity to talk about the particular 
bill and get advice as to who is speaking at this particular bill 
and some of the changes that are being proposed. What are the 
net effect and the impact, and who is being impacted by this? 
But we have this continual dialogue with the northern and the 
southern leaders, the community leaders. And when I say the 
municipal leaders, I’m talking about the big-city mayors, I’m 
talking about the medium-sized cities, and of course I’m talking 
abut the hamlets and the small villages and so on and so forth. 
So it’s really, really important that when we say some of the 
buzzwords, we talk about all the communities involved, no 
matter how big or small. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, wherever you go it is important, it is important 
that you look at some of the aspirations they’ve had over the 
past number of years and the aspirations they have for the next 
number of years. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And it goes back to the earlier point that we’ve made, is that 
you’ve got to consult the municipalities on any bills, whether 
it’s a consequential amendment Act or whether it’s election Act 
or whether it’s an infrastructure Act. There’s got to be heavy 
consultation. We’ve seen evidence time and time again that this 
particular government does not, does not have a lot of history, 
does not have a lot of background, and does not have a lot of 
success when you talk about consultation with a lot of these 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6159 

communities in question. And that’s why it’s important to take 
the opportunity on any bill they present to further their case on 
some of the issues that I speak about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And a good example of that is when you look at the northern 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse as an example. They have asked 
for support on a number of occasions and, Mr. Speaker, that 
support, that support has not gone over well in terms of dollars. 
And one of the biggest things that I think I want to focus on is 
that communities in northern Saskatchewan, they have, they 
have the obligation, Mr. Speaker, to run some of these 
communities, the water and sewer, the maintenance, the street, 
to make sure they have their budgets properly done up. They 
have an incredible amount of responsibility. And no matter 
what Act that is brought forward by the province of 
Saskatchewan, they should consult these communities on a fair 
and equal and continual basis, no matter the size of their 
community, Mr. Speaker, and of course the area or geographical 
region that this community is in. 
 
And a good example I would use, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about these communities, is the whole notion around the costs 
that these communities are finding themselves in. If you look at 
the recent example that I spoke about, when we used to do 
housing for these northern communities — a good example — 
the federal government came along with the provincial 
government and they committed to developing social housing 
throughout northern Canada as a whole. And since we’re part of 
northern Canada, we were eligible for some of the housing 
dollars that were set aside to help build homes in northern parts 
of Canada. Northern Saskatchewan was eligible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you see a number of years later, the 
Saskatchewan Party government comes along and most recently 
they announced a housing project in a number of northern 
communities. I think the federal MP [Member of Parliament] 
was with them. And they travelled to some of these 
communities and they announced this money that they were 
putting in for these northern communities to help deal with the 
municipal strain of providing homes for local families, because 
some of these communities are growing. 
 
So one of the arguments that was used was that, well the federal 
government put their money in, the province will put their 
money in, but now the local government’s got to put their 
money in. And the local governments, Mr. Speaker, they 
primarily operate on a grant versus collection of land taxes. 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of these communities are small. 
They’re not very big. And some of them certainly, as they get 
bigger, they have more challenges because obviously they’ve 
got to provide more services. 
 
So one of the things that I thought of right away when I looked 
at the bill and I looked at all the different parts of the bill that 
they’re talking about and all the impacts that might be 
occurring, the point that I would make is, has the consultation 
been thorough enough? No matter how small the bill is and no 
matter how inconsequential it may seem, there are major 
ramifications for the partners in governance when it comes to 
not only southern Saskatchewan but as it should also be 
involved when you come to the northern part of Saskatchewan. 
They should also be involved in the consultation as well. 
 

So going back to my housing example, Mr. Speaker, what 
happens next year? For example, in the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, I think they are covering 55 per cent of the cost, 
which is a huge strain and drain on the local revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. And they’re building five homes. Now what happens 
next year? What happens next year, Mr. Speaker, if they need 
more homes? Do they have to go another half a million dollars 
in the hole, Mr. Speaker? Do they have to go another half a 
million dollars in debt? And how about the year after that if 
they need more homes? Is that another half a million dollars 
more debt that these communities have to assume? So every 
year the debt’s being added on to these northern communities 
and yet the senior governments, the provincial government and 
the federal government, are gradually getting away from 
providing support for constructing housing units in northern 
parts of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we saw the federal minister . . . or the 
federal MP and our provincial Housing minister smiling for the 
camera and as they’re holding a spade, what they were doing 
was they were digging a hole with the spade. And that’s kind of 
where the finances of the community would end up if we 
continued on with this kind of arrangement where you have a 
huge debt or a huge hole of debt that came along for the local 
community because the federal and provincial government are 
getting out of providing support for social housing. And they’re 
hoping that the communities like Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo 
Narrows, Beauval, La Ronge would be able to afford the cost 
on their own. 
 
So these are some of the examples that I wanted to share with 
you when it comes to any Act, consequential or not, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s really important that we have those 
discussions and that we take the opportunity. When we’re given 
the opportunity, the opposition say, we’re going to study the bill 
and make sure we move forward with as much of the 
consultation that’s necessary to look at the organizations and 
groups that may be impacted, seek their advice, seek their 
participation, get their support, get their endorsement, and 
challenge the government on any front that they may have on 
this particular bill. So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 167. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations 
Administration Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. This bill continues the work to update 
executive government legislation in Saskatchewan. The purpose 
of this bill is to create one Act that reflects all areas of the 
Ministry of Government Relations and meets the current needs 
and mandate of the ministry. 
 
Specifically the bill does four key things. Number one, first it 



6160 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

will reflect the ministry’s current mandate as it relates to 
municipal affairs, northern affairs, public safety, and First 
Nation and Métis relations. Second, it will consolidate and 
standardize the general authorities of the minister now 
contained in four separate statutes that are now outdated and 
inconsistent with other ministry legislation. Third, the bill will 
include new ministerial authority to deal with certain situations. 
And finally, it will provide for consequential amendments to the 
three municipal Acts as ministerial authority to help resolve 
intermunicipal disputes. 
 
I will briefly touch on each of these areas. It’s important to note 
the bill must be read in conjunction with other legislation and 
the regulations that pertain to the ministry and has been drafted 
so as not to duplicate any of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are currently four outdated former 
department Acts under the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Government Relations: The Urban Affairs Act, The Rural 
Affairs Act, The Rural Development Act, and The Northern 
Affairs Act. Each of the four former department Acts were 
written at a time when there were separate urban, rural, and 
northern departments. Those departments no longer exist and 
have not existed for some time. 
 
This bill proposes to consolidate authority from and repeal 
those four outdated former department Acts into a single new 
Act for the ministry. The Act will be more consistent with the 
ministry’s current mandate and functions which now includes 
public safety, First Nation and Métis relations, northern affairs, 
and municipal affairs. 
 
The second thing this bill will address is standardizing the 
general authorities of the minister. Provisions relating to current 
ministerial powers and ministry programs and services such as 
providing financial, administrative, and technical support 
services will be retained in the new Act. Other provisions that 
either no longer reflect or are no longer part of the ministry’s 
mandate will be removed. 
 
The repeal of the four former department Acts and the 
introduction of this bill is not intended to remove powers and 
duties that are required today to provide specific programs and 
services; rather it ensures that these powers and duties are 
inclusive of all types of communities and local governments 
where appropriate. 
 
The third thing this bill does is support the ministry’s role in 
setting the education property tax mill rate and then monitoring 
and ensuring compliance in the reporting, collection, and 
remittance of education property taxes by municipalities to 
school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to compliance, I want to point out 
that the vast majority of municipalities are compliant with 
education property tax collection, remittance, and reporting. 
However there are rare instances that the ministry is aware of 
where municipalities have not collected or remitted education 
property taxes owing to the school division. This is money the 
school division relies on to help fund day-to-day operations and 
services. 
 
Currently the ministry has few tools available to compel 

municipalities that do not remit the education property tax they 
collect to the school division beyond withholding grants for an 
indefinite period of time. In order to ensure school divisions 
throughout the province receive tax dollars they are entitled to, 
the bill will include new ministerial authority to redirect the 
school division grants of municipalities that have not levied, 
collected, or remitted education property taxes to the school 
division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this authority would be used as a last resort to 
address situations where a municipality does not comply with 
the legislative requirement to levy, collect, and remit education 
property taxes. 
 
The last point I want to touch on is the consequential 
amendments to The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, and The 
Northern Municipalities Act, 2010. These would enable the 
minister to appoint a person to review, make recommendations, 
or assist in resolving intermunicipal disputes where no dispute 
resolution mechanism exists. Currently the three municipal Acts 
provide for voluntary dispute resolution by consent of the 
municipalities involved in a dispute. The Acts also provide for 
dispute resolution by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in 
certain circumstances where municipalities are required to seek 
mediation and dispute resolution to resolve a matter. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there arise other instances where the 
minister may need to become involved — a voluntary dispute 
resolution is not attempted and municipalities are unwilling to 
resolve a matter, or there is no dispute mechanism provided in 
legislation. The consequential amendments to the three 
municipal Acts will provide clear authority for the minister to 
appoint a person to make recommendations or assist 
municipalities in mediating or resolving an intermunicipal 
dispute. This will replace the ability to appoint a municipal 
administration adviser in The Rural Affairs Act and The Urban 
Affairs Act and will address the lack of ability in the three 
municipal Acts to act if municipalities cannot voluntarily bring 
themselves to resolve the dispute. 
 
In terms of consultations, first within government, the 
ministries of the Economy, Agriculture, Social Services, and the 
Water Security Agency were consulted regarding the relevance 
and necessity of the provisions in the former department Acts 
that are jointly shared. All three ministries and the Water 
Security Agency indicated that there were no specific concerns 
with the repeal of the four outdated department acts. 
Government Relations also undertook the normal consultation 
process with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, and New North. All three associations have 
indicated, in writing, support for the proposed legislation. These 
consultations began in late November 2013 and concluded this 
past August. They involved meetings and sharing draft 
side-by-sides of the amendments for review and comment. 
 
I would like to take the opportunity to thank all those 
individuals who took the time to provide input, advice, and 
feedback in the development of this legislation. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, this bill continues government’s 
direction to repeal legislation that is obsolete, or consolidate 
and update legislation that provides for similar duties, powers, 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6161 

and responsibilities. It will better position the ministry and 
Minister of Government Relations to continue working with 
respect to municipal, public safety, northern, and First Nations 
and Métis stakeholders to support provincial priorities and 
objectives in these areas. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 168, The Government Relations Administration Act. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
as we go through the bill, Bill 168, I think it’s really important 
to note that there are two particular areas that I want to pay a bit 
of time with. 
 
First of all, in terms of the collection of education property tax, 
a lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan would know 
that the municipal governments have that role. When they issue 
their annual tax collection notice, part of the bill of course is for 
education property tax. And their duty and obligation of course 
is to collect that tax and certainly to remit it because it is 
intended to go to the boards of education within that specified 
region. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The other notion I want to spend a bit of time, Mr. Speaker, is 
on the whole issue of conferring more powers to the minister. 
We need to know what prompted that particular exercise, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it’s going to create some problems and 
challenges in the future. A lot of communities right across the 
province, they jealously protect their local community, their 
local authority, their local autonomy. They feel that they have a 
huge role to play, and rightfully so. And now we’re going to be 
giving and affording the minister more powers. We need to 
know what kind of powers those are distinctly, what kind of 
overarching authority they have over a local government, Mr. 
Speaker, and when in these instances would these powers be 
utilized. And above all else, who asked for the additional 
powers that the minister has granted to himself, Mr. Speaker? 
These are some of the questions that we obviously need to 
know. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that in northern Saskatchewan as 
well as right across the province that we have much a similar 
system in a sense of having school divisions operate within a 
certain region. And these school divisions obviously count on 
revenues from the tax base and property tax base and, Mr. 
Speaker, the local governments of local towns and villages and 
the different municipal entities out there, they actually collect 
these property taxes. And the theory is they collect them for 
both the education portion and the municipal portion. And then 
they’re supposed to, as they do so when they collect these taxes, 
they submit the amount that they collected for the education 
portion and that goes directly to helping fund the schools and 
boards of education right across our province. 
 
So I guess the first initial question I’m going to ask is that the 
minister said at the outset that the vast majority of local 
governments follow these rules: they collect and they remit 

these dollars that they collect on behalf of the education and 
property portion and that there’s no problems. The question I 
would have for the minister, well then why are we putting these 
rules in place? How many communities are being impacted? 
Who asked for these changes, Mr. Speaker? And how rampant 
. . . Is there a rampant problem? And I understood him to say 
that the vast majority . . . Is it 70 per cent? Is it 95 per cent? Is it 
80 per cent? It’s really difficult to ascertain from our 
perspective how bad the problem is of communities or local 
councils collecting the education portion of the property tax and 
not submitting it on time and not following the rules. 
 
How bad is this particular situation? Are there examples? Is it a 
rural issue? Is it a northern issue? Is it a southern issue in terms 
of the larger centres? We need to know where the problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, for us to determine whether these new processes 
are effective and that there isn’t something that the government 
is not telling us when it comes to this process of collecting 
property tax through the municipal bodies. 
 
We need to find out, Mr. Speaker, exactly what were some of 
the reservations of SUMA and SARM. They obviously are 
really important partners in governing the province of 
Saskatchewan. They would give some really good, sound 
advice. And I understood the minister in his previous bill said 
they got written confirmation, and this bill as well, that they do 
have some support from those organizations. New North was 
also mentioned. We need to find out, Mr. Speaker, whether that 
. . . if the minister is able to provide us with copies of that letter 
and exactly what kind of consultations occurred with some of 
the organizations I mentioned previously. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of information we need. It is not 
something that you take lightly, as I said before. Understanding 
these Acts and what the intent of the legislation is, what the 
issue at hand is, how they’re going to fix the problem, has 
consultation been done? These are all the things that the 
opposition have to ask. 
 
And one of the processes that I enjoy with this particular 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is that the bills are introduced; we give 
our first speech on a wide variety of bills, as I’m doing now. 
And then we take the bills and we research them and we look at 
options and we talk and meet with groups that might have 
concerns on these bills. And when the spring sitting is upon us, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s when you come forward with a lot of the 
recommendations. And people are more involved with the Act 
and hopefully they become more vocal and certainly participate 
on a greater level to make sure that we get this Act right. 
 
We’ve seen the government from time to time make many, 
many mistakes on the legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker, many 
mistakes. And we find them, as I said at the outset yesterday, 
they have an amendment to an amendment to an amendment 
from a previous bill that was amended earlier. So they get 
themselves confused. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the things that’s important is, in 
opposition, we point that out. And we tell people of 
Saskatchewan that we need to make sure that the process that 
we undertake in this Assembly is sound in the sense that we 
have our chances in opposition to look at the bill, research it, 
communicate it to people that are impacted on it and bring back 



6162 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

the weaknesses and the problems with the bill and challenge the 
government on that front. And that’s part of the accountability 
process that needs to be undertaken. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to chat a bit about was 
the fact that the minister talked about some of the communities 
not remitting the education property tax. And we know that 
many municipal governments in the province of Saskatchewan 
struggle. They struggle on a continual basis. And as they have 
the means to collect some of these property taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
they also, you know, they hold the money for a certain amount 
of time. 
 
And after all, as the communities get pressured, as the 
communities get pressured to do more things, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
always enticing to raise your property tax or look at some of the 
education taxes you collected while sitting in a bank account 
earning interest. And this is why it’s important. Most of the 
communities, if not all, understand that legally the money 
belongs to the education system of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why it is a bit surprising, a bit surprising that the 
minister’s conferring new rules upon himself. And why are 
these rules coming into force through this Act? What are the 
new rules that he’s conferring upon himself? And why is he 
given this extra power and extra authority to do all these 
different things? We need to find out exactly what rules. He’s 
giving himself an advantage over the municipal governments to 
make sure that he fixes some of these problems that he states 
out there. We need to know what rules, what problems, and 
what do you hope to solve. And, Mr. Speaker, based on the 
information that we received from this particular minister, it is 
very, very sketchy information. We need more information 
overall. 
 
The other thing I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, is that 
you have to be very careful when you deal with northern 
communities, and certainly when you deal with the southern 
communities as well. The municipal bodies we have right 
across the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s the city of 
Saskatoon or whether it’s the northern community of Buffalo 
Narrows or whether it’s a small hamlet in the southeast corner 
of the province, what’s really important is we’ve got to 
recognize that a lot of the local organizations, local leaders, 
they’re doing a tremendous amount of good work. They are 
volunteering their time. The mayors and councils, the reeves 
and councils, the school divisions, they’re volunteering their 
time to do all this good work, Mr. Speaker. And if it was not for 
them, there would be some significant problems because the 
government obviously cannot administer the operation of our 
communities in any way, shape, or form because the current 
provincial government do not have the capacity to deal with all 
the issues that the local communities have. 
 
I see it every day when we meet with some of the mayors and 
councillors and some of the reeves, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got a 
huge responsibility, a huge undertaking, and they need a 
government that’s going to complement their effort and respect 
their participation, not one that’s going to confer rules upon 
themselves and be able to come in and with a fell swoop 
determine the course of action of a particular community or a 
particular RM, Mr. Speaker. They should engage that 

community or that RM to the extent that they should be, that the 
communities want to be engaged. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very important that the message get 
through, as I said with the other bills. No matter what the bill 
involves, the message that I have for the government is that 
these municipal entities that are out there, whether it’s an RM, a 
local village council, or a city council, that they want to be 
recognized for the problems they have, the challenges they face. 
And on issues that need collaboration, they want be able to get a 
respectful dialogue going with the government. 
 
And this particular Act talks about more powers to the minister. 
What powers is he conferring upon himself? Where did the 
demand for these new powers come from? And how prevalent 
is the problem that they’re trying to deal with? And in this case 
he indicated the collection of education property taxes. How big 
is that problem and which communities are being impacted? 
 
So we have a lot of questions on Bill 168, Mr. Speaker. We 
obviously want to talk to our municipal partners. We want to 
engage them. Obviously there’s a few changes for The Northern 
Municipalities Act. We obviously want to talk to the New 
North, and we also want to talk with SARM and to SUMA as 
well. And anybody has any particular advice for the opposition 
or perspectives on this bill, most certainly encourage them to 
contact us, Mr. Speaker, because a lot of times you get some 
great information from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We want to keep that information flowing to hold this 
government to account, Mr. Speaker. And people out there are 
giving us tons of information, and a lot of the information we’ll 
use to strengthen Saskatchewan overall and to call the 
government to account on some of the lack of vision they have 
when they talk about respect for municipal leaders and certainly 
the lack of vision they have when it comes to the legislative 
agenda. We have to make sure they’re on the right track, and we 
encourage our partners to contact us to give us that information, 
give us that advice, give us your perspective. And we’ll use it 
properly, fairly, and respectfully in this Assembly to make sure 
that your values and your input are not forgotten and that the 
government gets the message and gets your message loud and 
clear. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this, but I move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill 168. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 163 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6163 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 163, An 
Act to amend The Education Act, 1995. And 1995 was a great 
year. Obviously some good work went into this, and I think that 
we could review 1995. But I will be reviewing certain dates, 
Mr. Speaker, because I have a lot to say about this bill 
particularly, and about some teachable moments we might have 
today, some teachable moments here. 
 
So some things that we need to get the record straight on, the 
record straight on. And I know that this is an important piece of 
legislation to a lot of people in Saskatchewan, a lot of people if 
not everyone. Everyone has an interest in good, solid public 
education, you know. And I think that it’s really important that 
we take a moment and just reflect back a bit on how important 
public education is in Saskatchewan. We have a long, long 
history here in Saskatchewan about public education right . . . in 
a formal sense because I certainly don’t want to discount the 
traditional way of learning prior to the public school system 
being set up because that was a huge way of passing knowledge 
down from generation to generation. That’s hugely important 
and it should not be discounted or forgotten. And so I just want 
to make sure we acknowledge that. 
 
But in the formal sense I want to take a moment to talk about 
the education, the public education here in Saskatchewan 
because it’s a huge, huge thing that people respect. And I don’t 
think they take it for granted here in Saskatchewan because we 
have such a strong record of education. And whether that be 
from back in the original homestead days, the early days of the 
province as we now know it, where education became more 
formalized for the settlers and the newcomers. 
 
And as we saw this Act evolve over the course of time, many 
changes have been brought forward to improve it. And one that 
we felt was really not a great idea, not a great idea, was when 
they introduced the legislation around changing when students 
would be back in the classroom after Labour Day. And it was 
such an interesting thing that when the minister at the time, and 
it’s the minister we have now, made that announcement. And it 
was part of an election campaign. 
 
But it’s so much of how this government has operated. It’s 
made announcements, knee-jerk announcements, and haven’t 
really consulted with primary stakeholders such as teachers and 
families, and what the impact would be, what the impact would 
be. And here we are now seeing the unintended consequences. 
 
And I think, I wish that we had more time and more resources 
to do the research on this, but if we were to go back and look at 
the old speeches from just a few years ago — when we talk 
about old speeches, we’re not talking about many, many years 
ago, but just a few years ago — we would have all been on this 
side talking about the unintended consequences. And one of 
them would be, we would be predicting that we would be back 
here today. And here we are fixing a wrong that this 
government had made because they acted in haste. They did not 

consult with the folks that they should have consulted with. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And to that extent, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a minute and 
talk about the minister’s . . . Actually when he was talking in 
the Throne Speech and he, even he, even the minister then 
acknowledges that it was the first time that they had actually 
gone out and consulted. I think this is what it means. And I 
quote from page 5564 of the Hansard, October 28th, 2014, 
when the minister said, “We’ve undertaken a historic 
consultative process called student-first where teachers’, 
parents’, and students’ voices were heard.” 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I think in many ways we would 
say, yes that’s right because you haven’t consulted — first for 
this government. They haven’t gone out and consulted. And it’s 
great that the minister’s actually acknowledging that it’s 
historic, that they’re actually going out and consulting. This is 
something this government is not known for doing, whether it’s 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, you can go through all the 
whole list of things, the employment Act, many things where 
they have not gone out and consulted. So it is good to see that 
the minister actually acknowledge a historic first, that they’ve 
actually gone out and done some consultation. 
 
And I don’t know if it came up then, or when it came up, but 
somebody pointed out to the minister, you know, there is a 
problem with that piece of legislation that you introduced a few 
years ago where you changed when kids would be coming back 
to school. And if you do it the way you had it right after Labour 
Day, at some point — and they are fixing the number of school 
days — at some point you’re going to have a problem. You’re 
going to have a problem, Mr. Minister. And he finally 
acknowledged that that day had arrived. And here we are, and 
now we have to change the legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the list doesn’t stop there. When we look at 
this Act, and there’s four main parts, and I will talk about many 
of those parts. But many of the other parts that he should be 
talking about, the changes this government has made without 
consultation . . . And I refer back to that quote about the 
minister acknowledging that they don’t do very much 
consultation, that in fact historically they’ve done a bad job of 
consulting, that there are other issues.  
 
And that is, for example, the number of hours of instructional 
time that has caused chaos, chaos out in many school divisions 
because they’re trying to coordinate what does that mean. 
They’ve established their processes to make sure they have a 
strong educational program. And I think that if this government 
is saying that they weren’t having a strong educational program, 
then we need to hear that. We need to hear that. But they 
created a lot of problems out there because they didn’t think 
through, they didn’t think through what the consequences 
would be. And so we are glad to hear that they are doing now 
consultations, full consultations. 
 
You know, we can talk about standardized testing. We can go 
on about standardized testing, about how this government 
refused to listen to the teachers, to school boards, or even 
academics about the problems of their infatuation about 
standardized testing and how they were going to pour money, 



6164 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

come whatever, into that. And so, Mr. Speaker, I have some 
real problems with how this government operates when it 
comes to education and their method. But I’m glad to hear that 
they are doing some consultation. 
 
But I do want to talk a minute because, you know, this minister, 
he prides himself on accuracy and how he feels that, you know 
. . . and today decide over there, talk about fact checking and 
how they are really wanting to be accurate. Well here’s a 
teachable moment. Here’s a teachable moment here because I 
want to refer to again the Throne Speech response from the 
Minister of Education. And he often likes to talk about me in 
his speeches. And he often talks about me, and maybe some 
people would say, he kind of gives me, a bit of giving me the 
gears, I think. And you know, and this is a lesson. This is a 
teachable moment about how, you know, people who live in 
glass houses should not throw stones. And that’s the lesson 
today. If you live in a glass house, it’s not a good idea to throw 
stones. 
 
This is what the member from Saskatoon Southeast was talking 
about. He said, and I quote, “The member opposite has said 
he’s wanted a minimum wage and he’s talked about The 
Minimum Wage Act, something hasn’t existed in our province 
since 1969.” So he’s talking about me. He’s talking about 
minimum wage. But the quote goes on. 
 

The member opposite went on at great length about 
wanting to have a minimum wage Act. I don’t know where 
he was in the summer of ’69, whether he was watching the 
moon landing or watching Woodstock on TV, but that was 
the year the NDP did away with The Minimum Wage Act. 

 
Now I ask you, in 1969, now some of you may remember who 
was in government in 1969. Do any of you remember who was 
in government in 1969? Now I know the member from Walsh 
Acres prides himself on being a factual type of guy. Would he 
remember who was in power in 1969? . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well so the world didn’t start before the 
member from Walsh Acres was born. That’s an interesting 
approach. Anyways, Mr. Speaker, just for the benefit of those 
folks at home who may not remember or for the folks over 
there, it was not the NDP. It was the Liberals. 
 
So my point here is for people who live in glass houses, for 
people who live in glass houses, they should not be throwing 
stones. And this minister, when he talks about being accurate, 
I’m talking about The Education Act because I hope he’s 
accurate in that, because we keep talking about how we have to 
come back and fix the education mistakes. Here he has 
something pretty seriously wrong. He doesn’t know his history, 
doesn’t know his history. I don’t know where the Minister of 
Education was in 1969. Maybe he was at Woodstock, I don’t 
know. He could have been at Woodstock. I know where I was 
in the summer of ’69. I was listening to the moon landing up in 
Waskesiu. That’s what I was doing. I don’t think I left the 
province that year. 
 
But I’ll come back to that because sometimes people say you 
have to repeat lessons seven times, seven times to get the point 
over there. So I may say this is lesson one or more times for the 
folks opposite because at the end of the day I really want to 
emphasize the point for everyone — you should not throw 

rocks if you live in a glass house.  
 
And if you don’t know who was in power in 1969 in 
Saskatchewan, I mean he was actually kind of famous because, 
you know, when this happened, there was some important 
labour legislation that the Liberals actually brought in about 
labour standards. And I think they actually deserve a lot of 
credit for that because they consolidated a lot of things and 
made it The Labour Standards Act. So you know, the Liberal at 
the time, and actually it was Minister Coderre who was the 
minister at the time. And I would know that because Coderre is 
not far from my hometown of Mortlach, and we know a lot of 
people from Coderre. But at any rate, I digress on that point. 
 
But I do want to say that we want to talk a little bit about the 
bill before us, Mr. Speaker. What I wanted to say about this was 
apparently there’s four pieces of . . . And I’ll take a minute here 
to review the minister’s comments here. And he talks about four 
amendments, essentially four amendments that will be in place 
by September 1st, 2015, by Labour Day 2015. 
 

The first change being proposed is to amend The 
Education Act, 1995 to rename section 4.1 to the Education 
Scholarship Fund. The newly . . . Education Scholarship 
Fund will include the Prince of Wales and Duchess of 
Cornwall Scholarship and also the Queen’s Diamond 
Jubilee Scholarship in alignment with the Premier’s 
announcement on May 23rd, 2012 [which was a good 
announcement]. 

 
But I do want to say that the Prince of Wales announcement 
when it was first introduced — and I believe it was introduced 
in the spring of 2001 — in fact it was one of the first things that 
our former premier, Premier Calvert, had done just after being 
elected leader and being elected premier. That was one of the 
first things he set up and it was a great scholarship. And it was 
done in recognition of the Prince of Wales’s visit here to 
Saskatchewan in the spring of 2001. 
 
So I think it’s fair enough, and if it means we can do more 
scholarships, then that will be a good thing. And that’s a good 
thing because, as we know, especially for high school students 
as they enter post-secondary education, it is getting tougher and 
tougher. And we hear the stories in Saskatchewan. We know 
this government’s in dispute about whether or not it’s easier to 
get into schools here than it was. We know that it’s still a 
challenge and it’s very important. 
 
And that’s one of our main goals in education, is make sure that 
we prepare students well enough that they can enter into 
post-secondary education if they are so inclined. But we do not 
want to see financial costs as a barrier, and too often we see 
that, and we see that unfortunately in communities right across 
this province. And we want to do all that we can to make sure 
students who have the potential and have the will and have the 
drive do access post-secondary education, whether it’s in the 
trades or whether it’s in the arts or whether it’s in other 
professional studies, we want to make sure that the potential of 
our young people is fully met. 
 
And again, this is the whole purpose of The Education Act, in a 
sense, to make sure that everyone, every person, every young 
person in our province has the ability to become, to reach their 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6165 

full potential. So that’s a very important part, and I don’t think 
it’s a small part. I think this is important, so we’ll be watching 
to see, and particularly now that we’re into the budget cycle and 
the Premier has alluded to it, in fact alluded to it today in 
question period, that we’re in the budget cycle. And maybe this 
is a signal that we’ll see more bursaries coming forward, more 
scholarships. So this is a very good thing, and it’s one that’s 
important. 
 
And the second change that’s being proposed is to amend two 
expressions that are used in the French version of The 
Education Act. And one is to talk around a change to 
home-based education program, and also the change, “pupil 
with intensive needs.” And now I do not have the faculty of the 
French language, and so I will not attempt to pronounce the 
words. But I understand, and I think that it’s important that 
when we have the translation, we often talk about what’s 
unfortunately lost in translation. And this is important when we 
talk about students with intensive needs. 
 
I can go back. One of the very first things this government . . . 
And I still have some questions about this. When they changed, 
they took the words special needs out of The Education Act, and 
what that meant. And of course we supported the idea, the 
concept that students with special or unique needs, that we 
should be moving from a medical model to more of an 
individual model, an individual needs model. But when you 
took out the words — words are important — when you took 
out the word special, that in fact special education had a certain 
recognition right across Canada, in fact, right around the world. 
And this change was really problematic. And we still see some 
of the fallout from that. 
 
But I think it’s important that we listen to the translators and 
understand the nuances. They’re hugely, hugely important. 
 
Last week we had a good discussion about the statutes 
amendment Act and how we saw words like capacity being 
used. And I had raised some concerns around the idea that 
capacity may not completely meet the needs of what the 
government was trying to say in terms of the new definitions. 
 
Clearly language evolves, and it becomes more specific, more 
current, but we have to make sure that we mean what we say 
and say what we mean. And I hope that in terms of the 
consultation that this government took on this, that it does meet 
the needs. 
 
And this is what we’ll be doing as an opposition, meeting with 
the Francophone community to find out, does this language 
capture the intent? It’s really important that, again, that the 
intent is not lost. The intent is not lost in translation, and that in 
fact it in fact strengthens the bill and limits the unintended 
consequences because we don’t want to be back here talking 
about the amendment again, as we are with the Labour Day, 
after the Labour Day fiasco that we knew, that we knew was 
coming. And here is the government today amending something 
that was almost a certain certainty that we would be discussing 
this point yet again. And so this is interesting. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So the second change looks relatively straightforward, but we 

would like to make sure that it does capture the intent. And you 
know, I can remember when we asked about when special 
education, that word was changed, that in fact it did cause quite 
a stir because the groups, who the minister at the time said that 
they were consulted, and in fact they weren’t consulted. And I 
think that’s the important thing. 
 
Well the third one, this is the one that really captured the news, 
and the government did issue a news release. And everybody, 
you know, quietly just shrugged because everybody knew that 
we were going to be coming back to this, that this was too big 
of a problem, and the government had to face it and face it head 
on. And of course that was to amend The Education Act to 
allow school divisions to start the school year prior to Labour 
Day when it occurs on or after September 5th. 
 
And he talks about: 
 

Current legislation provides that school divisions are 
required to commence instructional time no sooner than the 
day following Labour Day and to end no later than June 
30th. 

 
And this is where really the problem was caused because you’re 
setting out parameters that just were difficult in Saskatchewan 
to meet because people have certain expectations around what a 
school year was, and generally speaking, we’ve always thought 
that school starts around or after Labour Day. Everybody had 
that idea, and then there were concerns, and people started 
seeing the school year creep maybe too much into August when 
there were too many days that were not instructional days 
happening in the school year, the main school year between 
September and in June. And so they were really concerned. 
 
So people have an expectation about what will happen at 
Christmas. People have an expectation around Thanksgiving. 
And people have an expectation around Remembrance Day, and 
that’s one that we know. And you know, I have to take our hats 
off, and I don’t know who put the holiday, the stat holiday for 
Remembrance Day into being, but I think when we looked 
across Canada . . . And I know that’s a debate that actually the 
federal government is having right now and moving relatively 
quickly. I don’t know what the deal is with it, but making 
Labour Day a national stat holiday, because unfortunately it 
isn’t, and we see variations across the provinces on that one 
holiday. 
 
But we all have an understanding what spring vacation or 
Easter vacation would be. Now interestingly, and I’m not sure 
what the correct terminology is, whether Easter or spring, I 
think of it as Easter break because it’s tied to Good Friday and 
Easter Sunday, but it may be more appropriately referred to as a 
spring break, and how people have an expectation that it will be 
a week. And so this is one that really shows how important 
consultation really should be in our province, Mr. Speaker, 
because there’s just so many moving parts when you talk about 
holidays. 
 
But as well, you know, ironically when I was a teacher, and 
actually the minister of Education at that time was the chairman 
of the public school board, and we have an interesting history in 
terms of, I was the chair of the local bargaining committee and 
so . . . 



6166 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

An Hon. Member: — We heard some stories about you back 
then. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes, there you go. We were all great. It was all 
great. But I tell you we had some interesting discussions around 
prep time and how important preparation time for teachers is, 
very important because it has a direct correlation to improved 
instruction, and improved instruction of course leads to better 
learning. And that’s a great thing for students because at the end 
of the day, that’s what all our goal is, is how can we help our 
students achieve better. And of course there’s many ways of 
getting to that, but how you use your time wisely is really 
important. 
 
So this is something that I know the minister’s been thinking 
about for many years. And I’ve been thinking about many years 
because we’ve been talking about it for many years. But I think 
that it’s one that here we are when you see quite clearly 
evidence of something that’s not well thought out. 
 
And of course this is a government and this is a caucus really, 
you know, and I don’t know whether they have this process 
called stop-the-line, when you see . . . Did anybody in that 
caucus raise their hand and say, you know, to the people who 
are making those promises in that campaign, this isn’t going to 
work? At some point this is going to be a problem. And when 
many of them got elected, you know, and the bill came forward 
in caucus, did anybody say, whoa, stop the line? Stop this line? 
 
Oh there’s one who said he raised his hand. Okay, it would be 
him who said he raised his hand. He raised his hand to say, 
stop. This is not going to work. We’re going to be back here. 
We’re going to be back here in a few years. Somebody over 
there should have said, whoa, stop the line. Stop the legislative 
line, because this is not going to work. This is not going to 
work. 
 
Because here we are. Here we are. We should be debating 
things like buy local. We should be debating that bill on P3s 
[public-private partnership]. But instead here we are, fixing up a 
mistake that this government made because nobody would 
stand up. Nobody would stand up and say, whoa, stop the line. 
 
I think that many of those over there suffer from what they call 
group think, you know, because they don’t want to stand up and 
say, you know what, Mr. Minister? This is not going to work. 
This is not going to work. We’re going to be back in a few 
years. So I really do urge them. And I know many of them got 
up and, you know, we had quite a stirring debate about the 
statutes of limitations and spelling, and they really get into that 
over there. And you know, I think this is the kind of stuff, when 
they come forward, they need to say, hey, stop the line. Doesn’t 
make any sense. Doesn’t make any sense.  
 
Because if you know how the calendar works, dates and days 
change around. If you know how that works . . . a little 
different, you know. And you have a leap year and that throws 
another curveball into it. And so I think the folks over there 
needed to sit down and figure out, needed to figure out what 
was going to happen if they put in that legislation. And they 
did. They did. And because, you know, as we had these second 
reading speeches, we have these second reading speeches and I 
would hope that they listened to them. I hope they would listen 

to them and say okay, this doesn’t make much sense. Now 
today the fix is correct. We think that . . . But we need to talk to 
the people, the stakeholders. 
 
But there are other things that you could be fixing and talking 
about today. They should be talking about the minimum hours 
of instruction because that isn’t really very helpful. You should 
go back to and say, so what are we trying to resolve here? What 
are we really trying to resolve? You know, we all want our 
children to do better at school. That is a given. How do we 
make that happen? How do we make that happen? Well we 
think there should be better funding in schools. They should be 
addressing issues like that. They should be fixing the issues that 
teachers are identifying. Now the issues of overcrowded 
classrooms, the issues about educational assistants, that should 
be fixed. Now they’re all saying this is done — done, done, 
done; it’s all done. 
 
The last thing on their list, the last thing on their list was to fix 
the calendar. Was that what they’re saying? I don’t think so, 
Mr. Speaker. If that’s the last thing that needed to be fixed, then 
we’ve got a problem. We’ve got a problem because a lot of 
people out there have a lot of concerns about how we can make 
our Saskatchewan schools better. 
 
We have a great opportunity. We have a great opportunity. 
More kids, more kids in schools than ever before — this is a 
wonderful thing. We’ve got excellent teachers. You’ve got 
excellent teachers. But frankly they feel their hands are tied 
because they’re not getting the resources they should be getting. 
And this government . . . We’ll be watching the budget. We’ll 
be watching the budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like in 2009 when they slashed over 
300 educational assistants. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Three hundred educational assistants? Where 
did they go? And yet they say things are better. 
 
And they have this infatuation about standardized testing when 
we know that doesn’t prove education. And we know we have 
to do much more for First Nations and Métis education. And we 
saw there was a great consultation piece that happened a few 
years ago and it was put up on the shelf, put up on the shelf. 
And we know there’s much more work to be done, much more 
work to be done. 
 
So we do see, we do see a challenge for this government 
because they do have these ideological blinders put on and 
we’re . . . And this really brings me to the fourth point, brings 
me to the fourth point when we talk about P3 schools or the 
rent-a-schools. Talk about blinders, talk about blinders. They 
should be looking about. You know, one day we’ll hear they 
look across the country and they see what other provinces are 
doing and how they’re backing away from certain things, 
they’re changing things because that’s what other provinces are 
doing. And then the next day they say, hey, we’re going to do 
this first, or is it worst? They’re going to do it first or worst? I 
don’t know. I think they’re going to do P3s, the rent-a-school 
thing. We’re going to be watching this one very closely. 
 
You know, the whole thing about transparency and 
accountability, even when the BC [British Columbia] auditor 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6167 

says, not a great idea, not a great idea because of the way you’re 
forcing, the way they’re forcing the local school boards to 
borrow money, the way they’re forcing local school boards to 
borrow money at 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 per cent higher and this could 
result in increased costs, in fact several hundred million dollars. 
I’ve heard some estimates of $300 million . . . [inaudible] . . . 
on these P3 schools. Now I don’t know what $300 million 
could buy. Could that buy a school or two? I think it could. I 
think it could. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is the same . . . Here you have on one 
hand the point three, where they’re essentially saying, okay, we 
admit that we made a mistake. But wait till you see point four. 
We’re going to talk about our biggest mistake, and that is tying 
the hands of our local school boards and saying we’ve got to do 
P3s. 
 
Now really what it does, section 9 removes the requirement for 
the board to get a quote on a loan before passing a resolution to 
borrow money. And we think this may be a way of hiding the 
higher interest rates on P3s, which cost in BC more than 3.5 per 
cent. And that’s huge. That’s huge when you think of the costs 
that . . . when you’re thinking about the scale of these projects. 
That’s a significant amount of a money, and a significant 
amount of money. 
 
Now if we’re going to see the same kind of accountability that 
the minister from SaskPower says he’s talking about, the CCS 
[carbon capture and storage] project, that he’s going to do the 
analysis after a $1.6 billion project is done . . . We’re going to 
only see the analysis after it’s done, not before it’s done. It must 
have been done before. I mean clearly this government, any 
government, any government would have done its work before, 
would have done its homework before. 
 
And so we have some real questions about this, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that we have to really reflect on how this 
government . . . and its commitment to education. 
 
And you know, when I think about this and I think about, you 
know, what I had said earlier, and I think I want to talk a little 
bit more about especially around the history. And we have the 
Minister of Education who doesn’t know when the last time a 
Liberal government was in power in Saskatchewan, doesn’t 
know but yet seems to take quite a lot of pride in throwing 
rocks at glass houses when he himself lives in one. I think this 
is something he should think about, he should really think 
about. When he makes a big deal about pride of accuracy and 
knowing the facts and letting the facts tell the story, and here he 
is, here he is throwing rocks. And really he should be watching 
what he’s talking about because clearly somebody . . . Now I 
know the quality of Sask Party researchers aren’t so great. But 
they’ve gone up a little . . . Well I don’t know where they are. 
They’re kind of . . . That one bad one is, yes, out the door. But 
they were sort of at the D level, floating around the F, D level, 
somewhere in there, up and down. But you know the 
researchers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to make an 
introduction. 
 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to make an 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and to all 
members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce Mr. Ian 
Chisholm. He’s no stranger to this Assembly. He’s joining us 
from British Columbia today. He’s doing some work on behalf 
of Pearson College, and that’s an institution that I know he is a 
trustee with, but he is also connected to this fine Assembly 
through the good work of his father, Michael Chisholm, who 
served very ably on this side of the Assembly most recently. 
And so I’d ask all members to join me in helping to welcome 
Ian to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join with the member opposite and welcome Dennis 
Chisholm’s son, I believe . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Michael Chisholm’s son — sorry — to the Assembly here 
today. And I would like to say that I enjoyed actually working 
with his dad although I’m sure we had different perspectives on 
a whole lot of issues. We quite enjoyed working together on 
Public Accounts and I always valued his work and focus on that 
front. So a pleasure to welcome his son here today. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

(continued) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
great to have people in the gallery as well. And I think it’s 
important that when we have debates like this, when we’re 
talking about something so fundamental and The Education Act 
really is one of . . . You know, when we talk about core pieces 
of legislation, this is I think one of the most fundamental pieces 
of legislation in our whole legislative suite. I mean and I know 
that people would argue whether it’s labour or health, of course, 



6168 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2014 

environment would be right up there as well, and all of the good 
work that government is required to do, education is clearly one 
of them. The Education Act is a real fundamental, foundational 
document that I know the stakeholders, whether they be the 
school boards or whether they be the teachers, you know, 
parents, and now you know, in our new day and age too with 
young people and how it’s so important to consult with them. 
 
And we talked about that just a few days ago in terms of the 
international day of children and the United Nations declaration 
that recognizes how important it is to talk about the consultation 
and recognition of the rights of young people. And really this is 
what we are here all about in terms of making sure our young 
people are educated well and they have the ability to move on 
and the opportunities that, you know, as every generation 
moves forward to new opportunities, and we want to make sure 
that there are no limitations, that in fact we have the best 
education here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it’s not something we take lightly, and so when we go 
out and we consult with the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation], we will ask them, so what should have been in this 
Act? What should have been in this Act? And will we see yet 
another amendment Act? 
 
Because quite often this is what happens with this government. 
They put one Act . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, they 
haven’t fixed the hour issue and we’ll probably see a second 
education Act. We’ll probably see yet another bill and it will be 
called an Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 (No. 2). We 
might even see an Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 
(No. 3). Because the government never seems to finish it, never 
seems or never really finishes the job. What are the key pieces 
that we need to have done? And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
it’s really, really important that we take the time. 
 
And I know this government doesn’t have a really strong 
legislative agenda, does not have a strong legislative agenda 
this session. And really we are concerned about that because 
some of the things that we’re seeing before the House, you 
know, we look at their agricultural agenda, the legislative 
agenda was essentially one bill that was one line long. And here 
we have . . . And the points itself do have merit in terms of 
having a discussion. We do think it’s important to make sure we 
allow a process to have more bursaries or scholarships. I think 
that’s hugely important, and that’s great. 
 
I mean, but the real challenge will be if we just change the name 
to Education Scholarship Fund, and if we just changed the name 
and yet put no more money into it, that would be a real shame, 
wouldn’t it? What would be the point? And so is this a signal 
that we’re going to see more money in the budget for the 
Education Scholarship Fund? Or are we just going to see a 
name change and that’s it? 
 
You know, we were very proud to create the Prince of Wales 
scholarship back in 2001, and that was a good thing. And now 
we need to see more, more supports. We want to make sure, as 
I’ve said, we want to make sure that the barriers for 
post-secondary education are gone. And if the barriers are gone, 
then that’s a great thing so kids can take full potential. 
 
The second point the government made is around the French 

translation, on those two points about home-schooling and 
students with special needs or unique needs and how a better 
translation is very important. 
 
But I think the last two points are very interesting when we talk 
about the Labour Day change. And of course, as I’ve said, there 
was a collective sigh right across the province where the 
government finally owned up to the fact that they had made a 
mistake, that they should’ve consulted. And even in the 
minister’s own words that they had, you know, a historic, a 
consultation process, something they hadn’t seen before. And 
we agree, they have not really engaged in good consultations. 
 
We’ve seen a reluctance to have public meetings. We’ve seen a 
reluctance to actually engage face-to-face meetings. Especially 
that minister is one who really doesn’t seem to get out and meet 
with people. He’d rather have people do things through the 
website. And we do have really major concerns about section 9 
that removes the requirement for the board to get a quote on a 
loan before passing a resolution to borrow money. We have a 
lot of concerns about what that means in terms of transparency. 
 
We’ve put forward a bill about transparency for P3s, and yet the 
government refused to pass it last time. And we’ve got it . . . 
They don’t want to be accountable or transparent. They’re 
going to do it their style, their style. And I don’t know if that’s 
the style of the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, the smart 
meter style. You’ll never find out anything unless you really 
pull and pull and pull, pull. And we don’t want to see, we don’t 
want to see that happen. We don’t want to see that happen. And 
I just thought it was so passing strange that that minister could 
get up today and lecture us on strange financial behaviour, 
strange financial behaviour, somebody who’s managing the 
smart meter fiasco. There’s no lessons from that guy, no lessons 
from that guy about how to explain things, no lesson at all from 
that guy. 
 
You know, so you have that minister and you have this minister 
over there, the Minister of Education who really wants to 
rewrite history, rewrite history, writing out the Liberals. And 
there’s some Liberals over on that side; I don’t know how they 
feel about it, how they feel about it. They’re fleeing because 
they see the Sask Party rewriting history, writing out the 
Liberals out of Saskatchewan history. Because it was in 1969 
they did away with The Minimum Wage Act to create a much 
better piece of legislation called The Labour Standards Act. 
 
So that Minister of Education really needs to take a few lessons 
himself. Or maybe his researchers need to take a few lessons 
because I think that this is a real problem. And this government 
who likes to talk about glass houses, they themselves live in a 
glass house. And they should watch when they start chucking 
rocks because you know what happens? What goes around 
comes around, and it’s coming back to them. 
 
And that minister loves to have a few laughs. But you know, 
it’s odd when it comes back and gets him right in the House. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a problem. I think that’s a problem. 
So we have some concerns about this. We want to know. We 
will be talking to the stakeholders and we’ll be talking about a 
whole host of issues in education. How’s it going? How’s it 
going with the educational assistants? Are the kids with needs 
getting their support with the special needs? Are they? This 



December 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6169 

government says, yes they are. They say, yes they are, and 
there’s not any more work to be done. 
 
Well we’ll have to hear from the people in the front lines, in the 
classrooms, about that case. And we have some real questions 
about that. We have some questions about First Nations and 
Métis education. How is that going? Should there be stuff in 
this bill about that? What’s not in here? What’s not in here? We 
have a lot of questions about that. 
 
And again, when I talk about the P3s, this is really a question 
that we have. Because clearly, you know, when we see the 
mayor of Regina raising questions, when we see the auditor 
from BC raising questions. We see what they’ve done in 
Alberta when they’ve walked away and say, this isn’t working. 
This isn’t working. This is a real problem. Again, it’s really 
about ideological blinders. These folks are looking straight 
ahead. They’re looking straight ahead until there’s no more 
road. 
 
And this is what happened with the Labour Day fiasco. Clearly 
they were caught. They were caught in a jam, and the minister 
had to admit that it was, they had to admit, they had to admit it 
was wrong. It was wrong. And while it was an interesting idea, 
too many people couldn’t believe what they heard. And we 
remembered during that campaign when people go, what? 
Where did that come from? Where did that come from? 
 
Well you know, it’s like so many things that they’ve brought 
forward, like the 950 hours, you know. Where did that come 
from that it had such power that this government would go right 
to it? What about the standardized testing? Who was calling for 
standardized testing? Who was calling for, who was calling for 
the cuts to educational assistants? Who was calling for crowded 
classrooms? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have questions about this. And we think 
that we don’t want to be back discussing or debating another 
amendment to The Education Act. And it would be very 
interesting, and it might be just something that we’ll have to do 
a little work on, to find out how many times have we amended 
past legislation when this government did not clearly think 
through the consequences? And we raise this. We really do. 
And I know the folks over there go, oh that’s just a . . . you 
always say that. Well we do because there always seems to be a 
point where we come back, where we come back and find out 
that there’s been a problem. 
 
They haven’t really thought it all the way through, or if they’ve 
said that they’ve consulted with folks, they really haven’t 
consulted with the folks. When we call them up and they say, so 
we hear this is what you’re saying. Is that right? And they go, 
well no, it’s not really what we’re saying. And we hear, you 
know, in fact actually it was . . . It would have been interesting 
here that this, you know . . . Actually as I look through the 
minister’s speech, there is no acknowledgement of having 
consultations with any of the stakeholders on any of this. And I 
think this would have been very, very important, you know. 
 
I think it would have been very important, for example, and this 
is one I think is really important, is when we talk about the 
scholarships. Were you talking to groups who really, who really 
have faced barriers to post-secondary education? Who are those 

folks? Who are those folks that are facing real barriers? 
 
Well one group I know, and I think the University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union president, Max FineDay, raised 
a really interesting point about kids who have grown up in 
foster care, and what about the barriers they have? And is there 
something that we can make sure that they have access to 
post-secondary education because we see, as I’ve said, a direct 
correlation, the kids who do well in school then go on to 
post-secondary, and just achieve very well in later life. They 
have to have that option, Mr. Speaker, they clearly have to have 
that option. 
 
And so I know that there will be many of my colleagues who 
will have a lot to say about this, and particularly around the P3 
borrowing change here that we see, and how it’s been disguised 
as giving local school boards options when really, really they 
don’t have options, and as well the amendments around the 
Labour Day. As I said, this was a really, a very good 
opportunity for the government to come clean and admit to 
some of the other areas, but they’re only doing this one. So 
we’ll probably be, we’ll probably really . . . So, Mr. Speaker, 
with that I would like adjournment of the debate on Bill No. 
163. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to 
facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. [Inaudible] . . . we will be sitting at 7 
o’clock. The House stands adjourned till 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6137 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6138 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6138 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6138 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6138 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6167 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6167 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6138 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Member Elected to Canadian Football Hall of Fame 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6139 
 World AIDS Day 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 
 SaskBooks Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 
 2014 Movember Challenge 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6141 
 Community Safety Officer Program 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6141 
 Government Programs Support Education 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6141 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Monitoring of Long-Term Care Patients 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6141 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6142 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6143 
 Staff Levels in Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6143 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6143 
 Contracting Process for Lean Consultants 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6144 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6144 
 Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6145 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6145 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Mental Health and Addictions Action Plan Report 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6146 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6147 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6147 
MOTIONS 
 Committee Membership 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6147 
 
 
 
 



 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6148 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6148 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6151 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6151 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6153 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6153 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6158 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6158 
 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6159 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6161 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6163 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


