




















































Hansard: November 06, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5771 

 November 6, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve two sets of introductions to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly. First of all 

joining us today, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is Faye Katzman. 

Faye is a member of the Canadian Hemophilia Society. She’s 

seated in your gallery. She serves on the federal HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] advisory council, sits on the national 

HIV hepatitis C committee for the Canadian Hemophilia 

Society, and is a past president of the Hemophilia Society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Hemophilia Society is a national 

health charity with an important mission to improve the health 

and quality of life of people with inherited bleeding disorders 

and to find a cure. Mr. Speaker, today Ms. Katzman is here to 

commemorate the Krever inquiry which was released 17 years 

ago this month and to remember the many lives that were 

affected by this tainted blood tragedy. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

that all members join with me in welcoming her to the 

Saskatchewan legislature and for her commitment to helping 

those in need in raising awareness of the Krever inquiry. So I’d 

ask all members to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’m also very pleased to 

introduce, seated in your gallery, members of the Regina 

Movember committee. We have a number of Mo Bros and a 

Mo Sista up in your gallery. And when I introduce them, I just 

ask them to give us a wave. Mr. Speaker, with us today are the 

Mo Chair for Movember Regina, is Adam Kletchko, Mr. 

Speaker; Melissa Fiacco, Nikkoli Hubic, Carey Smith, Brad 

Massier, Mark Hillmer, and Craig Zamonsky, who couldn’t join 

us in the gallery but was here earlier as this morning members 

joined the Regina Movember committee in raising the official 

Movember flag at our Legislative Building. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should all take a little bit of pride in the 

fact that Saskatchewan’s legislature is the first Legislative 

Building in our country to raise the Movember flag to recognize 

the attempts, feeble and otherwise, of some of us that are 

attempting to grow moustaches this month and to change the 

face of men’s health in this country and in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

members of the Regina Movember committee to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to join with the Minister of Health, the member opposite, to 

welcome the Movember committee here, the Regina committee 

for Movember. And certainly I was proud to join in the flag 

raising here this morning as well. 

 

And you know, this committee has been working hard for some 

time to really make sure that the efforts here in Regina are 

significant and that we do our part to change the face of men’s 

health, both prostate and testicular cancer — raising awareness, 

raising funds — and importantly, men’s mental health which is 

a very important part. 

 

I’d like to welcome a few of the members, the Mo Bros and the 

Mo Sista that are here with us here today: Mo Bro Adam 

Kletchko who’s a Chair; Mo Bro Carey Smith, I see him there. 

It looks like he’s going to start growing at some point. It doesn’t 

appear there’s any evidence of that yet, Mr. Speaker. And Mo 

Sista Melissa Fiacco for all of her leadership and as well of 

course the other committee members that are here. Of course 

this is a time for us to both grow, in my case not a very 

attractive moustache, but hopefully grow awareness and raise 

dollars. 

 

And from this side of the Assembly, the official opposition, I’m 

joined by the member from Saskatoon Centre, the member from 

Athabasca, and then some staff in our caucus office that are also 

growing, by the names of Doyle Fox, Eric Anderson, and Mitch 

Bonokoski. So we’re proud to do our part and thank you to 

those members of the Regina Movember community for all 

their work. Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the Minister of Health in welcoming Faye Katzman 

with the Canadian Hemophilia Society here to her legislature 

today. All the work that the society does for improving the lives 

of those with inherited bleeding disorders is very important 

work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well I’d also like to join with the minister and my colleague 

in welcoming the Mo Bros and Sista here today. I was very 

pleased a couple of years ago when Movember added the 

discussion around mental health to the piece. I think that that’s 

huge. So with that, I’d ask my colleagues to join with me in 

welcoming these folks to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to the unsafe conditions on Dewdney Avenue created by 

that government’s failure to plan appropriate and safe traffic 

flow. And they call on that government to urgently act to ensure 

the safety of residents and users of Dewdney Avenue, Mr. 

Speaker. And the petition reads as follows, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 



5772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through the consultation with 

the city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition for minimum quality-of-care standards and 

appropriate staffing ratios in care facilities. The people who 

have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, point out that residents 

in care have the right to dignity, respect, and safety; that they 

deserve basic guarantees of a quality of care that they ought to 

receive; that they have a right to individualized care that meets 

or exceeds minimum quality-of-care standards; that this 

government deleted minimum quality-of-care standards from 

the legislation; and that it is in fact the responsibility of the 

provincial government to ensure consistent standards of care in 

facilities throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

require the government to reinstate minimum 

quality-of-care standards and establish appropriate staffing 

ratios in care facilities in order to guarantee a high quality 

of care for seniors and other residents in care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from folks in Moose Jaw. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition opposed to lucrative lean contracts. The 

petitioners point out that the government is failing to properly 

listen to front-line health care workers, patients, and their 

families. They point out that the government is spending many 

millions of dollars on an out-of-country lean consultant, 

including a $40 million contract with an American consultant 

and flying in Japanese senseis for $3,500 per day. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners 

humbly pray: 

 

That your honourable Legislative Assembly may be 

pleased to cause the government to cancel its lucrative 

contracts with out-of-country lean consultants and instead 

focus its resources on actually listening to front-line health 

care workers and fixing the basics in health care and 

seniors’ care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the fair city 

of Moose Jaw. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 

program. The folks who have signed this petition want to bring 

to the attention of this Assembly the following. The government 

knew about major safety concerns related to its smart meter 

project. The government ignored those safety concerns and 

plowed ahead with its program, and we know the safety of 

Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk. And the 

petition reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to take responsibility for its failure to act on 

readily available information about safety concerns with 

its smart meter program, including through the immediate 

resignation of the Minister Responsible for SaskPower and 

a fully independent inquiry into the concerning chain of 

events that severely compromised the safety of 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Moose 

Jaw and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to remember the sacrifices made by the men and women 

who served and protected our country, our rights, and our 

freedoms. November 11th is Remembrance Day, and a time 

when we should all think about those who fought and died to 

allow us the freedom to stand here in our Legislative Assembly.  

 

This year, Remembrance Day holds a special significance for 

all Canadians. With the recent attacks against our Canadian 

Armed Forces and the Parliament in Ottawa, we must give 

special thanks to those who protect us. Mr. Speaker, this 

Remembrance Day also marks 100 years since the beginning of 

the First World War and is the 75th anniversary of the start of 

the Second World War. 

 

Yesterday we held the annual Service of Remembrance for 

Saskatchewan’s civil servants. Wreaths were laid inside the 

rotunda of the Legislative Building and at the Saskatchewan 

War Memorial in commemoration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s important that we all take time on 

November 11th to remember the sacrifices of our Canadian 

soldiers and their families. We must never take for granted the 

freedoms and liberties that their lives have given us. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking our Canadian Forces 

and their families for the sacrifices they make and they made in 

their preservation of the freedoms we sometimes take so much 

for granted. Thank you. 

 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5773 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Defending and Protecting Freedom 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With this 

being the last sitting day before Remembrance Day, I would 

like to take a moment to recognize the sacrifices of our veterans 

and the sacrifices made by past and present members of our 

Canadian Forces for the freedoms we enjoy today in our great 

country. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have always answered the call to 

service whenever it’s gone out. People from all over 

Saskatchewan have bravely served in every branch of our 

Armed Forces, and that service touches so many families. My 

grandfather for one served in the Second World War with the 

Regina Rifles and was wounded on February 18th, 1945 in the 

battle of Moyland Wood. 

 

Without question or hesitation, our men and women in uniform 

do their duty to combat tyranny and oppression. Many of them 

have paid the ultimate sacrifice to protect and defend the 

freedom and democracy we enjoy and that we must protect. 

 

Remembrance Day is a time for all of us to reflect upon this 

sacrifice and to say thanks. And as we remember and as we say 

thanks, may our resolve for peace be strong. I hope that all 

members, and those watching as well, will be reminded that 

there isn’t any one day or any one season in which we need to 

remember, but this is something we should be mindful of every 

day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Remembering Winston Knoll 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was with great 

sadness yesterday that we learned about the passing of Winston 

Bernard Knoll on November the 2nd. Winston Knoll was a 

pillar in the education system as well as a prominent Regina 

resident and family man. 

 

Winston Knoll was born on the family farm outside of Yorkton. 

After attending University of Saskatchewan to achieve his 

Bachelor of Commerce, Winston married his childhood 

sweetheart, Lorene Grunert. They settled down in Regina where 

they remained until 1995, working over three decades with the 

Regina Board of Education. Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of 

growing up with the Knoll and Grunert families. In fact the first 

school I ever attended was named Grunert School. 

 

Mr. Knoll fostered a culture of excellence and integrity in 

everything he did, eventually becoming the superintendent of 

business affairs. Mr. Knoll was a respected adviser, a mentor 

well regarded in the educational and business sector. It was his 

reputation that Mr. Knoll was remembered for. 

 

After his retirement in 1995, the Regina school board named a 

high school Winston Knoll Collegiate in the constituency of 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Winston Knoll was both delighted 

and honoured at this amazing tribute for his years of services. 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud that such an established, nurturing 

school still remains in memory of this amazing man who 

contributed so much to the city of Regina. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the tireless 

contribution of Winston Knoll to the city of Regina and to 

education. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Veteran Honoured With Knight Medal 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today and to 

pay tribute to Roy Armstrong. Roy Armstrong’s a 95-year-old 

veteran. He was a member of the Regina Rifles. He was on 

Juno Beach on D-Day, and he was one of the Canadian soldiers 

responsible for liberating the threat in the Netherlands. And, 

Mr. Speaker, France has just honoured Roy Armstrong with a 

Knight medal in the National Order of the Legion of Honour, 

France’s highest decoration. It’s a well-deserved honour for a 

man who served his country and lost many friends at war. 

 

After the war, Roy worked on the railroads. He served as 

brakeman on the Queen’s train and was the conductor on the 

Diefenbaker funeral train. He certainly had an interesting life. 

But Roy’s story also reminds us of the need to better look after 

our veterans and all seniors. Despite having major health 

challenges, Roy was deemed too fit for seniors’ care, and his 

family had to fight to change that. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m extra 

pleased that Roy Armstrong has been awarded France’s highest 

honour because the last few months have been tough. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating and thanking 

Roy. But I ask all members to join me in committing ourselves 

to looking after and honouring our veterans and all our seniors. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Growing a Mo in Movember 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, members are aware Movember is 

upon us once again. It’s the time of the year when the ability to 

grow facial hair provides an opportunity to raise awareness 

about men’s health, raise funds for research, and support related 

to men’s cancer. 

 

I’m happy to announce that the Minister of Health, the Minister 

of Rural and Remote Health, the Minister of Finance, member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, member from The Battlefords, and 

myself will all be fundraising by growing our mo for men’s 

health. This year our thoughts will be with the Minister of 

Agriculture as he fights through his own battle with prostate 

cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s too often men are reluctant to take prompt 

action on our health. This year an estimated 670 Saskatchewan 

men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer. It is very important 

to schedule regular checkups with your doctor as early detection 

is vital. As such Saskatchewan has developed a prostate 

assessment pathway to make it easier to get timely information, 



5774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

diagnosis, and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask members to use Movember as an opportunity 

to engage in discussions about men’s health and to encourage 

the men in their lives to take steps towards better health. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Public-Private Partnership Project Receives Award 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For years 

the people of Saskatchewan have recognized the importance of 

introducing innovation into our public sector as a means to both 

improving services and making better use of taxpayers’ dollars. 

Therefore I’m very pleased to rise today to inform the House 

that the city of Regina was, at a ceremony earlier this week, 

given the prestigious C.W. Chuck Wills Award for municipal 

infrastructure for their success in using a P3 [public-private 

partnership] model to deliver the new waste water treatment 

plant. 

 

The recipient of this national award is a testament to the 

potential that P3 projects hold not only for the provincial and 

federal governments but also for municipalities looking to 

leverage the forces of competition and innovation for the 

benefit of all taxpayers. As the citizens of Regina know, opting 

for a P3 approach has resulted in the savings of $138 million, 

which can now be used to address other pressing infrastructure 

issues. 

 

The advantage of P3s have been afforded to cities across the 

country, to residents of Edmonton, Moncton, Ottawa, 

Saskatoon, Sudbury, Winnipeg, and many more cities. Canada 

now boasts 49 municipal P3 projects, making the city of 

Regina’s accomplishment all the more meaningful. 

 

The Minister for SaskBuilds participated in the conference at 

which this award was bestowed and had the opportunity to 

congratulate Mayor Fougere. On behalf of our government, I 

would like to commend the city of Regina on this well-deserved 

honour and invite all members of this Assembly in joining me 

doing the same. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Community-Based Organization 

Workers Appreciation Day 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

province has proclaimed November 6th as CBO 

[community-based organization] Workers Appreciation Day in 

Saskatchewan. This proclamation is in recognition of the 

tremendous work being done by the thousands of staff in the 

many community-based organizations, or CBOs, across our 

great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CBOs are an integral part of the Saskatchewan 

human service support system, and these workers deserve our 

utmost respect and recognition. They provide hope, dignity, and 

compassion to some of the most vulnerable citizens in our 

province. Mr. Speaker, the work they do supports our 

province’s children, people living with disabilities, the 

homeless, those struggling with addictions, families in crisis, 

and women experiencing abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, emergency shelters, group homes, daycares, crisis 

units, and many much needed other programs and services 

across Saskatchewan are staffed by 2,400 CBO workers. The 

Ministry of Social Services supports these CBOs annually with 

an investment of over $235 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government hopes that the proclamation of 

this special day will help raise awareness about the important 

role of CBOs and their staff in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

applauding the proclamation of November 6th as CBO Workers 

Appreciation Day in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Quality Council and the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier: 

why did this government allow its $40 million American lean 

consultant to meddle with the Health Quality Council’s 

mandate and operational structures? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government determined that we wanted to put a 

major focus on quality improvement. That was work that had 

been being done by the Health Quality Council for some time, 

since its creation. They’ve been focused on quality 

improvement, on metrics within the health care system. 

 

Based on the work that we wanted to do in changing how we 

deliver health care, how we manage the health care system in 

this province, the determination was made that the Health 

Quality Council would be a good place for where lean 

deployment would be located so that we could deliver it in a 

system-wide fashion throughout the health care system. This 

was a decision that the government made. Certainly we take 

advice from outside experts, but certainly this was a 

government decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council is 

supposed to provide objective information, not simply be a 

cheerleader for this government’s lean pet project. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, it spends most of its time cheerleading. This 

government has made it into the provincial kaizen promotion 

office. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker? Because John Black wanted it that way. 

Here’s an internal email that talks about John Black deciding 

which functions would move to the Health Quality Council. It 

says: 

 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5775 

Communication. This one John has clearly put with HQC, 

as he expressed his dissatisfaction with follow-up from our 

communications branch internally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: why didn’t he stand 

up to John Black? Why did he let John Black dictate that the 

Health Quality Council would simply become the cheerleader 

for this government’s lean pet project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the past, health regions in this province and the Cancer 

Agency would have had departments called quality 

departments, quality improvement offices, quality and safety, 

quality and efficient management. Quality has been a focus of 

the system for some time, but we certainly have put a more 

increased focus on quality improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the recommendations that would have 

come, in terms of how to deploy lean across the entire health 

care system — knowing that it is a system with over 250 

individual facilities, over 43,000 employees in the system, 12 

health regions, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and other 

organizations — we took certainly advice, but ultimately the 

decision was the government’s decision on how to deploy lean 

throughout the system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the record is clear what we’ve 

seen with John Black. He threw a tantrum. He didn’t like the 

communications that was coming out of the ministry, and he 

said the Health Quality Council is going to become the 

mouthpiece, is going to take over the communications, will be 

the cheerleader for this government’s lean pet project. John 

Black decided that the Health Quality Council needed to be the 

provincial kaizen promotion office. He decided that it would be 

responsible, Mr. Speaker, for the communications. 

 

My question to the Premier: how can the Health Quality 

Council possibly fulfill its mandate to provide objective, 

independent information, Mr. Speaker, when it is forced to be 

the cheerleader for this government’s lean pet project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly other health organizations in this province — 

the regional health authorities, the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency — have found out what members on this side of the 

House have known for some time, that what members opposite, 

and the Leader of the Opposition in particular, what he says in 

this House isn’t always factually correct, isn’t always the entire 

story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was the decision that was made by this 

government in April of 2012 that we would have a 

province-wide focus when it came to quality improvement. We 

felt that we needed to have a central location for that to take 

place. Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council is an 

organization that is focused on quality improvement. That is the 

work of lean, Mr. Speaker, and that is why it was decided that 

that’s where the provincial office would be located. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister and this 

government, this Premier, doesn’t have to just take my word 

that cheerleading has become the obsession and the project that 

the Health Quality Council now is all about. The board Chair of 

the Health Quality Council says this: “Our work this past year 

was primarily focused on understanding and executing the 

functions of the provincial kaizen promotion office.” 

 

And an internal copy, Mr. Speaker, of the transition plans 

shows, it clearly shows that this government knew that that 

project was cutting into the work that the Health Quality 

Council is mandated to do and should actually be doing, Mr. 

Speaker, cutting into important work like listening to patients, 

like tracking patients’ opinions of their experience, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I guess we know very clearly that this 

government is not very interested in hearing how poor patients’ 

experiences are in our health care system. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: how can he think 

that it is acceptable? How is it acceptable that the Health 

Quality Council is all consumed with promoting the lean pet 

project while it’s scaling back the important work that it’s 

legislatively mandated to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that work will continue. The Health Quality Council 

will continue to do that work. They will also be the provincial 

quality improvement office through kaizen promotion office, 

Mr. Speaker. That work can . . . will take place. It’ll go forward. 

 

I’m glad that the Leader of the Opposition raised the Chair of 

the Health Quality Council. I hope he wasn’t implying that the 

Chair of the Health Quality Council is dissatisfied with the fact 

that the Health Quality Council will be further engaged with 

lean as it’s deployed because that’s certainly not the indication 

that Dr. Susan Shaw has given to me when I’ve spoken to her. 

In fact I know that Dr. Shaw, a very respected physician in 

Saskatoon, has made the offer to the Leader of the Opposition 

to join with her to see lean in action. She’s made that offer on a 

number of occasions. He has said no. I would offer to him, 

would he take that offer up again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister is 

reading the Hansard that the Premier used yesterday. I was 

invited by nurses to go to lean things, Mr. Speaker, and guess 

what? The health region and this government didn’t allow it to 

happen. That is how open, that is how transparent that this 

government is when it comes to their lean pet project. 

 

The board Chair, Mr. Speaker, is saying that their primary 

focus, their primary focus has been with the kaizen promotion 

activities. And, Mr. Speaker, that is taking away from the work 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 



5776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

The Speaker: — Order on both sides, please. I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — That is taking away from the work, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Health Quality Council needs to do and should 

be doing: providing objective information. 

 

It wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, that John Black insisted that the 

communications and all of the lean promotion, all of the 

go-team activities be moved from the ministry into HQC 

[Health Quality Council]. That wasn’t enough for John Black. 

Then he had to meddle in the activities of the HQC. 

 

Internal emails that we’ve obtained, Mr. Speaker, show that 

John Black expressed frustration when he learned that HQC 

staff members were working on things other than lean 

promotion. How dare they? How dare they fulfill their 

legislative mandate, Mr. Speaker? 

 

My question to the Premier: will he at least recognize, will he at 

least admit that forcing the Health Quality Council to be lean 

cheerleaders is putting a major strain on what they are supposed 

to be doing? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Leader 

of the Opposition in saying that he was denied access to speak 

to front-line staff or to visit facilities, frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t believe it. Mr. Speaker, I know that the Chair of the 

Health Quality Council has offered on several occasions to . . . 

has invited the Leader of the Opposition. He has said no each 

and every time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council does good work. Mr. 

Speaker, they do good work on quality improvement. They do 

good work on bringing forward the metrics, doing that 

evaluation, and they do good work on lean deployment, Mr. 

Speaker. And they will continue to do that work in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that is simply not correct. Mr. 

Speaker, what we see from this government is a control and a 

fascination all around the optics, and this government, Mr. 

Speaker, love to have their dog-and-pony shows. They love to 

orchestrate the photo ops. They love to go in, polish the floors, 

and have all the yes-people sitting around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if this government was actually interested in tours, actually 

interested in finding out what’s going on in our health care 

system, they would pay some surprise visits to health care 

facilities and speak with the people on the front line: the health 

care workers, Mr. Speaker, that are run off their feet; the health 

care workers, Mr. Speaker, who don’t have enough time to 

clean the emergency rooms, so they’re filthy; the maintenance 

workers, Mr. Speaker, who don’t have the resources to make 

the repairs that they need to do. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is: will he visit with 

the front-line workers and actually find out what’s going on on 

the front lines of health care in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this is what I like to do. This is what I like to do. I like to be 

able to report to the House and to the people of this province 

that the time spent in Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon 

for an X-ray has gone from one hour down to 22 minutes. 

That’s what I like to talk about, Mr. Speaker. I like to talk about 

the fact and I love to be able to report to the people in this 

province that the cancelled MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] 

have gone from 12 a week in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

to one a week, allowing us to do 650 more scans a year without 

adding a single dollar as a resource. 

 

Those are the things I like to report on, Mr. Speaker — 

reducing wait times, increasing care, improving access — 

unlike the members opposite when they were in government 

and they made all sorts of promises, like they were going to 

reduce wait times for surgeries. In the 1999 election, they were 

going to reduce wait times for surgeries by 30 per cent. What 

happened between 1999 and 2003? Wait times increased 61 per 

cent. That’s the record of the NDP [New Democratic Party], 

and I’ll take no lessons from them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Smart Meter Program 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — At every step of the way of that 

government’s smart meter debacle, the media and the 

opposition have had to drag information out of that SaskPower 

minister and of that government, continually showing that he 

hadn’t been forthcoming. And his story just kept changing. But 

now he hides every day after question period and won’t even 

speak to the media on this file, hides behind his officials. That’s 

absolutely unacceptable. 

 

What’s also unacceptable is hiding relevant information. When 

the media and the opposition tried to get information about the 

smart meter debacle, the government threw up a $60,000 

roadblock to reporters and a $20,000 roadblock to the 

opposition. To the Premier: why won’t this government release 

all the information on the smart meter debacle? Why is it 

throwing up roadblocks? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the smart 

meter issue in this province hasn’t gone the way this 

government wanted to see it go. Absolutely not. But this 

government, Mr. Speaker, has taken action. It stopped the 

program, Mr. Speaker, when we knew that there were problems. 

 

We not only stopped the problem, but we had CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], which I’m the 

minister responsible of, do an independent review, Mr. Speaker. 

All the information is in this report, whether it’s 

PricewaterhouseCoopers, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Robertson 

Stromberg law firm, or Ritenburg & Associates, Mr. Speaker. 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5777 

All the information was made available to those professional 

firms. They produced the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, day after day the opposition will come in here 

with half-truths, Mr. Speaker. They come in here with half the 

information. We saw that again yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when 

the member opposite started to say that people no longer use 

Sensus, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely wrong. Every time they stand 

on their feet, Mr. Speaker, we have to listen to the question and 

then find out the true facts because they’re not in that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to even consider what the 

Minister of SaskPower in this smart meter debacle has been 

saying, to consider it as a half-truth would be generous, Mr. 

Speaker. That minister knew full well and was briefed of safety 

concerns, and that government continued to strap dangerous, 

fire-prone smart meters on the homes of Saskatchewan people. 

Absolutely unacceptable. 

 

And the opposition requested complaints about smart meters 

and records of dangerous smart meter incidents. That’s a pretty 

simple and straightforward request. And I think Saskatchewan 

people deserve to know the full facts and all the concerns on 

this smart meter debacle, but this government won’t release that 

information. So it demanded $20,000 before it would turn over 

that information. That’s utterly ridiculous. Again to the 

Premier: why won’t this government release all the information 

on the smart meter debacle? What is he hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

statement, as well as the Minister for SaskPower and the 

Premier have been very clear on this issue, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t 

the way the government wanted to see this project rolled out. It 

is one of the biggest projects SaskPower has ever embarked on, 

touching every house in the province, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, things haven’t gone the way we planned. 

 

That’s why we had an independent review by three well-known 

firms in this province, Mr. Speaker — PricewaterhouseCoopers, 

Robertson Stromberg, and Ritenburg & Associates — that have 

looked at all the details, Mr. Speaker, that are available through 

SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, they realized where the problems 

have laid. The meter itself of course allowed moisture in. We 

had one of the rainiest springs we’ve ever had, hence the 

problems that we saw. 

 

When we saw those problems, Mr. Speaker, the government 

acted immediately. Stopped the program, started removing the 

smart meters, Mr. Speaker, regained money, all the money that 

was put out, Mr. Speaker. The CEO [chief executive officer] 

president, Mr. Speaker, resigned. This government has been 

very accountable and very transparent on this issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have a new minister 

speaking to this issue today. We have a Minister of SaskPower 

who should no longer be the minister, who was briefed two 

years ago, before they strapped those dangerous, fire-prone 

meters to homes of Saskatchewan people, that told him that 

there was direct major safety risks, and they ignored it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But here’s what government also said. There are about 2,505 

pages of complaints about smart meter problems and records of 

dangerous smart meter incidents, 2,505 pages of complaints. 

Saskatchewan people have a right to that information. They 

have a right to know the whole truth, the full picture about this 

government’s decision to strap dangerous, fire-prone meters to 

the homes of Saskatchewan families. To the Premier: will he 

release all those pages of complaints here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of this 

province deserve is an opposition that comes in with facts, Mr. 

Speaker, not half-truths, Mr. Speaker, facts. Because yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker . . . The member opposite a couple days ago said, 

you know, it’s not for a politician to get into the technical part 

of these smart meters, except yesterday he was saying that we 

should have used the meter that Saskatoon made. Obviously 

he’s a politician that thinks he knows more than the experts at 

SaskPower. The experts at SaskPower have come out and said 

that absolutely would not have worked across the province. I 

wish the opposition would do a little bit more research before 

they came in here so we don’t have to correct 90 per cent of 

what they have to say. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

minister that no longer speaks to the media. We have a Premier 

that’s defending a minister and a government that sold out the 

safety of Saskatchewan people, and now we see an attack from 

a new minister here, Mr. Speaker. It just gets uglier. We have a 

government that’s gifted $23 million of Saskatchewan people’s 

hard-earned money to a company that can’t deliver and that has 

put the lives of Saskatchewan people at risk. 

 

How is any of that unacceptable? Surely if this government 

believes in any level of transparency, there should be no issue 

to release the thousands of pages of complaints and incidents to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Surely they can take out a little bit 

of the personal information. The only cost should be a little bit 

of photocopying. This $20,000 roadblock that was put up by 

this government to evade accountability and hide from 

transparency is simply unacceptable. 

 

To the Premier: if he simply won’t release these records here 

today, it simply highlights an important fact that all these 

records need to be put into the hands of the independent 

Provincial Auditor for a full investigation. 

 

The Speaker: — I know that both sides of the House . . . that 

it’s Thursday and everybody’s anxious and excited to get home, 

but let’s keep the tone down a little bit if we can, please. I 

recognize the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that the auditor, if they so choose, can look 



5778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

into this, Mr. Speaker. That is the purview of the auditor. 

 

We feel that as government we certainly have gone one step 

further. Through CIC, we’ve conducted a full investigation. I 

know the opposition was worried that it was too internal and it 

would be too slanted one way because it would be government 

reviewing government. I don’t think they would say that about 

this report, Mr. Speaker. This report was done by three very 

professional organizations that are not going to lean a report to 

favour government. And I think if you look at some of the 

report and some of the findings in this report, that is absolutely 

true. They are very straightforward. They had their information 

they wanted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report is certainly not flattering to SaskPower, 

and it certainly isn’t flattering to the government. We take this 

report very seriously, Mr. Speaker. We take these 

recommendations very seriously. That’s why we’re going to be 

following through. 

 

If the auditor wants to look into this, they certainly are able to. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I wish we had an independent review of some 

of the facts that they used because they’re absolutely not true. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Environmental Code 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s shiny new 

Environmental Code doesn’t even mention greenhouse gas 

emissions or climate change. There was a chapter on 

greenhouse gases in an earlier draft of the code, but this 

government left it out of the final version, and the Environment 

minister refused to give any timeline on when this government 

will get around to finalizing that very important chapter. Even 

when he was asked if it could take 25 years, he wouldn’t rule 

that out. Perhaps he’ll have a more acceptable answer for the 

people of Saskatchewan today. 

 

To the minister: when will this government finally get around to 

finalizing the greenhouse gas emissions chapter of its 

Environmental Code? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to the 

member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 

Environmental Code that was released earlier this week 

provides better environmental regulation and better 

environmental protection for the people in the environment of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is a framework that can be 

added to in the future, and the work of the code development 

committee does continue to go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the feedback from our stakeholders and the public 

will inform any new chapters that go into the Environmental 

Code. And, Mr. Speaker, the reduction of greenhouse gases is 

an important aspect of the environmental protection, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s not the only aspect. Keeping our environment 

healthy also means keeping our forests healthy, Mr. Speaker, 

responsible management of land, and ensuring our water and air 

quality remain pristine. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to balancing 

environmental protection and economic growth in the province 

of Saskatchewan. That’s why we introduced the Environmental 

Code earlier this week. That’s why we’ve done innovative, 

world-renowned projects like the carbon capture and storage in 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that as a 

resource-producing and trade-dependent province, it’s 

incredibly reckless for us not to be smart and diligent on 

environmental protection, environmental assessment, and doing 

our part to address climate change. Saskatchewan people get 

that, but this government just doesn’t seem to get that. It has cut 

climate change funding by 82 per cent since 2009, and it left the 

entire chapter on climate change and greenhouse gases 

emissions out of its shiny new Environmental Code. 

 

To the minister: does he actually believe that climate change is 

a problem, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

our government is committed to balancing the environmental 

protection of the province of Saskatchewan with the growth that 

we’ve been experiencing. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this 

province has experienced unprecedented growth in the last 

number of years. Saskatchewan is a leader in job creation. 

We’re a leader in exports, and we supply Canada and the world 

with natural resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, greenhouse gas emissions 

have stabilized. It’s this government that takes action in our 

environment, Mr. Speaker, with responsible regulations that 

were introduced earlier this week such as the Saskatchewan 

Environmental Code and as well as with innovative investments 

in carbon capture project, Mr. Speaker, at Estevan. That’s 

reducing the emissions of Boundary dam 3 by 90 per cent, 

which is equivalent to taking 250,000 vehicles off the road. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this minister certainly 

knows how to read from the notes his staff prepared. But we 

want to know what’s going on with climate change. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a pattern going on with this government. They 

promised back in 2009, four Environment ministers ago, that 

would have put a price on carbon for large emitters and the 

money would go into a Saskatchewan Technology Fund to 

finance investments. 

 

Five years later, the Technology Fund still isn’t up and running. 

And it’s not for a lack of planning, no. We’ve got the internal 

business plan for the Technology Fund. It was prepared by 

Meyers Norris Penny back in 2010. The fund is ready to roll. 

It’s got 100 pages of very specific details on how this fund is 

going to operate. But four years later, Mr. Speaker, four years 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5779 

later, still no follow-through. 

 

To the minister: when will we see your famous Technology 

Fund in action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member opposite for the question. As I said, this government is 

committed to balancing environmental protection in the 

province of Saskatchewan with our unprecedented growth that 

we have, Mr. Speaker. We have an innovative, world-renowned 

investment in the carbon capture and storage project, Mr. 

Speaker, in Estevan, that is reducing emissions from Boundary 

dam 3 by 90 per cent. As I said, that’s equivalent to taking 

250,000 vehicles off the road, Mr. Speaker. We’ve stabilized 

emissions in the province of Saskatchewan, as acknowledged in 

committee last spring, Mr. Speaker, as I had a look at Hansard, 

and it goes like this, and I quote: 

 

And I certainly do want to put on the record that we are 

thankful for the stabilization in the emission rate. Certainly 

that’s a huge step forward, and I don’t want to minimize 

the efforts that have been made on that front. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the member from Nutana. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please state his point of 

order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in one of the exchanges just 

taking place here in question period, the Minister for CIC used 

the expression, absolutely not true. That’s unparliamentary 

language and certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a member that has 

apologized to the House in the past for such sort of activity. So 

I’d ask the Speaker to call that member to order. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve listened closely to the member. I certainly did not 

hear anything that was unparliamentary or anything 

unacceptable. We’d ask that the Speaker, you know, review the 

record. I know the member said half-truth and that’s something 

that has been used in parliament for decades. So again we’d ask 

that the Speaker review. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I was listening carefully to the comments of 

both the Opposition House Leader and the Government House 

Leader as well as during question period. I heard the comment 

that the minister made when he said, it’s not true. He did not 

accuse the member of lying or that she was not telling the truth. 

It’s relevant to the tone and to the implications as to whether 

it’s deliberate or not. In this case the point of order is not well 

taken. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Family Matters Program Established 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to recognize the launch of a new program that assists 

Saskatchewan families experiencing separation or divorce. The 

Ministry of Justice, with financial support from the Law 

Foundation of Saskatchewan, has developed a program called 

Family Matters, assisting families through separation and 

divorce. 

 

The goal of the program is to help minimize the effect of 

separation and divorce on all family members, especially 

children, by allowing access to an early, affordable, and 

informal opportunity to resolve issues. This is a three-year pilot 

project that has received nearly $1.3 million in funding from the 

Law Foundation. It has been launched in Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert with expansion to Regina and Moose Jaw in April of 

2015. A province-wide expansion will occur in April 2016. 

 

The dispute resolution office and family justice services will 

jointly deliver the program. Family Matters will coordinate 

work that is currently being done by a number of other agencies 

and help families access better resources. The dispute resolution 

office and family justice services have over 40 existing 

qualified service providers for this program. These include 

experienced social workers and mediators with backgrounds in 

social work, law, and human justice. 

 

Prior to the program’s implementation, extensive consultation 

with the legal community took place. Among those consulted 

were the judiciary of the Court of Queen’s Bench, Public Legal 

Education Association or PLEA, Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission, Pro Bono Law Saskatchewan, Community Legal 

Assistance Service for Saskatoon Inner City or CLASSIC, the 

Canadian Bar Association Saskatchewan branch — family law 

Regina, and Saskatoon collaborative lawyers. All provided 

valuable input into the implementation of the Family Matters 

program, and I thank them for their contributions. 

 

With this program, Justice is trying to change the culture, 

change the default setting in divorce and separation. We need to 

change the perception around what divorce and separation looks 

like. Separating couples can be assisted to see this process as a 

normal transition for a family, and not see it as an all-out war 

on their former spouse. By taking part in the Family Matters 

program, it is hoped that these couples will share their 

experiences with their friends, neighbours, and families, which 

will influence the way others may approach their own 

separation and divorce in future years. 

 

The program has the potential to influence people beyond just 

the direct participants in the program. The current challenge for 

many individuals going through a separation or divorce is to 

identify what information is available, access it, understand it, 

and use it to make quality decisions. Family Matters will assist 

clients by providing them with information, support, and 

guidance. 

 

Early intervention has a positive effect on assisting separating 



5780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

couples through this transition. The needs of separating and 

divorcing couples in our province continues to grow, and it is 

important that we address these needs. It is preferable to resolve 

these issues through early intervention rather than the 

traditional court process. In the court process, there are many 

unrepresented or self-represented people who are separating or 

divorcing. These are people who do not hire a lawyer. These 

individuals cannot resolve basic issues, and if they are able to 

resolve them it is for a less than optimal outcome. This group 

will be the primary beneficiary of the program. 

 

The earlier separating parties are able to address the issues 

between them by getting good information and engaging with 

each other in a constructive way, the more likely it is that they 

will be able to reach resolution of their issues and minimize 

negative impacts. By doing so, stress is alleviated both 

financially and emotionally on all family members, providing 

more security and stability for children. For many couples it is 

very hard to believe that there is a light at the end of the table 

when it comes to separation or divorce. The Family Matters 

program may offer that light. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I extend my 

thanks and appreciation to the Law Foundation of 

Saskatchewan for their financial support of this program. The 

government continues to strive to make Saskatchewan the best 

province for all citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d first 

just like to respond to the ministerial statement, but I’d like to 

say thanks for having been provided an advance copy of the 

minister’s remarks. It’s good to get those to have a bit more 

information in terms of what’s being considered here. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Family Matters, assisting 

families through separation and divorce, work that is being 

done out of the Ministry of Justice, we’re glad to see that this is 

work done co-operatively with the Law Foundation of 

Saskatchewan. We’re glad to see the fairly significant work 

that’s been undertaken to consult broadly throughout the 

community, Mr. Speaker. And we’re glad to see the goal of the 

program being to help minimize the effect of separation and 

divorce on all family members, especially children, by allowing 

access to an early, affordable, and informal opportunity to 

resolve issues, quoting from the minister’s remarks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re glad to see that the dispute resolution office and family 

justice services will be delivering the program. And we’re also 

glad to see that again this is something that has been, consulted 

everything from the judiciary to the Public Legal Education 

Association or the Legal Aid Commission, Pro Bono, 

CLASSIC up in Saskatoon, the bar association, and the 

collaborative lawyers. 

 

Certainly collaborative approaches to matters that are otherwise, 

that are adversarial enough, Mr. Speaker, that are contentious, 

we think is a step in the right direction and certainly this would 

seem to be a good program coming forward here today. So 

we’re glad to see the efforts being made, and we’ll look to 

improved results and outcomes at the efforts of this program. So 

thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment 

Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the first reading of Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 

2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les 

directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5781 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 be now introduced and 

read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 

Smart Meter Investigation 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 

of the day, I stand to seek leave under rule 61 to move a motion 

of urgent and pressing necessity simply to request that the 

Provincial Auditor perform a special assignment pursuant to 

section 16(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act to investigate the 

smart meter file. If there’s unanimous consent, I’m prepared to 

move that motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont is 

requesting leave to move a motion regarding the Provincial 

Auditor and the smart meters. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 61 through 67. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 61 through 67. 

 

[11:00] 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Canadian Armed Forces Primary Reserve Co-op Program 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to rise today to discuss the co-op program, military 

training within our school systems. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s very appropriate at this time considering the events of the 

last few weeks when we’ve seen catastrophic effects in our 

country from terrorists and how our military really come to the 

forefront. We really appreciate what our military is doing for us 

in Canada and abroad. 

 

At the end of my comments, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a 

motion that confirms the Government of Saskatchewan, 

confirm its continued support of the Canadian Armed Forces 

primary reserve co-op program which is scheduled to be offered 

to students in the Regina public and Catholic school system 

starting in February 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my capacity as military liaison for the province 

of Saskatchewan, I frequently meet with senior members of 

Canada’s military, specifically those in the province, but also 

from those that have jurisdiction within our province such as 

the commander of 38 Brigade, who is actually in Winnipeg, but 

he has a lot of units here in Saskatchewan. 

 

He and I spoke about a co-op program for the province and how 

it may enhance the military reserves, but it provides an 

opportunity for some of our students in our schools with some 

options. And I’m one that likes stuff on paper as much as 

possible. So when I spoke to the commander, I said to him to 

give me something that I can put forward to our government. 

And I’m going to read parts of his letter, Mr. Speaker, that he 



5782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

had sent to me. And I will quote: 

 

. . . 38 Canadian Brigade Group’s area of operations span 

Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Western Ontario up to 

Thunder Bay. Within Thunder Bay itself, we have 

conducted a very successful Co-op Programme for several 

years. As negotiated with the local school boards, based on 

the policies and procedures stipulated by the Minister of 

Education for the province’s Co-operative Education 

program, this program provides school credits for high 

school students towards their graduation diploma, 

conducting class work about careers, and subsequently 

being placed in a work site related to a career field they 

wish to explore. 

 

One such opportunity we would wish to pursue would be 

for career opportunities within the Canadian Armed 

Forces, with the provision of the Primary Reserve Basic 

Military Qualification . . . and Basic Military Qualification 

— Land . . . Courses as part of the school board’s Co-op 

Program. 

 

Not only can this Co-op Program provide excellent work 

experience and employment skills opportunities, but 

military . . . in general stresses teamwork, discipline, 

physical fitness and safety training, all skills highly 

transferable to the civilian sector, and useful to any student 

about to graduate from the high school environment to 

future endeavours. As part of this Co-op Program, 

potential candidates will need to accept a job offer with 

the Canadian Armed Forces as a member of the Primary 

Reserve, and complete basic training requirements, those 

being the Primary Reserve . . . Courses [and the land 

course] . . . which are required for soldiers and officer 

candidates alike. The BMQ course is 23 full training days 

and the BMQ . . . [land] is 20 full training days in 

duration, which would be conducted during weekday 

afternoons, plus would also include an occasional 

weekend for the completion of field type training 

requirements. These courses are designed to teach the core 

skills and necessary knowledge to succeed in a military 

environment. The training emphasizes basic military 

skills, weapons handling, first aid, leadership 

fundamentals, ethical values and physical fitness training. 

At the end of training, each participant would be able to 

function effectively as a member of a small team in simple 

operations in both garrison and field environments. 

 

After my receiving this letter from the commander of 38 

Brigade, we set up a meeting with the Minister of Education 

and Minister of Advanced Education to discuss how this project 

could go forward. It was later discussed with the school boards 

and the school boards in Regina, both Catholic and the Public 

School Board, were very receptive to the idea. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just as a side note, since we have introduced 

this program, which will start in 2015, there have been several 

other jurisdictions now that are calling us, calling the 

commander of 38 Brigade, to ask how it’s being done here. And 

they’re looking at setting this up in other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a deep respect for our 

Canadian Armed Forces and their commitment and dedication 

to serving our country. Now high school students in Regina area 

will have the opportunity to receive military dual credit 

recognition through the co-op program. The agreement has been 

between the Government of Saskatchewan, 38 Brigade Group, 

Regina Public Schools, and the Regina Catholic School 

Division. They have allowed this program to happen. 

 

The primary reserve co-op program will help students learn life 

skills and leadership skills. We recognize that the value of those 

skills are very transferable. Under the program, students who 

complete the requirement of basic military training will receive 

one dual credit and recognition as a member of the Canadian 

Army Reserve. Schools offering the program are doing so in 

conjunction with Canadian history 30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this addresses one of the goals in the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth that by 2015 there will be an 

expansion of alternative credentials for high school completion 

through partnerships with school boards, teachers, training 

institutions, business, and industry. The Government of 

Saskatchewan supports alternative pathways to graduation by 

allowing high school students the opportunity to earn high 

school credits and post-secondary credits or other program 

recognition at the same time in the same course. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a letter from an individual that had 

sent it to the Leader-Post September 29th, 2014. Now I’ll quote 

the letter, Mr. Speaker: 

 

As a proud spouse of a Canadian sailor, with a long 

military lineage in her family, I feel Verda Petry's Sept. 23 

letter missed the mark on our military. 

 

Military training is much more than training for war — 

though, with the state the world today, we can all benefit 

from Canada's military preparedness. 

 

Yes, the Canadian Armed Forces is trained for specific 

duties in conflict. But its personnel are also trained to give 

and follow orders, and learn leadership, teamwork and 

respect. 

 

Basic training covers first aid, ethics/morality and codes of 

conduct. Those taking it are taught that use of force is a 

last resort, but may be a necessary one. 

 

They also learn sacrifice. HMCS Regina, for example, has 

just returned from a nine-month deployment, protecting 

shipping lanes from pirates and showing Canada's support 

for the people of Ukraine. 

 

Canada's armed forces also serve at home. The air force 

provides aircraft for land/sea searches. The army helps 

fight flooding in the Prairies or assists in the aftermath of 

natural disasters. The navy responded to the SwissAir 

disaster on the east coast, and its ships will alter course to 

respond to a maritime distress call. 

 

So why would we not want our young people to learn 

about sacrifice, leadership, teamwork — or give them a 

sense of pride in being part of something larger than 

themselves? 

 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5783 

Joining the Canadian Armed Forces is a choice. While not 

for everyone, it should definitely be offered in high school 

as a rewarding career option. 

 

And this is signed by Gail Carney of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a great letter and really hits the tone 

of what we’re, our motion is proposing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very supportive of the military, as we 

know, and some of the initiatives that we’ve brought forward as 

government, I’ll just read a few of them to you. 

 

Qualified military granted Saskatchewan resident status for 

fishing. Regular members of the Canadian Armed Forces who 

are Saskatchewan residents at the time of their recruitment or 

deployment from the province will now be considered 

Saskatchewan residents when fishing in the province. 

 

We know that the military service pin that the Lieutenant 

Governor has had produced symbolizes the gratitude of the 

Crown and people of Saskatchewan for those who have served 

with honour and valour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Highway of Heroes between Moose Jaw and 

Regina has been named Saskatchewan’s Highway of Heroes as 

a permanent tribute to Canadian Forces personnel from 

Saskatchewan who have lost their lives in service to our 

country. 

 

We also have produced Support our Troops stickers. 

 

Legislation to improve provincial electoral process. The Act 

also makes Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction in Canada to 

provide special residence recognition to voters serving in the 

Canadian Armed Forces. Active members of the military from 

Saskatchewan will retain their Saskatchewan residency while 

serving outside the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we just highlighted earlier this week, the 

Scholarship of Honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, there are many, many people that are 

very supportive of our position with the military and very 

supportive of the co-op school program. But, like everything, 

there are some people that are opposed to the program. A 

pamphlet was sent to me that outlined some people that are 

opposed to this. And to me, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the CAVE 

units, and CAVE stands for citizens against virtually 

everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this pamphlet it has some key facts which seem 

to be correct. There’s a lot of questions that are asked in this 

that make people think. The goal of the program, questions to 

reflect on, it says. The goal of the program is to revitalize the 

reserves. Should we be turning our high schools into military 

recruitment centres? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s providing an 

opportunity for students. Students at the age of 16 or 17 can join 

the reserves anyway. What this has done is provided them a 

credit in school for doing something that they could walk 

outside and do. So it actually is beneficial to the students in 

school. 

 

The program includes instruction in weapons handling. Is this 

what we want young people to learn in school? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s many things you learn in school that you could 

relate to in such a way that could be looking at it in a different 

light.  

 

Like one of the other ones in here, it talks about, 162 Canadians 

lost their lives in Afghanistan and many more are struggling to 

cope with their injuries. Well this is precisely why we want a 

military and a strong military, to protect our freedoms here at 

home. 

 

And another question: is the army training program compatible 

with the UN’s [United Nations] view of education as enabling 

individuals to live and learn better in a world characterized by 

diversity and pluralism?  

 

But, Mr. Speaker, and here’s one that really hits the core. 

Wouldn’t it be better for society if students were to be paid 

$2,000 to take math, English, or biology? And this kind of 

struck me, Mr. Speaker, because if this individual or individuals 

that wrote this had said, why don’t you take biology rather than 

study weapons, if you look at it carefully, biological weapons 

are made by whom? People that have a degree in biology. 

Chemical weapons are . . . people that have taken chemistry in 

school. Nuclear weapons are created by people that took 

physics in school and went on to nuclear physics. So if 

somebody wants to look at it in that context, no matter what you 

take in school you could relate to something as a military 

weapons production, even math. You have to have a very strong 

course in math to be able to produce any of these other weapons 

or build fighting machines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about students being paid $2,000 for the 

program. And the individual has a bit of the gall to say we’re 

going to be enticing low-income families to take this course. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, again it’s a choice. Students have a choice. 

Now they can get a credit for taking their choice and joining 

into the military co-op program. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to read the motion into the 

record. The motion reads: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan confirms its 

continued support of the Canadian Armed Forces primary 

reserve co-op program which is scheduled to be offered to 

students in the Regina public and Catholic school system 

starting in February 2015. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Wood River has moved: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan confirms its 

continued support of the Canadian Armed Forces primary 

reserve co-op program which is scheduled to be offered to 

students in the Regina public and Catholic school system 

starting in February 2015. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



5784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s at this time 

of remembrance that we enter into this discussion here today, 

and certainly it’s important for none of us to take our minds off 

that important role of remembrance. And certainly the NDP is 

supportive and proud and eternally grateful for the Canadian 

Forces — their contributions historically, their contributions 

currently, domestically, internationally — and value that role 

and value the service. And certainly the co-operative program 

discussed here today would be an acceptable program that 

presents an opportunity for students to learn about the Canadian 

Forces, what that service may look like, and also what a career 

may look like. 

 

It’s important to note that this provides choice for students. I 

understand that there is parental consent that’s required, and I 

also know that a student who engages into it can depart at any 

point and can also choose to not be a member following their 

service. But as I say, we’re entering into this discussion about a 

program at a time of remembrance and certainly at a time where 

all of our minds need to be with those veterans, with those that 

serve, and providing the respect that they deserve. 

 

We would like to, as it relates to education itself, like to see 

extended opportunities in a host of areas for students. This is an 

acceptable program that presents an opportunity to learn and an 

opportunity to engage in a hands-on way. I believe it’s that sort 

of learning that can be rather valuable for students in a whole 

host of areas, whether that be through other avenues, the arts, 

sports, cultural offerings, and many, many other areas which 

can enrich the learning of students, but also provide that 

hands-on experience and hopefully make students draw a 

greater connection to their learning, to their choices, to their 

future, and make learning more relevant. And so we, while we 

see this as an acceptable program, we certainly would want to 

see support for enrichments to the education program and 

choices for all students in a whole host of different areas. 

 

I’m a grandson of a Second World War veteran. I know some of 

that story of a young farm boy from Saskatchewan going over 

to serve in the Second World War, landing on the beaches, and 

serving through to, until 1945, on February 18th where my 

grandfather was shot in the Battle of Moyland Wood, was 

wounded, and returned to Canada. I know that from his 

perspective, to remember certainly was a very humble thing, 

and there was little glorification of the actual battle. In fact in 

his case, no glorification of the battle and, in fact, returned to 

Canada both proud of his service — rightfully so — but also 

wounded, not just physically, but emotionally as well. 

 

And I think that those families that have histories of service, 

those members that are currently serving, those families that are 

impacted, will know that there are many, many impacts. And 

you know, the respect that we pay to our veterans and to those 

that serve cuts across an entire province, cuts across political 

divides, and is something that we simply need to really be 

respectful in how we remember. 

 

It’s important to recognize that in this program that there’s 

choice and information. It’s important that parents need to also 

be supportive of this activity, as I believe that they are, and I 

believe as well that students do need to be empowered to make 

decisions as to the kind of learning they’re going to engage 

with, the kind of opportunities they’ll engage with, and it allows 

students to take ownership and be empowered as they take steps 

forward. 

 

Note, we understand that communities and Canadians in every 

community across, you know, our country and certainly across 

Saskatchewan, that there’s a diversity of views as it relates to 

military service as well. And I think it’s very important for us to 

remember that in that range and diversity of views, that that is 

the democracy in action that we believe to be so important. In 

fact I would believe that the democracy and to allow for the 

diverse views to be shared, for questions to be asked, and for 

answers to be forthcoming are part of what has been fought for 

and part of what we cherish. So certainly on this program, there 

have been questions raised and concerns noted by some within 

the community. And I wouldn’t want to dismiss those questions 

or those concerns. In fact their very presence is part of what 

reflects the healthy democratic state of our province and 

something that we need to be ever-mindful. 

 

I know that for many when they look at the role of our Armed 

Forces, of military service, it can often be a matter of deep 

conscience, and that many come at these views as well through 

their own personal experience, through the experience of their 

families, and many through the lens of their own family or the 

potential of their family to be involved in that service. I have 

family members who currently serve with Canadian Forces. 

And as I’ve said, my grandfather not only served, he fought in 

the Second World War and was wounded. I know what that 

experience is. 

 

And it’s through that lens as well that I look to the engagement 

and the mandate of our Armed Forces, our Canadian Forces. 

And I think it’s incumbent on all of us — and I look to my 

little, new son, William, when I’m looking to this in respecting 

the role of the Armed Forces and the choices he’ll have to 

engage in a whole wider range of careers — that we must, when 

we look at the men and women of the Canadian Forces who 

currently serve and the mandate and the direction and the 

engagement that we choose to have them engage with, that we 

look to those men and women as our own sons and daughters. 

And that’s a really critical lens for us all to come at. 

 

You know, so as I say, there’s questions and concerns from 

community members that’s a reflection of a healthy democracy, 

something that should be not discouraged and certainly they . . . 

you know, that as we move forward with a program like this, 

we’ll be working with our educational partners, with the school 

boards, with the teachers, with students and parents to make 

sure we fully understand if there’s any unintended 

consequences as they move forward. 

 

I know there’s already paid internships into the trades which are 

providing opportunity. I know that students are provided 

apprenticeship hours into high school. These are programs that I 

also support, providing opportunity. I do believe we need to do 

a better job of providing hands-on learning, relevant learning, 

and opportunities for all students in a whole wide-ranging host 

of areas. So those are aspects that we’ll continue to track. 

 

And I guess importantly for us and for the NDP, at a time of not 

only remembrance but a time every day that a discussion about 

our Canadian Forces cannot occur without recognizing the need 

to support those that have served — our veterans, not just those 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5785 

from years before but those that are returning — and 

recognizing the emotional stress and strain, the realities of 

depression for many, the challenges of PTSD [post-traumatic 

stress disorder] that many are facing, and that we need to 

recognize that when those that have served come back to their 

families, come back to their provinces, come back to their 

country, that they’re provided the supports they deserve, which 

is why we as the NDP have been so concerned by the cuts by 

the federal government to those supports that veterans deserve 

and that they require. And I hope that while we stand in this 

Assembly here, that we stand unanimously, as well, opposed to 

those cuts to very important programs. 

 

Our Canadian Forces have an important role domestically by 

way of safety, by working on our coastlines, by tending to 

floods and potential crisis domestically, and they too engage 

internationally, both through peacekeeping and humanitarian 

missions but also through direct combat. 

 

And I simply say it’s a time of remembrance. Let’s do just that, 

and let’s look at the men and women of our Canadian Forces as 

we would think of our own sons and daughters as we look at 

these missions. So it’s a time where, as I say, we must 

remember. We must think of that service. We must think of that 

sacrifice, and we must be there to support the men and women 

who support us through the Canadian Forces. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

with great honour that I rise and join this debate today regarding 

the Regina Public Schools and Regina Catholic School Division 

allowing a primary reserve co-op program to come into their 

school divisions in February of 2015. 

 

I think at this particular time and this time of year, it’s with 

great respect that we honour the men and women who are part 

of our Armed Forces across the country. And they’re doing 

great work here, abroad, protecting our interests and protecting 

the democracies that we hold so dear that allow us to have these 

types of debates right here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I want to thank my colleague from Regina Rosemont who 

added, I believe, added his support to this program. I think he’s 

said many times that opposition’s role is to oppose and propose 

and to support the government when they bring forward good 

programs. And I think on this side of the House and I believe 

most of the members on that side of the House think that this 

co-op program is a very good program to allow the youth of 

Regina and maybe — who knows how the program rolls out? 

— but allow the youth of Regina to be able to enter into some 

co-op programs with the military, with the reserves. 

 

And for the young men and women who decide to take part in 

this program, I think what they’re looking to get from this 

program is, some things that they want to get a good grasp on is 

leadership. I think they can get some leadership training, some 

of the sacrifices they have to make to make sure they make it 

through this program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this program came about in an interesting way, and how I 

think a lot of good policy is made, is some people brought the 

idea to the member from Regina South, I believe; I think is how 

this came about. And I want to thank the member from Regina 

South for helping in developing this program. 

 

The reserve co-op program idea did come when 38 Canadian 

Brigade Group Commander Colonel Ross Ermel approached 

the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Regina 

South with the idea of offering high school credit to students in 

the reserves. He then met with the Education minister who put 

him in touch with the Ministry of Education in the Regina 

public and Catholic school divisions, who also saw the benefits 

of alternative credits in military training. 

 

Colonel Ermel spearheaded this initiative and provided the 

vision and leadership to make it a reality, and I would like to 

thank him for all of his hard work and effort in bringing this to 

reality. I think he deserves a round of applause. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s great when you add 

alternatives to the public school divisions. And not all students 

are looking for the same type of education when they’re going 

through the school division, and that’s not a bad thing, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that when students . . . There’s no cookie-cutter 

mould for any particular student, and all of our young people 

have different views and they have probably different career 

choices that they want to chase. And any time that you can 

broaden the education spectre and allow different opportunities 

for our children and our youth, I think it’s a very good thing. 

 

The member from Regina Rosemont talked about his son, and I 

think we would be in agreement when any opportunity and all 

opportunities are afforded to young people into the future is a 

good thing for young people. And I think that students are 

going to appreciate that. And I know that . . . 

 

Just a couple of information about the program which, I think, 

I’m very supportive, Mr. Speaker, is that military training will 

be delivered at the Regina Armoury. To be eligible, a student 

must be a Canadian citizen with a minimum grade 10 education 

and be 16 years of age. If successful, students may choose to 

continue on with their service with the Canadian Army Reserve. 

 

“The Canadian Armed Forces are proud to provide 

employment and career exploration opportunities to our 

Saskatchewan youth,” said Colonel Ermel. “A career in 

the army reserves is an excellent opportunity for students 

to experience service to Canada while experiencing 

part-time military occupations that provide direct skill 

transfers to . . . government and educators, we will achieve 

diversity in learning and growth while building 

tomorrow’s leaders.” 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I think that hits the nail on the head, Mr. Speaker, when he 

says, in partnership will we “. . . achieve diversity in learning 

and growth while building tomorrow’s leaders.” 

 

And I think diversity is a good thing, and we’re seeing more 

and more of it throughout our province — diversifying our 



5786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

population, diversifying . . . The young people are taking the 

opportunities here for growth and for employment, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would like to say that “This is an exciting 

initiative that will allow our students to attain credits while 

accessing unique training and paid employment,” the Regina 

Catholic Division’s superintendent of education says, Cheryl 

Exner. Providing an opportunity is a big focus of our 

government within the education sector. 

 

And I think, over seven years, we’ve provided a lot of 

opportunities for growth within the education sector. We’ve put 

in over $700 million in capital infrastructure which is, on the 

basis, what we see as providing opportunities for young people 

throughout the education sector. 

 

The hard-working men and women that are teaching our 

students, we appreciate the work they’re putting in, and I think 

it’s incumbent on any government to provide as much money as 

possible in infrastructure in education so that they have the 

tools at their fingertips to continue to do a great job in educating 

our young people across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d really like to say that, on the last couple of weeks, the 

military has been front and centre in Canada and definitely in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We think of Corporal Nathan 

Cirillo and Warrant Officer Vincent and the tragedies that 

happened in Ontario and Quebec, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we had a few celebrations over the last couple of years 

here in Saskatchewan, and one of them where we had some 

World War II veterans in. And the member from Wood River 

does an excellent job as a liaison with the Armed Forces. And 

to have men of that stature — and many people have said it, it’s 

the greatest generation — have those men that fought in World 

War II in the Assembly, I think every time I see them, it just 

makes me think of the commitments they made to freedom, to 

their country at a very young age, at the age of 19, 20, 21, and 

the commitment they made and the sacrifices they and their 

families made to ensure that we have the opportunity to live in a 

free country, a free and democratic country. Every time I see 

them, the least I do is say thank you and shake their hand. And 

they just, with a smile on their face say, it’s kind of what we 

had to do. I think we think a lot more of the commitments they 

made than they did at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those men and women deserve nothing but our utmost 

respect, and we should honour them more than just on 

November 11th. Like the member across the way and the 

member from Wood River said, we should honour them each 

and every day for the sacrifices they made. Which, going on 

with the theme, Mr. Speaker, is that we have done some 

honouring the last couple of days. And yesterday was a fantastic 

celebration with the memorial licence plates that we gave to 

Ben and Margie Walsh and the Callaghans. 

 

And I got to know Ben quite well. I’d like to call him a friend. 

It’s an honour to call him a friend actually. And the ability he 

has to just take the small things, I feel the small things that 

we’ve done for members of military families who have lost 

loved ones and giving them the memorial licence plates is 

something that Ben was very, very honoured and moved when 

he received it. And for me, I feel it’s something so small, but I 

think in remembering and honouring his son’s memory it’s 

never a small thing when it’s just a licence plate or something 

like that. And I think it’s fantastic. Every time we get to see Ben 

come in carrying the Black Rod, I think it’s just one of the 

better things that we get to see in this Legislative Assembly. 

And I think it’s an honour for us to see him come in and carry 

that rod.  

 

And to speak with the Callaghans and some of the memories 

they shared, I just want to say thanks to them for the ultimate 

sacrifice they made when some of the loved ones that were sent 

off just never returned home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the Shipways as well from Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker, I 

was able to talk to a couple of them. And they said they used to 

live in Walsh Acres but then they moved to Churchill. And it 

was fantastic to have a conversation with them. Just the utmost 

respect for the families that made the trip down to the 

Legislative Assembly to receive those licence plates yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

One more thing is the Scholarship of Honour. And I’m just 

tying all these in with some of the abilities we have to say our 

thanks to the military. Not only that, but allow the young people 

in Saskatchewan to realize the commitments that the military 

has made on our behalf to make sure that we’re free and we 

have the ability to make these choices and have these freedom 

of choices even within the education sector. And I think that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Scholarship of Honour is another 

small thing, a $5,000 scholarship for people who have fallen 

loved ones or have had military service and been injured. 

 

And I think that tying all this in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

ability for our government to do some of the small things to 

honour the military and to make sure that our generation 

realizes and the next generation realizes the commitments that 

our men and women make in the military service is one of the 

things that we must never forget. And I hope the people join in 

Remembrance Day ceremonies across the province to celebrate 

our armed forces. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s always an honour to rise to join debate in this Chamber 

because of course, you know, there’s so many that contribute to 

why we’re able to do this work in the name of democracy. But 

it’s particularly an honour that we’re reminded of here today, 

that these rights and freedoms and responsibilities that we enjoy 

in Saskatchewan and in Canada, it’s not that folks had some 

great ideas and it was just handed over for free, but that in fact 

these rights and freedoms were paid for in the blood of those 

that would defend them — those that bore arms, those that put 

on the uniform. 

 

And in particular, Mr. Speaker, at this time of year, those that 

came forward, I think of those that came forward in World War 

II. And in the McCall family, Mr. Speaker, this is a time that, as 

the Minister from Crown Corporations yesterday gave a great 

talk yesterday at the public service commemoration ceremonies, 

talked about how these times affect all families and that there 

are stories in all families. And certainly I found his remarks to 

be true with our experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the McCall 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5787 

family. 

 

And this time of year we think in particular of people like my 

great uncle Roy Calder McCall. And Uncle Roy was the ripe 

old age of 30 when he was shot and killed in action in northern 

Italy as a corporal in the Royal Canadian Signal Corps. And 

he’s buried in the war cemetery at Gradara in northern Italy, and 

I’ve had the very humbling experience of being there to pay my 

respects to Uncle Roy. 

 

And it’s a terrible story, Mr. Speaker, in that, you know, at the 

age of 30 he was sort of an old man in terms of the troops that 

he was serving with. And we’re reminded of that today with the 

tragic passing of Corporal Nathan Cirillo, who was all of 24. He 

was very cowardly and tragically killed just short days ago in 

our nation’s capital.  

 

But Uncle Roy was 30. And when he shipped out overseas, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, he left behind a pregnant wife, and his wife 

ultimately gave birth to my cousin, Daryl. And of course Daryl 

never knew his father. And for me that always stands out as 

what . . . There’s some hard sacrifices that are made in the name 

of the defence of these freedoms and rights that we enjoy here 

in Canada. And it always seems to me that, you know, in terms 

of what Uncle Roy paid with his life, it was all the more tragic 

for having never known his son and to never have had the 

opportunity to hold that boy in his arms, and let him know that 

he loved him. 

 

And when we come through this season of remembrance, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, these are some of the things that I think about. 

And I think about how heavy a burden it is, how grave a 

responsibility that we have as legislators when it comes to 

approaching things like sending citizens into harm’s way, 

sending them to places where they may be injured either in 

body or in mind and spirit or killed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

that’s a huge responsibility that we have in terms of our part of 

the bargain, in terms of how we conduct ourselves in this 

wonderful Canadian democracy that we hold so dear. 

 

And we have with that a responsibility to make sure that when 

those troops are coming home, that . . . When they’re sent out in 

the first place, that we do so with the utmost of caution, and 

with a grave sense of what the stakes are. But when those troops 

come home, Mr. Speaker, or when they don’t come home, the 

responsibility that endures to those individuals and their 

families, it’s important to remember and to never forget — 

particularly as we come up on November 11th, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — but as my colleague the member from Regina 

Rosemont had said earlier, that there’s a responsibility to 

remember all the year through. 

 

And again, there’s some good initiatives that this government 

has undertaken to help out those efforts in terms of properly 

honouring and supporting individuals who have paid those 

prices, who have made that sacrifice for us here in 

Saskatchewan that we might live as we do. And you know, 

again it’s particularly acute this time of the year, and it’s very 

hard to separate out the particular merits of an individual 

program from this time of remembrance. So again, Mr. Speaker, 

I wanted to state that first before I proceeded to the actual 

program itself, and some of my thoughts on it. 

 

But certainly, you know, I’m here because 30-year-old Roy 

Calder McCall is not. And his name lives on in the chamber of 

remembrance in Ottawa or in the War Memorial here outside 

the legislature or on the cenotaph in downtown Montmartre, 

Saskatchewan. And it’s to the names of the fallen and to those 

that carry it forward that we owe that respect, we owe that 

tremendous, terrible humility when we approach these 

questions of how the military is supported, how the Canadian 

Forces are supported, how they are administered here in 

Canada, and how they are deployed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And in doing so we honour not just those that have gone on, 

and again in our family on either my father’s side of the family, 

we had uncles that served in the navy in the South 

Saskatchewan Regiment, and again with Uncle Roy in the 

signal corps. On my mother’s side, my uncle Sid was a tail 

gunner in a Lancaster bomber and made it home but died of a 

heart attack at far too young of an age. And it’s arguable that 

again that trauma that was undergone by so many of those 

people, this is the way it evidenced forth. But those are the 

people I think of when we come to this season of remembrance, 

and those are the people I think of when we come to this debate 

today. 

 

In terms of the program, this is, in and of itself, Mr. Speaker, it 

would seem to be an acceptable offering. We’ll be watching as 

it goes forward to make sure that it lives up to its stated intent. 

In terms of the expansion of co-operative education experience, 

this is something that we’re not just on record of supporting, but 

certainly there were initiatives undertaken, certainly the 

carpentry apprenticeship program enabling that dual-credit 

principle to get high school students a leg up in the trades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a progression of that. And I guess that it’s 

come in for some question, is again, Mr. Speaker, I think signal 

to the democracy that we live in. It’s signal to the rights and 

freedoms that our military has gone forth in the world to secure 

with their lives at risk. And so I don’t have a problem with 

people having different opinions about this program but I think, 

Mr. Speaker, the main point is to see how this unfolds, how this 

engages young people, and how, whether or not the outcomes 

that are entailed in this program are lived up to. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So we’ll be watching closely, Mr. Speaker, but again in terms 

of the choice that is inherent in this program, it’s not the draft, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would submit in terms of the way that it 

expands on the already existing co-operative opportunities that 

are particularly rich and for which I know the Regina Public 

School Board and Regina Catholic School Board have been 

leaders in the province for. There are a lot of things that we’ll 

be looking for, Mr. Speaker, but again in this context it’s 

certainly a program that we find acceptable on its face. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First and 

foremost I want to start off with, that I fully support this 

motion. When it comes to the Canadian military’s ability to 

teach leadership, I believe that it’s truly unsurpassed. I have a 



5788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

little — and I don’t want to make this about me — I have a little 

experience with the Canadian military, being a reservist myself 

before this job, working with cadets within the CIC. The CIC is 

the Cadet Instructors Cadre which is part of the Canadian 

Armed Forces reserves, and we work with young folks that are 

school age from ages 12 to 18. Very good program and I 

believe it teaches true leadership, teamwork, all the things we 

like to see in our young folks here in Canada. 

 

When it comes to teaching leadership, one of the definitions 

that I’ve come across that the Canadian military has is they 

define it as “effective leadership in the terms that evoke the 

concepts of duty and honour, directing, motivating, and 

enabling others to accomplish the mission professionally and 

ethically while developing or improving capabilities that 

contribute to a mission’s success.” We can take that, or the 

young folks that join the reserves can take that and apply that to 

everyday life. When we’re talking about accomplishing a 

mission professionally, when you take a look at how they do a 

report in school, so if you take that . . . Their mission is to 

accomplish a report. When you take that ability that they’re 

going to be trained within the reserves, to be able to apply that 

to everyday civilian life, it will be unsurpassed. 

 

This program I truly believe will be raising some of the future 

leaders of this province when they have the ability to step up 

and get the training that the Canadian military will afford them 

and work with them and lead them to this, down this path where 

we work as a team. And this side, I know my colleagues on this 

side of the House, we truly believe in teamwork. We truly 

believe in leadership. 

 

We have a member that served the greater part of his adult life 

in the Canadian military. The leadership that the member from 

Wood River is able to provide some of us younger folks is 

unsurpassed. Having the ability to work with the reservists in 

our province, in hopefully working with the kids in Regina, 

taking that leadership role, that teamwork, that excellence that 

the Canadian military is able to provide them in the training, 

will be great for the city of Regina. I’m almost jealous of my 

colleagues. Well I’m actually jealous of my colleagues here in 

Regina that they have this rolled out through the Regina public 

and Catholic school system and we don’t have it available to us 

yet in Moose Jaw. So it looks like a great program. 

 

I’ve worked with the cadets. I went through the cadet program 

myself, took their leadership training all the way through from 

grade 7 to grade 12, so that was five, six years, doing the math. 

I’ve got to think. So from ’77 to ’84, I was in the cadet program 

and they’ve even expanded it now so you can start when you’re 

12 if you’re going to turn 13 that year. And I’ve worked with 

some cadets that transitioned from the cadet program into the 

military reserves right in Moose Jaw. And I watched these 

young folks. They developed from shy, insecure, almost those 

kinds of kids that would hide in the back of the room, wouldn’t 

put their hand up when they were asked a question or a question 

was asked of the class, and I watched them develop from being 

that shy person in the back of the room. And both boys and girls 

developed into that confident, confident in themselves, 

confident in their ability, confident in their knowledge of what 

it takes to be a leader. These are the type of young folks you 

could give a simple task like you could walk in and say, okay 

we need the classroom set up for 25 cadets. And you’d be able 

to go in and it’s set up for 25 cadets. You don’t have to follow 

them around to make sure that that job is done. That takes 

leadership. That takes teamwork. That takes training. 

 

This is the kind of training that will be afforded the young 

people right here in Regina. I’m sure that this program’s going 

to be full. We’re looking at, I’m sure, some of the people that 

come out of this program might be sitting here 10, 15, 5 years 

from now. We’re not sure where that leadership that they’ve 

been trained in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will take them. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the program itself, as my 

colleagues have. Our government and the opposition today, and 

over the last couple of weeks, has expressed our profound, deep 

respect for the Canadian Forces and what they’ve done for us. 

And during this time of remembrance, and I agree with the 

member from Rosemont that this is something that’s not 

something that just happens on November 11th, these folks . . . 

And I’m finding myself agreeing with them on this point, is at 

some times surprising. However when we talk about respecting 

our Canadian Armed Forces and the sacrifice that these people 

have laid down before us, is amazing the fact that my boys, had 

they been born 50 years ago, 75 years ago, would have taken 

part in these conflicts. 

 

My grandfather served in World War II as an aircraft mechanic 

in England during the entire Battle of Britain. And as the 

member from Wood River would know, we celebrate the Battle 

of Britain early in the fall every year. The sacrifices that those 

airmen put forward when they faced insurmountable odds, 

unbelievable odds against what was happening in Europe, and 

facing that over England . . . And you had people patching the 

runways, people . . . Not just the pilots, not just the gunners, not 

just the bombers, but you had the people on the ground patching 

those runways, patching those planes, getting those folks back 

up into the air so they could do the job that was laid out. 

 

And when we take a look at the leadership that they provided 

for us, the sacrifices they laid down before us, I can do nothing 

except support this motion fully. The primary reserve co-op 

program will help students learn valuable life and leadership 

skills. And we truly and fully recognize the skills that they will 

have. 

 

Under the program, the students who complete the requirements 

of basic military training will receive one dual credit and 

recognition as a member of the Canadian Army reserve. When 

they put on that uniform, when you put on that uniform, the 

amount of pride that you have representing your country, 

representing the history that’s behind it, these young folks that 

have been afforded this opportunity in Regina are lucky. 

 

And I just want to go on the record one more time that, with our 

motion: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan confirms its 

continued support of the Canadian Armed Forces primary 

reserve co-op program, which is scheduled to be offered to 

students in the Regina public and Catholic school system 

starting in February 2015. 

 

I fully, 100 per cent, support that program. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5789 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am happy 

to wade into this discussion today. I’m incredibly grateful too, 

and proud of the women and men of Canada’s Armed Forces, 

both those who are serving our nation today and those who have 

served our nation in the past. I am the granddaughter of two 

World War II veterans, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

My grandfather, Napoléon Champagne, lied about his age, as 

we often hear, young men who would sign up before they were 

eligible. But, Mr. Speaker, my grandpa was almost 40 and felt 

that that would be an impediment to his ability to serve so he in 

fact lied about his age and said he was younger than he was, 

Mr. Speaker. My Grandpa Champagne served with the Yorkton 

LAA [Light Anti-Aircraft] Battery, RCA [Royal Canadian 

Artillery] CASF [Canadian Active Service Force]. He left 

Canada in 1940 and returned in August 1944. He served in Italy 

and Sicily. He spent some time in Africa. 

 

And he came home actually in August of 1944 because my 

grandmother was very ill and had surgery, and one of my 

grandmother’s friends had actually written a letter to the army 

asking if compassionate leave would be appropriate. My mom 

actually remembers someone from the military coming out to 

visit them in Melville and checking on the family. And the 

decision was made that he could come home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my mom tells me that she was so very excited about his 

impending arrival on the train home, but he got off the train and 

she didn’t recognize him, Mr. Speaker. He was a gaunt, weary 

individual, Mr. Speaker, who had contracted malaria when he 

was in Africa. And my mom talks about my grandmother 

lovingly every night taking time and picking shrapnel out of my 

Grandpa Champagne’s neck, Mr. Speaker. I never had an 

opportunity to meet my Grandpa Champagne. He passed away 

a month before I was born. 

 

My Grandpa Chartier also was a World War II veteran. He 

joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in April 1941 and was a 

corporal actually assigned to ground duty. He never went 

overseas. He actually helped build the Alaska Highway. After 

the attack on Pearl Harbor and at the beginning of the Pacific 

theatre, the building of that Alaskan highway became incredibly 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So make no mistake, I’m incredibly proud of all those folks 

who are willing to put their lives on the line for all of us and the 

freedoms that we have here in Canada, Mr. Speaker, those 

who’ve done it in the past and those who continue. 

 

This program, this co-op program that we’re discussing today is 

acceptable, but I’d also like to talk about the options our 

children have as they reach the end of their secondary 

education. 

 

I think of my older daughter, Hennessey, who is now in grade 

11. She’s a smart young woman — I think so — and she’s 

thinking quite a bit about the career opportunities that interest 

her, those things that capture her imagination and challenge her. 

She’s thinking about the post-secondary education that would 

suit her learning style and, most importantly, her interests. It’s 

hard to imagine, Mr. Speaker, that young people only 16 or 17 

years old are making decisions that will impact their futures so 

much. As a mother, I know I want to give her guidance and 

support, but I also want to let her take the lead when it comes to 

making decisions that impact her own future. 

 

What’s really so important to me, Mr. Speaker, is that my 

daughter’s options aren’t limited. She’s expressed interests and 

talents in a number of areas. She’s athletic. She’s been on 

student council and understands the value of serving her peers. 

She’s academically inclined and excels in several subjects and 

she’s also expressed her creativity through dance for many 

years, Mr. Speaker. She has chosen during her grade 11 year to 

pursue a media program. The program is giving her an inside 

view of what pursuing a post-secondary education in media 

production and working in media production might be like. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, it would be very difficult to pursue that 

career here in light of the government’s decision to end the film 

tax credit. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I have to tell you, in the short time that she’s been in this 

integrated learning program, it’s been a wonderful experience 

for her and for me, and for her to come home and tell me about 

some of the things she’s experienced. She’s developing 

leadership skills, organizational skills on top of all the things 

that she’s learning about media production, Mr. Speaker. She is 

truly getting prepared for university. And I think this decision 

of hers to pursue this was brilliant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in order to register my daughter in this media program, her 

dad and I wrote a cheque for about $400. I am fortunate that we 

are able to do that. My daughter is fortunate to have parents 

with enough money in the bank account to write that cheque. 

But I want to talk about the families who may not have that 

money in their accounts. Let’s not create a system in which a 

young person’s options are limited by his or her family’s bank 

accounts. Let’s create a system which only a young person’s 

determination, her potential, and her aptitude opens the door to 

the choices available to her. 

 

For a young person only 17 years old or so to have educational 

or training options cut off from them merely because of their 

parents’ ability to pay, I don’t think that is right, Mr. Speaker. 

And I see so many kids who could be benefiting from some of 

these amazing programs that don’t have that opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I would think that if a program could be created for young 

people to join cadets and consider a potential future with the 

Armed Forces reserves, surely we want to be the kind of nation 

that also offers young people a chance to excel at sports without 

costs being a barrier to accessing that education. 

 

Surely we want to be the kind of nation that offers young 

people a chance to learn about a career in public service without 

making that kind of education only available to those whose 

families can afford it. Surely we want to be the kind of nation 

that offers young people a chance to learn about a career in the 

arts, in education, or in a trade, without cost barriers that 

prevent some families from accessing that for their child. Surely 

we don’t want the financial situation of a 17-year-old and that 



5790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

child’s parents or guardians determine the type or suitability of 

the high school education they receive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition believes Saskatchewan’s 

youth have to be given access to information and be trusted to 

make decisions about their own future with the guidance of 

their families. I know first-hand that if you give a young adult 

an opportunity to make a mature and reasoned decision, you’ll 

often find that maturity that young person shows you to be more 

than you would’ve ever imagined, Mr. Speaker. I think we 

should do our best to consider these young people, grade 12 

students preparing for independence, as capable of wise 

decision making, providing they have all the options, all the 

opportunities, and all the information that they need, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Today we are talking about a co-op program that asks if young 

adults are interested in considering learning about the Armed 

Forces. I am confident that this discussion would not be 

complete without a conversation about how we are doing when 

it comes to caring for those who serve and those who have 

served. 

 

We are learning even more as a society about the brutal and 

devastating effects of PTSD or post-traumatic stress disorder 

and how members of our Canadian Armed Forces have suffered 

in silence for far too long, and even now without the proper care 

and support. PTSD is an illness and it can kill you. It can take 

your life. It can devastate a family and ravage the promise of a 

young person. 

 

I don’t think we’ve scratched the surface on how to care for and 

support those who have PTSD. From mitigating the effects of 

trauma during a person’s services to treating the illnesses, to 

offering support services for an Armed Forces member and her 

or his family, we’ve got to do better on all fronts. One of the 

first greatest steps we can take, Mr. Speaker, is for the 

Government of Canada to fully acknowledge that this illness is 

an epidemic among Armed Forces members, first responders, 

and law enforcement officers, and to commit to making 

dramatic progress without delay. 

 

I also have to point out that veterans, including seniors who 

fought for democracy in the Second World War, have faced a 

reduction in Veterans Affairs Canada service recently, including 

the closure of the Veterans Affairs office in Saskatoon this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our country made promises to those veterans, and these things 

we’ve promised have become less stable and more difficult to 

access. And that’s unacceptable. Canada’s veterans kept their 

promises to our nation. It’s saddening to think that our federal 

government would break their promises in return. And it’s not 

acceptable for provincial governments to sit silent and allow 

that to happen. 

 

The Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. I recognize the 

member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly at 

this time of remembrance, it’s important for us all to reflect on 

and thank those that have served and sacrificed, both in the past 

and currently. It’s been noted by many that coming back from 

service can be a very difficult process. And many come back 

wounded in many ways, and many are veterans. All require the 

services and supports that they deserve. 

 

We know that post-traumatic stress disorder and that 

depression, that all sorts of pressures on an entire family and an 

individual can be significant. And I’m sure that for many of us, 

we can only fathom what that can actually be like. So I guess 

it’s important for us to stand together and to support those 

veterans who are returning from missions, and as such I ask the 

member from Walsh Acres to join with us and to state as well 

his opposition to the cuts to veteran services in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And at 

this time, I think our side of the government would just like to 

say that we have the deepest and utmost respect for veterans, 

the men and women that do the hard work abroad and at home 

to keep us safe and keep our democracy protected. 

 

And I feel that we were talking about a provincial program, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it does neither of us a service right now to 

try and score political points on a debate like this. I want to talk 

about what we’re doing for the youth of our province and how 

we’re going to give them the opportunity to gain some 

leadership skills, get them to realize what the sacrifices our men 

and our women have made to keep our country safe, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that question was out of order, and I just 

want to say that we should have more respect for democracy, 

that people put their lives on the line for, than that. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

has been making great strides in ensuring the students of 

Saskatchewan receive the best education. Since 2007 we have 

increased the operating funding for school divisions by 26 per 

cent. We have invested over $700 million in capital funding 

which includes 22 brand new schools as well as nine new 

joint-use schools that will be built by 2017. 

 

We are glad that the NDP is supporting our plan even if they 

don’t have one of their own. We appreciate the support of the 

military education program. To the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale: in this new-found spirit of co-operation, can we 

count on your party to work with us and support this 

government in the education sector strategic plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re talking 

about a specific program, a co-op program which we find 

completely acceptable. But it’s also important to make sure that 

all those resources are in place to ensure that cost is not a 

barrier for those students who have many different interests and 

aptitudes, and ensure that those resources are in place. Every 

day in Saskatoon Riversdale, I hear stories about the fact that 

there are supports that are not in place that so many students 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5791 

need, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 

we’ve heard in different of the speeches, different of the 

measures that have been undertaken by this government in 

terms of support for veterans, for those that have paid a 

significant price in terms of taking up arms to defend our rights 

and freedoms here in Canada and Saskatchewan, and certainly 

this program is brought forward as part of that. We’ve provided 

our opinion on it. 

 

But part of that approach, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting 

to hear from the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow what he 

and his government have done to communicate with the federal 

government their opinion around the cutbacks to supports for 

veterans and the inadequacy of support for those that have come 

back wounded not just in body but in mind and spirit as well. 

So my question is to the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale said it quite well. We’re talking about this 

motion, this motion that this government put forward. And it’s a 

great motion, you know, that the Government of Saskatchewan 

confirms its continued support of Canadian Armed Forces.  

 

And to go off to try and again score political points for their 

cronies during this time of remembrance when, you know, 

when we’ve all had members serve — like we’ve all had family 

members serve in the Canadian Armed Forces — and we hear 

this line of questioning when we’re talking about working with 

our youth, teaching them leadership, teaching them teamwork. 

If you fully support this, I don’t understand why they’re taking 

this line of questioning, Mr. Speaker. Obviously they don’t. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the NDP’s tree book, their former policy clearly stated that they 

wanted to work with educators, parents, students, and officials 

to review the current curriculum. It also states that we need to 

make chances for students to learn more about society, 

government, and the rights and responsibilities that are part of 

citizenship. 

 

Serving our country and strengthening our province’s military 

cannot be closer to the core of our Canadian duties and 

responsibilities. To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: can 

we rely on you to stay true to the policy-developed document 

penned by your leader and work with this government to ensure 

that our students learn about rights and responsibilities of 

citizenship? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think any of 

those members opposite listen to any of our speeches, Mr. 

Speaker. We find this program completely acceptable. 

 

I think one thing we have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there are many different interests and aptitudes of our children 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we need to ensure that 

we have programming in place that makes, that fosters 

individual student’s aptitudes and skills, Mr. Speaker, and that 

cost is not a barrier, Mr. Speaker, that cost does not keep 

children out of learning and pursuing what they love and would 

love to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve stated that the 

program is an acceptable one which provides opportunity and 

choice to students, that provides important learning to students 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not sure why members 

would be heckling at a time of remembrance on an issue like 

this, but I find that a tad tacky. 

 

But I will say that this is an important opportunity that, you 

know, we all have of course the support and respect for those 

that have served and the value of our Canadian forces. And this 

is an important offering. Offering enrichments and hands-on 

learning to students is something that’s really important. I’m 

just wondering if government is focusing in on any other areas 

of dual-track opportunities or other hands-on learning that 

they’d like to report to the Assembly here today? Maybe to the 

member from Wakamow here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Well, again I thank the member for the 

question. Let’s talk about this motion. We’ll talk about how it 

addresses the Saskatchewan plan for growth. The Saskatchewan 

Plan for Growth says that: 

 

By 2015, there will be an expansion of alternative 

credentials for high school completion, through 

partnerships with school boards, teachers, training 

institutions, business and industry. 

 

So we can add one more to that list, the Canadian Armed 

Forces, that we’re going to partner with to help teach our 

students — our students, all our students, your students, our 

students — leadership, teamwork. And again, it’s just one more 

plank in the plan for growth within the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, effective Canadian Forces 

leaders get the job done and look after their people, notes the 

national defence manual on leadership in the Canadian Forces. 

Leaders in the military also think and act in terms of the larger 

team and anticipate and adapt to change. A career in the 

Canadian forces not only teaches students how to work together 

as a team, but also how to lead teams with a sense of duty and 

honour. To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: will you 

support an innovative co-op that not only prepares our students 

to work effectively in teams, but to be better members of 



5792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

society and leaders in their own communities? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I don’t 

think any of those members opposite have listened to a word 

that we’ve said on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We 

think this is an acceptable program and would agree that there is 

definite merit in providing opportunities where our young 

people learn hands-on leadership skills, Mr. Speaker. So again 

we find this to be an acceptable program. And learning 

leadership skills is important, but costs should never be a barrier 

for any child in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon now, shortly after the lunch hour, to be able to enter 

into the debate this afternoon and speak to a piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that I’m very pleased and very happy to be able 

bring forward to this House for the consideration of members 

on both sides of the aisle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The piece of legislation that I have the pleasure to give second 

reading to today is The Buy Local Day Act. And this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is a fairly straightforward bill, and I 

don’t think, Mr. Speaker, it should be overly controversial or 

prove to be overly controversial. You know, from time to time, 

Mr. Speaker, as different pieces of legislation are brought 

forward either from members of cabinet or, Mr. Speaker, 

through private members’ bills, some pieces of legislation are 

contentious because they speak to different discussions that are 

going on in the province, and there will not be agreement on 

both sides of the House and nor should there be agreement on 

certain types of bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are other types of legislation that we bring forward 

that really are about finding common ground and doing what is 

the right thing, doing what is the common sense thing, doing 

what should be done. And we saw that, Mr. Speaker, with 

Howard’s law as one example, the asbestos right-to-know 

legislation, which was important. And I was pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, to have government support on that piece of 

legislation; not at first but, Mr. Speaker, they eventually came 

around and realized that it was in fact a needed and important 

piece of legislation. 

 

In this instance, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that 

should be unanimously endorsed by every single member of 

this House, whether on government or opposition benches. 

What the legislation does is simply to proclaim the first 

Saturday of every month as Buy Local Day. So, Mr. Speaker, 

not overly controversial. 

 

Of course each of us in the Assembly, when we give our 

responses to either a budget or to a Throne Speech or, as we’re 

in adjourned debates talking about issues, you know, we often 

reflect upon our home communities. We reflect upon the people 

we know, and we reflect upon the businesses that are operating 

in our home communities, either providing services or selling 

goods, whatever the case may be. 

 

And so when we look at the notion of having a day a month that 

is designated as a buy-local day, I think that’s something that 

every member should be able to relate to because they can think 

of those businesses in their home communities, those local 

businesses, some that may have been around for many years 

and some that may be new businesses. But they can think of 

those businesses and contemplate on how they could benefit 

from a day once a month where there is increased profile. There 

is increased awareness of the benefits of buying locally. So it’s 

a common sense thing to do, and it’s simply a way to promote 

the value of local businesses in our province’s economy and in 

all of our communities that we represent. 

 

You know, the statistics for the benefits of shopping locally are 

pretty clear. It’s something like for every $100 that are spent at 

a local business, $73 stay in the province. And those dollars that 

stay in the province do important things for our local economy 

and for our constituents. They do things like pay local suppliers. 

They pay wages. They pay taxes, something that of course is 

important. And, Mr. Speaker, they, of course, those dollars are 

put into paying for other services, supporting other businesses, 

and that’s simply a smart way to do things. 

 

You know, if you contrast that with the $100 spent at a business 

that’s not Saskatchewan owned, only $43 stay in the province. 

So we know if we shop locally, support local businesses, $73 

stay in the province, but if it’s making a payment to a business 

that is not Saskatchewan owned, we know only $43 stay in the 

province. 

 

So this is a good thing. It would be a great step, and it would 

encourage that ripple effect that we all want to see, Mr. 

Speaker, of businesses doing well, of creating jobs, of providing 

opportunities for people, of paying taxes municipally or 

provincially in order to provide the good public services that 

people rightfully expect and rightfully need. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s why I think this is simply a common sense thing to do to 

promote the value of local businesses. Not a controversial 

notion, but that’s how we can put Saskatchewan first, Mr. 

Speaker, and promote greater economic sustainability in our 

province. 

 

And again I will ask members to reflect upon, you know, the 

responses to the Throne Speech when we talked about our local 

communities. So I think it’s important to think about those local 

businesses that would benefit and those local businesses that 

give back already in such a big way. 

 

The idea for this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, The Buy 

Local Day Act, came from a group called Sasklandia. And I 

would like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to pay a special 

tribute to a few individuals who are among some of the leaders 

of this grassroots movement. I’d like to pay tribute to Fred 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5793 

Reibin, to Kurtis Muench, and Roshan Hoover that started up 

the Sasklandia group and are working hard through their team 

efforts and connecting with many folks to help build a buy-local 

movement here in Saskatchewan. 

 

What Sasklandia has laid out are a few key pillars for building a 

buy-local movement. And, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re a 

definitely good foundation and a good approach that members 

should be aware of. The first goal that they have, Mr. Speaker, 

is that they want to connect local businesses and the local 

community because as we get to know one another, Mr. 

Speaker, as we make those connections, we know that that’s a 

big part of ensuring that the fabric is there to support a 

buy-local movement here throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

And we can think of, again, of those local businesses in our 

constituencies, in our home cities and towns, in our RMs [rural 

municipality], Mr. Speaker, where people are connected. 

There’s a track record. There’s a relationship. And the children 

of those businesses are going to the same schools, are involved 

in the same community organizations, the same churches, the 

same volunteer groups. And so it’s important to have those 

local connections between the local community and the local 

business. It can happen organically, but it should also be 

fostered where appropriate and where possible. 

 

A second pillar that they have, Mr. Speaker, is that they want to 

incentivize and celebrate buying locally. I know they have some 

thoughts and some plans under way on how there could be good 

opportunities, how it can make sense to the consumer, make 

sense to citizens to support local businesses, and there’s some 

good efforts that they have under way, and to celebrate buying 

locally. You know there are some groups that do this already 

and we can think of the business improvement districts. I think 

of my home city, whether it is on Broadway or whether it’s the 

downtown group or whether it’s the more nascent on 33rd 

Street, which is part of my constituency. It’s important to 

celebrate buying locally and raise awareness, and that’s one of 

their pillars. 

 

A third component that they have, Mr. Speaker, is that they 

want to increase the supply of locally produced goods, which 

will mean more access to local options. 

 

So it’s about making the connections. It’s about providing a bit 

of a carrot, perhaps an incentive as to why it’s good to buy 

locally. And then, Mr. Speaker, it’s also about increasing the 

supply of local produced goods in order to allow businesses to 

thrive. So those pillars are important. 

 

But when we look at them, they’re also in some ways 

complicated and take some time to put together. So I would like 

to commend the Sasklandia group for their efforts, commend 

them for what they’re doing, and to thank them and to let them 

know that members in the Assembly, at least on this side of the 

House and I would hope all members, Mr. Speaker, are 

appreciative of the efforts that they have been making. 

 

But we do know it takes effort. It takes some work. It can be 

complicated. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, their first plank in 

the Sasklandia platform is to gain support from the top. They 

recognize, as we’ve seen in other jurisdictions, in other 

examples, and other causes, that the most effective movements 

have strong supports from governments and legislatures as well 

as from the citizens. 

 

So it’s important to have I suppose that two-pronged approach. 

It’s important to have the grassroots movement, the people 

coming together, which Sasklandia and many other groups are 

working on. But it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, that we as 

legislators take the opportunity to say this is a good thing. This 

is something we support. This is common sense. This supports 

every community throughout the province and this is something 

that we want to see progress, something that we want to see 

thrive, something that we want to see to bring benefits to 

Saskatchewan people. And that is precisely why, Mr. Speaker, 

Sasklandia started pushing for the proclamation of a monthly 

buy-local day. 

 

So back in July, I was actually in Saskatoon . . . or pardon me, 

Mr. Speaker. Back in July, Fred Reibin was quoted in the media 

as saying, and this is the quote: 

 

We’ve all travelled to other places: Vancouver, parts of 

Europe, Montreal, where there’s really strong local culture 

and local business environment. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what Fred, Kurtis, and Roshan want 

to help bring to Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are many great 

individuals and entrepreneurs and businesses that are committed 

to having Saskatchewan do well, having a strong local 

economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe, as do these three 

individuals and many others, that it could be even stronger. It 

could be even better. We could ensure that we have a strong 

local buy-local movement as we see in other jurisdictions, and 

the benefits of that, Mr. Speaker, would ensure that those 

dollars that are spent locally, that more of them stay in 

Saskatchewan, stay in our province and are then put back into 

the economy in supporting other businesses. 

 

I was intrigued when I saw the news coverage of the Sasklandia 

group as they launched their media campaign. So I contacted 

them and asked to meet with them. And we actually met up in 

Saskatoon at a good local business, at the Broadway Roastery at 

five corners, or what was five corners, so the Broadway 

Roastery on Broadway, and we had a good discussion. We had 

a good discussion about what a local movement could mean for 

communities throughout the province. 

 

I listened to their plans. I listened to their observations from 

other jurisdictions and, Mr. Speaker, I thought this was a great 

idea. I appreciated their passion and I appreciated their 

determination and the concrete steps they were doing in 

spreading the word at the local level throughout the province. 

And I said, well I would like to support this. I think this is 

something that the provincial legislature should in fact get 

behind. 

 

I also encouraged them, Mr. Speaker, to reach out to 

government as well. I said, it’s important to talk to opposition 

and we will lend our voice. It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to 

speak to government members. That’s part of the work that 

groups do when they do some campaigning and have a good 

idea. And so that, Mr. Speaker, is what they did. 



5794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2014 

They actually wrote to the Minister of the Economy. You know, 

buy-local movement, support your local economy. You’d think 

the Minister of the Economy would be the right person to reach 

out to. And, Mr. Speaker, they did hear back from the minister, 

but it really wasn’t a supportive letter. It wasn’t buying into 

their view of the importance of supporting local businesses, and 

it wasn’t really offering any support. I guess there’s different 

terms for that type of letter, but it certainly wasn’t one that 

could be characterized as encouraging. 

 

What the Minister of Economy did is, he simply referred them 

to the Canadian Federation of Independent Business who put on 

a Small Business Saturday once a year in October. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, once a year in October on a Saturday, that’s great but 

that’s not the point and that’s not the point that these individuals 

are pushing for. And it’s not the point that we should be 

concerned about here in the Assembly. 

 

As it turns out, Mr. Speaker, the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] actually supports the idea of a monthly 

buy-local day. It was just yesterday, after I had provided first 

reading of this piece of legislation, then following that, not too 

far long after, Mr. Speaker, Marilyn Braun-Pollon who is 

CFIB’s vice-president of prairie and agri-business tweeted, Mr. 

Speaker, that the CFIB is pleased that I introduced The Buy 

Local Day Act in the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work for the Economy minister. It 

doesn’t work for the Economy minister to pretend that the 

CFIB’s once-a-year day is good enough. It certainly doesn’t 

because the CFIB is saying that government should support Bill 

607, The Buy Local Day Act. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So what does this legislation do, Mr. Speaker? If passed, it 

would simply proclaim the first Saturday of each month as Buy 

Local Day. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we would expect, and I 

think Saskatchewan people would expect and Saskatchewan 

people would want that the government would seize 

opportunities around each buy-local day to promote local 

businesses. 

 

We know there are many people at the grassroots level that are 

behind us, and it would be a great opportunity to build those 

bridges and to ensure that local economies benefit as they 

should. We would expect, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

would encourage families to shop at Saskatchewan-owned 

businesses. I know I certainly do, and we do, and certainly hope 

that government members would do the same. 

 

And we would also expect and hope that government would 

provide information to help families make informed consumer 

decisions about the benefits of shopping locally, about 

highlighting some of the strong local businesses that we have. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that would all be a logical extension of 

proclaiming a buy-local day. 

 

But the first step of course would be for the government to 

determine what it would look like and what resources it would 

devote to it. I hope the resources that it would devote to it 

would be effective and would be appropriate for the importance 

of this type of issue. 

Passing this bill simply means that the first Saturday of each 

month would be proclaimed as Buy Local Day. So again this is 

simple. It is straightforward. It should not be controversial in 

the least bit, Mr. Speaker. It should be unanimously endorsed 

by every single member of this House. Here on the opposition 

side, we are fully supportive. And I truly hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that government will also support this bill. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen problems 

with this government’s approach to business. We see that with 

the government’s lazy procurement policies that only look at 

initial price and don’t look at other things like quality, product 

history, supplier experience, warranty, delivery schedule, final 

total price, vendor performance, and local knowledge and a 

local net benefit. 

 

Local . . . [inaudible] . . . business, Mr. Speaker, tell me that 

they’re concerned with the actions that this government has 

taken or failed to take. And I think that’s frustrating and it 

simply isn’t right. And that should be a wake-up call to this 

government that its very short-sighted view isn’t working well 

for Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

We shouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, have to wait for frustration. There 

are positive things that we can do now to support local 

businesses. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be talking more about that, 

I would think, probably on another day. But right now there is 

something concrete and good that this government could do. 

 

This government could support this piece of legislation, which 

isn’t controversial, which isn’t something that should cause a 

whole lot of debate, but it should be something where we 

recognize the common ground. We recognize the good benefits 

that would come of it and we would make it happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Buy Local Day Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 607, The Buy Local Day Act. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

certainly a pleasure to rise and participate in the debate on Bill 

No. 607, The Buy Local Day Act. I can’t wait for the first 

Saturday of each month, Mr. Speaker, to be proclaimed as such. 

And certainly this is a worthy initiative going forward. Glad to 

see it here today. 

 

There is an agreement between the sides in terms of the time 

that we’re going to be taking to debate here today, Mr. Speaker, 

and with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 607. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 607. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 



November 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5795 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:34.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembrance Day 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

 Defending and Protecting Freedom  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5773 

 Remembering Winston Knoll 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5773 

 Veteran Honoured With Knight Medal 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5773 

 Growing a Mo in Movember 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5773 

 Public-Private Partnership Project Receives Award 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5774 

 Community-Based Organization Workers Appreciation Day 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5774 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Quality Council and the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5774 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5774 

 Smart Meter Program 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5776 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5776 

 Saskatchewan Environmental Code 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5778 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5778 

POINT OF ORDER 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5779 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5779 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5779 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Family Matters Program Established 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5779 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5780 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5780 

 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5780 

 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5781 

 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5781 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 Smart Meter Investigation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5781 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5781 

 

 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Canadian Armed Forces Primary Reserve Co-op Program 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5781 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5784, 5790 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5785, 5790 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5786, 5791 

  Lawrence ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5787, 5791 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5789, 5790 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5790 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5791 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5791 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5792 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5794 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


