




















































Hansard: May 01, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, MAY 1, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5265 

 May 1, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to table the reports from the 

Provincial Auditor, Report to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan on the 2013 Financial Statements of CIC Crown 

Corporations and Related Entities in accordance with the 

provisions of section 14(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you, 

through you, and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

take this opportunity to introduce some special guests seated in 

your gallery, some people I’ve gotten to know well, 

constituents, the family of Lindy Kasperski: Sharon Kasperski, 

Jay Kasperski, Daniel, and their one and a half year old son, 

Oliver. 

 

It’s with heavy heart we give them our condolences on the fact 

Lindy passed away last Friday. He gave his life to the people of 

Regina. He was a coach in soccer and very integral in the 

Mosaic Polish pavilion. And we’ll hear a little more on his life 

and the life he dedicated to serving the people of Regina here in 

a member’s statement from the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

So I wish everyone would join me in honouring the Kasperski 

family and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I would like to join with the member in 

welcoming the Kasperski family to the legislature. This was a 

very special place for Lindy, as we all know, and the family 

grew up with their father working here. And to come here and 

acknowledge Lindy’s life I think is an important thing for us, 

but also for the children and spouse and especially for Oliver, 

grandchild. 

 

I had the privilege of bringing greetings at the funeral last 

Friday on behalf of all of us in the Assembly, and I know that 

the Deputy Premier will be very pleased to give an honourable 

statement today. But Lindy was a part of all of our lives, and we 

thank God for his presence among us. And we especially 

welcome you as the family here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’m very pleased to highlight the presence of and 

help introduce two distinguished guests. 

 

One is Dr. John Meehan, president of Campion College. He’s a 

graduate of McGill, of Oxford, and the School of Advanced 

International Studies at Johns Hopkins. And Dr. Meehan 

assumed the presidency of Campion College in 2013. As almost 

everyone in this Assembly will know, Campion is the largest 

Jesuit college east of Montreal, known for its intellectual rigour 

and really the opportunities that it affords its students. 

 

Dr. Meehan is joined today by Ms. Sarah Hanna who just a few 

short weeks ago defended her master’s thesis, and today is her 

very first day on the job as the engaged learning coordinator at 

Campion College. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask members from 

both sides of this Assembly to help welcome these two 

distinguished guests to their Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome Dr. Meehan and Sarah. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming Father Dr. 

John Meehan. He’s got a lot of titles there, Mr. Speaker, but 

certainly as president of Campion College does a tremendous 

job on behalf of one of the great learning institutions in the 

province. And as well, welcome Sarah to her legislature, wish 

her all the best with the job. But it’s good to see these 

representatives from Campion here today. And as a Campion 

grad, I couldn’t be prouder, Mr. Speaker. So welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

welcome a group of 17 grade 5 students sitting in the west 

gallery. Give us all a wave. The Harvest City Christian School, 

17. With them today is teacher Justine Glover and chaperone 

parent Elizabeth Strom. And I’ll be looking forward to getting 

stumped again in questions as I usually do by students but 

looking forward to it. And I’d like all the members to join me in 

welcoming this great group from Regina Coronation Park and 

the Harvest City Christian School to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Request leave for an extended introduction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Douglas Park. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the world of business, it happens from time to time 

that a family-run business is in operation for 100 years or more. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone would agree that that 

doesn’t happen very often. 

 



5266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, up in the very top row is the 
Hipperson family, representing four generations of Hipperson 
Construction and Hy-Grade Millwork, 108 years of 
construction and 87 years of millwork manufacturing in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have an opportunity later to 
elaborate in a member’s statement. 
 
In the top row are Donald Sr. and his wife Nancy, of 62 years. 
Don is the son of William Hipperson, founder of Hipperson 
Construction in Regina in 1906 and of Hy-Grade Millwork in 
Saskatoon in 1927. With them are son Gordon and 
daughter-in-law Rhonda Hipperson — Rhonda, Gord. And they 
represent the third generation of Hipperson Construction. And 
with them are two of their children, Anna and Rhys in the next 
row — Anna, Rhys, thank you. 
 
Next are Donald and Dawn Hipperson, third generation of 
Hy-Grade Millwork in Saskatoon, and their son Greg, Greg 
representing the fourth generation of Hy-Grade Millwork in 
Saskatoon. Also in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, are family 
members: son, Douglas — thanks, Doug — and 
great-granddaughter, Avery Bankowski. Hi, Avery. Avery, Mr. 
Speaker, I was informed this morning, is in town and in Moose 
Jaw for the annual Moose Jaw dance festival, and I was 
informed just this morning that Avery indeed won a medal 
yesterday. We wish her luck on the weekend. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Don and Nancy’s eldest, their 
daughter Karen, my wife, my best friend, and most ardent 
supporter — Karen. I’m sure I’ll pay for that eldest comment a 
little later. I think there’s no doubt about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 
and thanking the Hipperson family for 108 years of contribution 
to the success and the growth of this great province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 
member in welcoming the Hipperson family to the legislature. 
Don and Nancy are constituents of Regina Lakeview, and have 
been neighbours for almost three decades now. But the 
important part for me is that all of us are neighbours when 
we’ve been sitting in the basketball stands at games right across 
Canada, because one of the Hipperson granddaughters, Mary, 
was a teammate of my daughter. So in that connection the 
Hippersons have become friends of ours over many, many 
years. And it’s a great opportunity for me to honour this family 
and their history in Saskatchewan. So I welcome them to the 
legislature today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would like to introduce my second group in seven years, 
so I’m very honoured and privileged to have them here today. 
It’s Se-Se-Wa-Hum from Big River, 23 high school students. 
Welcome to your Assembly. Accompanied by their teacher, 
Marla Netmaker and Doreen Netmaker; chaperones, Rose 
Whitefish and Roderick Rabbitskin. So I look forward to 
meeting with them later this morning. I would like everyone to 

give them a warm greeting in their Assembly. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning I’d like to present a petition calling for greater support 
for anti-bullying initiatives. And we know that the 
consequences of bullying are devastating, including depression, 
self-harm, addictions, and suicide. And we know that other 
provinces have brought forward legislation, various tools and 
programs showing swift and effective government action. And 
we know that this government is not doing enough to create 
safe spaces in our schools for gay and transgender students or 
students bullied because of their sexual identity. And this 
government must act so that students have simple, 
easy-to-understand information about gay-straight alliances in 
their schools and how to form a GSA [gay-straight alliance] and 
who they should talk to in order to form a GSA today. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that bullying is a human rights issue, one of 
safety and inclusion. I would like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: we call on the government to 
take immediate and meaningful action to protect 
Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 
of young people are at stake and this government must do 
more to protect our youth. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
safety on Dewdney Avenue and the inundation of heavy-haul 
truck traffic and semis on to Dewdney Avenue, a consequence 
of decisions of this government, recognizing that there’s an 
unsafe condition, circumstance on that road that needs to be 
resolved. Residents note that this is an issue created by that 
government and any further delays to address this unsafe 
condition are entirely unacceptable. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of families, communities, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting of the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5267 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition. 
Many northern residents benefited from the rental purchase 
option program, also known as RPO [rental purchase option]. 
These families are very proud homeowners in their 
communities. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government 
stubbornly ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it 
cancelled the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I once 
again stand today to present a petition on building a second 
bridge to Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert will receive a commitment from 
senior government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these three pages of 
petitions are primarily from Saskatoon, but we have a number 
of other petitions that have been signed from people from all 
throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present the petition on the 
second bridge for Prince Albert. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. And the undersigned 
residents wish to bring to our attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita in all of Canada; Saskatchewan’s emissions have 
continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes, as reported by 
Environment Canada in October 2013, and show no signs of 
decreasing; that the Saskatchewan government has failed to 
tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the province’s own 
targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural environment; 
and, since 2009, the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced 
climate change funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per 

cent cut in the 2014-15 budget: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
enact a real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the 
provincial budget to tackle climate change by reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 
 

And the people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Reading and receiving petitions. 
Statements . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sorry. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good anticipation. 
 
The Speaker: — You’re not supposed to anticipate. I recognize 
the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

May Day 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I stand today in solidarity with workers across the 
world as we recognize May Day, also known as International 
Labour Day. 
 
May Day has its origins in the movement for an eight-hour 
workday that swept the United States and Canada during the 
mid-1880s. It was on this day in 1886 that thousands of North 
American workers mobilized and protested in Haymarket 
Square in Chicago. Now for over a century, May Day has 
become a time for workers around the world to acknowledge 
how far we’ve come and to celebrate what has been achieved. 
But it’s also a time to refocus and to reaffirm our conviction to 
support workers’ rights moving forward. 
 
The tenacious and revolutionary spirit of May Day extends 
beyond our borders as people fight for safe and fair workplaces 
across the globe. Now more than ever, we should be setting the 
bar for labour standards and standing with workers around the 
world who are being denied their basic, fundamental labour 
rights. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, “No work is 
insignificant. All labor that uplifts humanity has dignity and 
importance and should be undertaken with painstaking 
excellence.” Let us all celebrate May Day with this in mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this House join 
with me in recognizing May Day. I’m honoured to stand in 
solidarity with workers throughout the world in calling for fair 
and safe working conditions for everyone. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Remembering Lindy Kasperski 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



5268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

it was with great sadness that I learned about the passing of 
Lindy Kasperski on April 18th. Lindy was a devoted MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly], a passionate historian, 
and an encouraging friend. 
 
The eldest of four siblings, Lindy was born in Regina but spent 
the majority of his childhood in Moose Jaw. His eagerness to 
learn was evident from a young age. Lindy skipped the fifth 
grade and, at the age of 17, was the youngest student to attend 
the University of Regina in over 20 years. 
 
In 1973 Lindy accepted his first job as the multicultural 
coordinator with the Department of Culture and Youth, and in 
1995 he was elected to the Legislative Assembly as the MLA 
for Regina Sherwood. Lindy received perfect attendance 
records during his early years in the legislature and was always 
eager to talk with constituents, the public, and fellow MLAs. As 
an MLA, Lindy spoke French in many proceedings and read 
member statements in Polish, Ukrainian, and German. He was a 
founding member of the Regina Open Door Society, Regina 
Mosaic festival, and an important resource for many 
multicultural groups in Saskatchewan. 
 
Lindy encouraged me to explore and find the roots of my 
Ukrainian ancestry and for that I am grateful. I ask all members 
to join me in recognizing the many contributions of Lindy 
Kasperski. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Record Corporate Donation to Heritage Centre 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to recognize an 
important event I had the opportunity to attend last week, along 
with colleagues. On April 24th the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] Heritage Centre received a $1 million 
donation from Mosaic potash company. 
 
This is the largest single corporate donation the beautiful 
facility has received since opening its doors. The Heritage 
Centre is integral in relaying the strong history of the RCMP. 
This investment will make sure that the centre will be able to 
enhance its important contribution to our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the centre is certainly worthy of this generous gift. 
The main gallery takes visitors on a journey through the history 
of the Mounted Police and how it has evolved from its early 
days as a frontier police to a world-recognized force. 
 
CEO [chief executive officer] Al Nicholson announced last 
week they are planning to enrich exhibits and add more 
interactive components, extend community education and 
outreach initiatives. 
 
I’d like to thank Al Nicholson and his team at the Heritage 
Centre for their incredible work, and the Friends of the Heritage 
Centre for all their support. The RCMP are an integral part of 
Canadian history and also have a truly special place in 
Saskatchewan’s history and future. So it is greatly valued to see 
Mosaic, as well as all generous friends and donors, recognizing 
the importance of sharing its story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me to say thank you 

and extend our appreciation to all. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Construction Company’s Century of Achievements 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Four generations of 
Hippersons have helped build and continue to build 
Saskatchewan. Hipperson Construction was established in 1906 
by William Hipperson after he relocated to Regina from Ontario 
to supervise the construction of the Ackerman Building located 
on Dewdney Avenue. 
 
Notable Regina properties completed in those early years 
included the Qu’Appelle Apartments on the corner of 14th 
Avenue and Hamilton Street and the historic St. Mary’s 
Anglican Church on 15th Avenue. 
 
William’s son Donald took over the company in 1952 and over 
the next 45 years more Saskatchewan landmarks were 
completed, including many of Regina’s churches and schools 
and the award-winning power plant at the U of R [University of 
Regina]. 
 
In 1991, Don’s son Gordon took charge and developed 
Hipperson Construction into one of Saskatchewan’s top 100 
companies. 
 
Hy-Grade Millwork in Saskatoon, another successful Hipperson 
company, was born out of necessity in 1927 when William 
Hipperson determined that it was too expensive to freight 
millwork to Saskatoon from Manitoba. Through the years, 
Hy-Grade was run by William, then Donald Sr., his son Donald, 
and now William’s great-grandson Greg, making for four 
generations of Hipperson ownership. 
 
Their work can be seen in the Bessborough hotel in Saskatoon, 
City Hospital, the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and just 
about every other major institution in Saskatchewan. Alumni of 
the U of S and active supporters of Huskie athletics, the 
Hippersons provided the resources and expertise to renovate 
and refurbish Huskie basketball team rooms at the U of S. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the 
contributions of Hipperson Construction and Hy-Grade 
Millwork to the success and growth of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Moose Jaw Chosen as Reading Town Canada 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce that Moose Jaw has been proclaimed as the first ever 
Reading Town Canada to take place all next week. 
 
Reading Town Canada is a national reading campaign dedicated 
to the principles that reading is essential to the happiness of 
individuals and to that person’s capacity to act as a citizen in 
democracy. It is a coalition of writers, educators, librarians, 
publishers, and readers from all across Canada. Its mission is to 
make reading a national priority for all Canadians. High voting 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5269 

rates, volunteerism, a sense of belonging, and physical, 

emotional, and mental health are all fostered by reading for 

pleasure. When Canada reads, Canada grows. 

 

To show people what the Reading Town Canada would look 

like, a national reading program created by Reading Town 

Canada project . . . I’m proud to say that Moose Jaw has been 

chosen to host this project because it is simply the best place to 

do this. The enthusiastic arts community, the substantial success 

of the Festival of Words, the community infrastructure, and the 

great can-do attitude of the citizens of all Moose Jaw are ideal 

to host this event. There are several events planned throughout 

the week for people of all ages. 

 

I encourage all members to show their support for Reading 

Town Canada by either visiting Moose Jaw and taking in some 

of the many events or taking time to read something new each 

day for a week, next week, May 3rd to 10th. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Missing Children’s Month 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to announce that the government has proclaimed the 

month of May as Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. 

 

This year marks the 23rd Green Ribbon Campaign by Child 

Find Saskatchewan, which culminates with National Missing 

Children’s Day on May 25th. According to Child Find 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, thousands of children are reported 

missing in Canada every year. Having a Missing Children’s 

Month is a vital opportunity to raise awareness in Saskatchewan 

and throughout Canada on behalf of missing children and their 

families. The Green Ribbon campaign is a nationally 

recognized symbol to remember missing children and hope for 

their safe return. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to the safety and 

well-being of all Saskatchewan children, including those who 

are missing, and their families. That is why we are wearing the 

green ribbon today. Green ribbons and Green Ribbon donation 

boxes can be found at Saskatchewan Liquor Board stores across 

the province during the month of May. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to encourage all Saskatchewan citizens to wear a Green 

Ribbon of Hope to show their support and help raise awareness. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Immunization Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 26th to May 3rd 

is National Immunization Awareness Week. Immunization is 

the most effective way to prevent and control infectious 

diseases. Previous generations were threatened by serious 

illnesses caused by infectious diseases. We now have easy 

access to vaccines to help protect us. 

 

Our province offers a comprehensive package of publicly 

funded immunization programs. We provide routine 

vaccinations for infants, pre-school, and school children. Since 

2010 we’ve been offering flu shots free of charge to all 

Saskatchewan residents six months and older. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this awareness week is an opportunity to 

encourage everyone to make sure their immunizations are up to 

date. This is very important for children so they can stay 

healthy and safe. Getting immunized on schedule provides them 

with the best protection against vaccine-preventable diseases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank the public health staff across 

the province. They work tirelessly every day to deliver 

immunization programs and keep children, parents, and families 

safe. They worked very hard during the last influenza season 

and did an amazing job providing the vaccine quickly to people 

who needed it most. I ask my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing these valuable health professionals for their 

contributions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we brought 

forward concerns we’ve been hearing from professors and 

students about TransformUS and its long-term ramifications for 

the university, the minister said that everything is fine and that 

he has full confidence in the TransformUS process. My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: does he share this lack 

of concern? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I reject the premise of the question. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s one of the reasons that we as a government 

invested more than $350 million in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that marks a 65 per cent increase in operating 

support to the University of Saskatchewan since we’ve had the 

honour of serving government. Here’s what the TransformUS 

has to say about government support, and I quote: 

 

To respond more fully to the question of how well the 

university is supported by the government, one needs to 

compare how we are doing relative to other provincial 

sectors in terms of total funding and comparatively with 

our western Canadian peers. In the March 2014 provincial 

budget, the allocation for Advanced Education increased 

by 3.7%. The resulting increase to the University of 

Saskatchewan was approximately 4.4%. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, “When we compare across 

provincial sectors, post-secondary education received the 

largest increase in 2014.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about the 

concerns being raised on campus about the TransformUS 



5270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

process and its long-term implications for the university, and 

whether the Premier shares the lack of concern that we just saw 

once again from the Minister of Advanced Ed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a big difference, there’s a big difference 

between interfering in university affairs and ensuring that the 

right questions are asked and taking a proper interest in what’s 

happening at our publicly funded university. This government is 

failing to do that, Mr. Speaker, but instead they’ve given carte 

blanche to the TransformUS process, and they are stubbornly 

dismissing the very real concerns that are being brought 

forward by respected faculty and by students. 

 

One of the big concerns is about the elimination of jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve already seen the elimination of 248 jobs on 

campus, and yesterday we learned that there will be even more 

cuts. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: how many 

jobs will be eliminated at the University of Saskatchewan at the 

conclusion of TransformUS? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, once again I reject completely the notion that we are in 

any way overlooking the concerns of students, of scholars, of 

faculty. In fact just this morning, I sent an email off to Dr. 

Sandy Ervin. Sandy has an op-ed piece today in The 

StarPhoenix, to which I responded: 

 

While there are points worthy of discussion for us as a 

result of your op-ed piece, my most direct and immediate 

concern is for the student that you reference. If and as 

she’s interested in following up directly, please feel free to 

provide her with this email address or the ones listed 

below. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted with our investments. We know 

what’s going on at the University of Saskatchewan. We know 

that’s meant to help meet a promise of making sure that this is 

one of the world’s leading institutions. That’s why we’re 

making record investments, Mr. Speaker, record investments — 

more than $350 million in this year’s budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re attentive to what’s going on. At the same 

time, we’re very respectful of the governance and 

independence, the rightful independence of the University of 

Saskatchewan to continue on its trajectory towards world-class 

education for our students in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suppose it’s good 

that the minister is sharing his email address. I didn’t know that 

was such a guarded secret. 

 

But the concern, Mr. Speaker, is when respected faculty, when 

the USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union], when 

the faculty association have voiced their concerns about 

TransformUS, we saw the minister say as recently as this week 

that he had confidence in the TransformUS process and that it 

was fine as it is. There were no alarm bells that the minister 

saw. 

 

Students, faculty, and staff, Mr. Speaker, have been on edge on 

campus for months now. And, Mr. Speaker, they remain on 

edge because there was some information released yesterday in 

the report, but the final details are not there. It’s understandable 

that the mood on campus is very grim. One program that will be 

greatly affected, Mr. Speaker, is the school of public health, 

which just recently received international accreditation which is 

vital to its ongoing success. But the TransformUS report 

yesterday stated that the school of public health should be rolled 

into the College of Medicine. The concerns that I’m hearing, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this could jeopardize the recent 

accreditation that it received. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: is he aware of this 

concern, and what is this government doing to ensure that our 

school of public health maintains its accreditation and maintains 

its very well-earned reputation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a fair and legitimate question. In fact it’s one 

that we’ve been working on with the university for a 

considerable period of time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, just this week 

I’ve received reassurance from the president. I’ll read it in for 

the record, and that is: 

 

Nothing is decided until it goes through the governance 

bodies. And in this internal matter that the university must 

manage, we believe that the restructuring will make health 

care provision better, not worse, and that it will force 

better accountability and collaboration and that we would 

[quote] never jeopardize accreditation. 

 

That’s directly from the University of Saskatchewan. I’m 

asking those questions, Mr. Speaker. They’re fair and 

legitimate. We are on the case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — That’s an interesting response, Mr. Speaker, 

because just two days ago this very same minister, when we 

asked about the outcomes of the TransformUS process, he said 

it’s too early to say anything. And so it’s interesting now to 

know that there’s been, it sounds like detailed discussions about 

the implications of TransformUS. Those are two very different 

stories we’re hearing just recently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that’s being affected by TransformUS 

is the Centre for Continuing and Distance Education, which is 

slated to be gutted. The centre offers, Mr. Speaker, language 

courses, music, business and leadership programs, and personal 

and professional interest programs. It’s an important centre, Mr. 

Speaker, for the city of Saskatoon, but important for the entire 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier: is he concerned to 

hear that the Centre for Continuing and Distance Education at 

the University of Saskatchewan is on the chopping block? 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5271 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, a 

fair and legitimate question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what we 

do know is that key functions that the centre has undertaken 

will actually be shifted to some academic programming. It may 

actually create more opportunities for graduate students or 

retired faculty members to get out and actually engage with 

members of the community. 

 

What’s important here, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that 

this is an internal university matter. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

very, very pleased to talk about post-secondary education. 

We’re very pleased to talk about $5.5 billion of investment as 

our track record. We’re pleased to talk about the more than 

$350 million invested in the University of Saskatchewan. We’re 

also very, very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 

independence of the University of Saskatchewan and allowing 

the university to do its business. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, he says, allow the university to do 

its business, but he needs to take an interest in what is 

happening. They need to have an opinion, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s appropriate at the Centre for Continuing and Distance 

Education to eliminate the language courses, eliminate the 

music courses, eliminate the business and leadership programs 

for people here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday’s report, Mr. Speaker, provided some information 

but lacked concrete details about the full impact of 

TransformUS on our province’s largest university. As the 

details come out, Mr. Speaker, what I’m hearing from the 

university community is that there needs to be proper discussion 

and scrutiny by campus and by all Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. The right questions need to be asked and the Deputy 

Premier knows that. It’s the beginning of May, Mr. Speaker. 

Students are off campus. Many faculty are away. And what I’ve 

heard from deans, what I’ve heard from student leaders, is that 

this cannot be rushed. 

 

My question is to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: will he ensure that 

proper scrutiny occurs, and major decisions that have long-term 

ramifications for the university for decades to come, Mr. 

Speaker, will not be rushed through? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the member 

opposite knows that there will be due deliberation and that the 

governance structures, which include the council, will be fully 

engaged by this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, talking about a couple of days ago, the member 

opposite, and I quote this, Mr. Speaker, he offered this, he said, 

“. . . that we might as well at the end of TransformUS rename 

the university Meewasin Valley community college.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he may quote a few individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, but here’s who I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to quote Sir Wilfrid Laurier on the creation of the University of 

Saskatchewan where he said, “There is no doubt that this 

university will in time be one of the world’s greatest.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, he went on to say, “Let a university arise here which 

may be a worthy disciple of Oxford, Cambridge, and other 

universities which have done so much.” From July 29th, 1910, 

it’s in that spirit that we defend the University of 

Saskatchewan’s independence, Mr. Speaker. And we will 

continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Lean refused to reveal what this government has 

spent to date on its lean pet project. So let me put this question 

in terms all Saskatchewan people well understand. To the 

Minister of Lean: government-wide across ministries, agencies, 

and Crowns for this government’s lean pet project, do we have 

a total? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we know that when the NDP [New Democratic Party] come 

into question period, their information they bring with them is 

not always correct. So I’d like to take this opportunity to correct 

the record on some lean initiatives. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, hung up on Christmas trees, 

said those were, the ones that were being thrown away, were for 

fundraising purposes. That is wrong, Mr. Speaker. They were 

donated to the hospital. The NDP’s crack research team phoned 

the foundation yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and they knew that. 

 

Yesterday the NDP said that government was throwing away 

Christmas trees. Wrong again. It wasn’t government. It was an 

initiative of the local health authority. If the Leader of the 

Opposition had just read committee Hansard, Mr. Speaker, he 

would have known that. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP blamed 

this government for Christmas trees. Wrong again. The 

initiative was undertaken by the CEO at the time. And what 

time was that, Mr. Speaker? 2006. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Leader of the Opposition can turn 

around in his little chair and direct his feigned outrage to the 

member from Lakeview, who would have been Health minister 

when this lean initiative was undertaken. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I know the minister doesn’t want to answer the 

question, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll certainly try again. We know 

about a $40 million contract in Health, which is in addition to 

an annual cost of more than $17 million on kaizen promotion 

offices. And there are millions more to pay for various websites 

to promote lean in health care, physician training for lean, and 

extra contracts for lean consultants. Mr. Speaker, that’s not to 

forget the salary costs it takes for senior administrators to 

become John Black certified lean leaders, what some are 

apparently called getting kaizen black belts, Mr. Speaker.  



5272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

All told, Mr. Speaker, a very conservative estimate for lean 

costs in health care alone is now more than $76 million, more 

than $76 million in health care alone, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t 

include the rest of government. So to the Minister of Lean, 

again: what is the total cost of the government’s lean pet 

project? 

 

The Speaker: — It would be helpful if both sides were 

prepared to listen to the questions and to the answers. I 

recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate the member for Elphinstone and his new-found 

interest in this critic area. I’ve been the minister for about two 

years and he’s never asked a question. He didn’t ask any 

questions at committee. We had an hour and a half on lean 

estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if the members opposite would like to know, the Minister 

of Health has been on his feet several times. As of January this 

year, Health has spent $26 million on lean initiatives. Executive 

government, which includes Education and Advanced 

Education as third party sectors, is about $5.3 million. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a total of $31 million to date. Cost avoidance has 

been $18.2 million. We have accumulative savings of $46 

million, Mr. Speaker, and that doesn’t even include the 

improved customer service that our government is offering to 

the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it may have started out as the 

Premier’s pet project, but more and more lean costs make it 

look like Godzilla, Mr. Speaker. A very conservative 

calculation of the costs to taxpayers of this government’s lean 

pet project, based on the incomplete information provided so 

far, the amount is somewhere near more around $100 million, 

Mr. Speaker. And the meter keeps running each and every day, 

and we hear about more millions in costs. 

 

So the minister could clear up the uncertainty around the total 

figure if she would stand in the House and answer the question 

today. Again to the minister: what is the total cost for the lean 

pet project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I just did that. 

Yesterday the NDP opposition critic said it was 92 million. And 

today he’s ran it up to 100 million — again, Mr. Speaker, their 

crack research team at work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I just said, Health as of January of this year, 

$26 million; executive government, third party Education, 

Advanced Education sectors, $5.3 million, Mr. Speaker; 

cumulative savings of $45.9 million; cost avoidance of almost 

$20 million, Mr. Speaker; and improved customer service to the 

people of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this government could do 

the right thing and table all of the expenses on the lean pet 

project. They could finish answering the written questions the 

opposition has asked and table those answers in the House 

today. Taxpayers have a right to the truth and to the whole 

picture. 

 

To the minister: why won’t she answer that question? Is it 

because she doesn’t know the answer or because she doesn’t 

want taxpayers to know the answer? Why won’t they table the 

answers to the written questions? Why won’t they come clean? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 

member opposite’s earpiece isn’t working, but for the third time 

today I will tell him. Health, as of January of this year, of the 

$40 million contract has spent $26 million; executive 

government, including third party Education and Advanced 

Education sectors, $5.3 million. To do the math, Mr. Speaker, 

$31.3 million. That includes cost avoidance of almost $20 

million across government, a cumulative savings of $45.9 

million, Mr. Speaker, and improved customer service to the 

people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Traffic Safety in the North 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government is once again not listening to the people of Prince 

Albert about highway safety concerns. We’ve been hearing that 

Highway No. 2 north of Prince Albert has a number of safety 

issues. Community members are saying traffic on No. 2 North 

is too heavy, turning is hazardous, and it’s getting dangerous to 

share the road with speeding semis on a stretch of highway with 

so few turning lanes and shoulders. So, Mr. Speaker, when 

community members who use the Red Wing intersection 

reached out to the local MLAs, they felt that their valid 

concerns were dismissed. 

 

My question to the minister: when will the members from 

Prince Albert and this minister start listening to the concerns 

from the people of Prince Albert and area to fix these problems 

once and for all? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll say on the outset that through the Ministry of 

Highways and this government, the Sask Party government, we 

take traffic safety as our number one priority absolutely, Mr. 

Speaker, across the province. 

 

We have seen the traffic increase over the province on every 

highway over the last number of years and with that, we’ve 

taken safety precautions in many areas. I can tell you that the 

MLAs from those areas — whether it’s from Prince Albert or 

surrounding MLAs, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan Rivers, 

for example — have been raising issues, Mr. Speaker, of that 

area. They know the traffic volumes have increased. 

 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5273 

We want to look at what can be done to make sure that the 

traffic in that area can travel those roads safely. But I do know, 

Mr. Speaker, volumes are going up across the province. We’re 

addressing many of those issues. There’s more work to be done. 

That’s why this year, Mr. Speaker, you see a record amount of 

spending in Highways with a budget of $664.5 million, more 

money spent in Highways than ever in the history of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this minister should be aware of 

the safety issues on this stretch of highway, and there are many. 

The people of Prince Albert have been calling for a second 

bridge to ease the congestion for this area for a number of years. 

And after a deadly three-car collision at the Red Wing 

intersection where a woman lost her life, Jim Miller, the 

Buckland fire chief, pointed out how busy it was and labelled it 

a high-collision intersection. 

 

One of the unhelpful suggestions that community members 

were given by their local MLA was to use another intersection. 

My question to the minister: a detour, Mr. Speaker, is how this 

government’s way is to handle the serious traffic safety 

concerns that have been expressed to them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, again, we continue to 

evaluate all highways across this province to see how we can 

make improvements, whether it’s on the surface or whether it’s 

engineering, to make sure intersections are safer. 

 

I’m trying to figure out quite, and perhaps he can answer this in 

his next question, how a second bridge, when No. 2 highway is 

the main artery up through the North — so past the Red Wing 

School for example, as you go further north, it is the main 

artery — how a second bridge going across the Saskatchewan 

River, which will then no doubt join up with No. 2 where these 

issues are, how that impacts the traffic safety of No. 2 North, 

Mr. Speaker? I think he just weaved it in because it was written 

in the question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do take those concerns serious. That’s why we’re spending 

record amounts of money. You’ll continue to see that, Mr. 

Speaker, far outweighing what was spent in previous years 

under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, with that answer, the people of 

Prince Albert are shaking their heads. The people of Prince 

Albert are feeling deserted by this government. The Prince 

Albert MLAs campaigned for a second bridge. Now they sit 

silently and look on as the people that they represent get more 

and more frustrated with answers like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Prince Albert is in a traffic crisis, yet this government continues 

to make excuses about their broken bridge commitment. At the 

same time, when residents raise their concerns to government, 

they are dismissed and simply told to go and figure it out, as the 

minister just did just now, Mr. Speaker. 

My question to the minister: these Prince Albert MLAs are not 

delivering on their campaign commitment for a second bridge 

for the area, but can they at least lobby this minister and their 

government to put in immediate measures to keep the men, 

women, and children who use the Red Wing intersection and 

the congested Highway No. 2 safe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely the MLAs in 

that area are very aware with the increase of traffic in that area 

and have certainly talked to me on many different occasions, 

Mr. Speaker, when we have had the opportunity. 

 

It’s too bad that after three and a half hours of estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, we had three and a half hours, one-on-one estimates 

where that critic could ask whatever questions he wanted to 

regarding highways across this province, and not once did he 

drop below the northern authority, Mr. Speaker. After three and 

a half hours of asking questions in estimates, Mr. Speaker, 

where were these questions? These questions never came up 

once, Mr. Speaker. He all of a sudden has a new-found love for 

the area of P.A. [Prince Albert], Mr. Speaker, only in question 

period? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the MLAs on this side have 

done more for Prince Albert and will continue to doing more for 

Prince Albert than any NDP MLA has ever done in the history 

of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Camping Fee Increases 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in the dark, cold days of January, 

the government again increased fees for camping. And later this 

month, Saskatchewan families will start paying a much higher 

price. For a full-service site, this government had no problem 

increasing fees $9 a night. Mr. Speaker, that means that Sask 

Party increased total fees in the range of 4 to $11 per site per 

night. For an economy site, the government has increased fees 

32 per cent, once you factor in their additional booking fee for 

their failed booking site that has overcharged campers hundreds 

of thousands of dollars. And for a full-service site, the fees have 

skyrocketed 41 per cent.  

 

To the minister: at a time when people are thinking about their 

summer holidays, how can the government justify a 41 per cent 

increase in camping fees? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member’s question, our costs have 

gone up over the last seven years by 42 per cent. There has not 

been a fee increase on park fees in the last five years, Mr. 

Speaker, so since 2009. We have increased the fees by about 35 

per cent over the last five years, Mr. Speaker. That compares 

with the NDP’s seven years of 1995 to 2000 where they 



5274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

increased fees by 43 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the premise of the question the hon. 

member referenced in the cold, dark days of January, we 

actually start allowing campers to book towards the end of 

January on seasonal sites and the beginning of March for the 

sites, in comparison, Mr. Speaker, in comparison, Mr. Speaker, 

to the NDP days when the member from Athabasca was the 

minister responsible for Parks, they announced a fee increase 

three days before the long weekend in May, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the former minister for camping 

fee increases said people wanted to pay more for campsites. It 

was one of the most bizarre things to ever come out of a 

minister’s mouth. 

 

The new fees for camping have made a weekend camping trip 

an expensive event, Mr. Speaker, and may discourage people 

from checking out our beautiful parks and lakes. That new $9 

fee is equivalent to a pack of wieners, a pack of buns, and a bag 

of marshmallows. This government is sitting on its hands while 

the cost of living, the cost of having a nice family camping trip 

are skyrocketing. 

 

To the Minister: why would the government let camp fees 

skyrocket, bungle up its online booking system after it leaned it 

and privatized it, and then tell campers they just weren’t 

appreciating the value of the campsites? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. We went 

through a couple, three or fours hours of estimates the other 

night. There wasn’t any discussion with respect to the actual 

parks’ fees themselves. There was some discussion about the 

online camping system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has increased investments into our provincial 

parks over the last five or six years by some 200 per cent over 

what the NDP invest in our provincial parks. Equate that, Mr. 

Speaker, with the record visitations over the last three years. 

Every successive year, we’ve had more people utilizing our 

camps, our provincial parks in this province than ever before in 

the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. Couple that with the 

fact that this year — even with the fee increases where our costs 

have gone up some 42 per cent, no fee increases in the last five 

years — we’re on record pace for another record visitation this 

year to our provincial parks. 

 

Unlike when the NDP charged for firewood and for the wiener 

roast tax on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

going to do that. We invest in our parks in this province. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its seventh report. I 

move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 

House Services Committee: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 340 through 346. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 340 through 346. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Aboriginal Engagement in the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to lead 

off this debate today and at the end of my comments to move a 

motion in support of our government’s actions and policies to 

foster greater Aboriginal engagement in the provincial 

economy. 

 

I would like to begin today with a quote from a First Nations 

elder from my area, Elder Theresa, who said, “Working 

together is better than talking about each other.” Mr. Speaker, I 

couldn’t agree more with that, and I think that sums up 

perfectly what our Saskatchewan Party government has been 

doing since we formed government in ’07. 

 

So what I would like to do today is highlight some of our 

actions that have proven to be very successful over the past six 

and a half years. Mr. Speaker, you only need to look at some of 

the priorities outlined in our plan for growth to see that we are 

absolutely committed to ensuring that First Nations and Métis 

people are ready and able to participate in the economic 

opportunities that are available in our province today. 

 

The Conference Board of Canada estimates that if 

Saskatchewan businesses employed Aboriginal people at an 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5275 

equivalent rate to non-Aboriginal people, economic activity in 

this province would increase by $1.34 billion by 2015. A 

staggering figure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know that in order to close that employment gap we 

need to first close the gap in educational achievement, and that 

is why we are aiming to reduce the graduation rate gap between 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal students by 50 per cent by 2020. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to outline a few of our educational 

initiatives that are proving to be very effective in achieving 

those goals. Some weeks ago I had the opportunity to travel to 

Saskatoon with our Education minister and make an 

announcement with regards to Microsoft licensing agreement. 

Our government was very pleased to have contributed $120,000 

towards this Microsoft licensing agreement. What this 

agreement will do, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to provide computer 

access, computer programming for 91 First Nations schools 

around this province. That gives those students the same 

opportunity as the students in our urban schools to have access 

to computers, to computer learning and other programs that are 

provided through those computers. 

 

Early last fall, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of bringing 

greetings on behalf of this Saskatchewan Party government in 

my own constituency at the Atoskewin Success Centre. This is 

a success centre that was started by the Battlefords Agency 

Tribal Chiefs, and myself along with the federal minister in 

charge of Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Valcourt, we opened that 

facility in September of 2013. And I’m proud to say that our 

government contributed $227,000 to that facility. 

 

And what they do at the Atoskewin Success Centre is they’re 

providing GED [general equivalency diploma] preparation for 

First Nations and Métis people. They’re providing adult basic 

education seats, and they’re working diligently to close that gap 

that we’re talking about between Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal people. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I’d like to talk a little bit about our First Nations and Métis 

achievement fund. This fund is committing $3.8 million for 

three years and this is going to provide funding for school 

boards to use in programs and initiatives that they see fit to help 

First Nations and Métis people become ready to work in our 

economy. 

 

Our northern career quest program, Mr. Speaker. Since 2008 

the total funding from all partners for this program has been $50 

million, with our government’s share some $10.8 million. To 

date, Mr. Speaker, this program has resulted in approximately 

1,450 jobs and it is expected that by 2015 another 625 jobs will 

be created for First Nations and Métis people. 

 

Earlier in this session I talked about our Crown Investments 

Corporation’s bursary program, the Aboriginal bursaries 

program where they’re providing 85 bursaries of $5,000 apiece, 

Mr. Speaker. And these bursaries are available to students at the 

U of R, U of S, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology], SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies], and the Lakeland College. 

 

What these bursaries do, Mr. Speaker, is plain and simple. They 

provide funding to help students ease the burden a little bit of 

financial responsibilities. And we all know that students have a 

lot of constraints on the money that they have available to them 

when they’re going to school. And I’d just like to quote one of 

the students that received this bursary, if I could, Mr. Speaker: 

“Please thank everyone who made this possible. I am forever 

grateful. Even after this scholarship is gone, I will have an 

education and that will never go away.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, since that expansion . . . Originally this program 

was just offered in the U of R. In 2009 we expanded it to 

include the U of R, SIIT, SIAST, and in 2010 we expanded it to 

include Lakeland College as well. Since that expansion, Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided 337 bursaries. A total of $1.69 

million has been provided by Crown Investments Corporation. 

That is very substantial funding for our post-secondary students 

in this province. In 2012, Mr. Speaker, we commissioned the 

joint task force and have already begun to implement some of 

the recommendations that were made in that task force. 

 

I talked about the Atoskewin learning centre here a moment 

ago, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that the instructors and the 

management of that school told me, when the students first 

come to their school, one of the first things they have to do is 

get them a driver’s licence. A lot of our First Nations students 

weren’t getting their driver’s licence. Through SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and this government, 

we have engaged in a program to provide driver education in 

First Nations schools, on-reserve schools. We expect that the 

uptake on that program this year, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 

approximately 2,600 students. So that’s going to be 2,600 First 

Nations students that are going to be more ready to participate 

in the opportunities available in this province today. 

 

Another time when . . . people that I’ve talked to with regard to 

the driver’s licensing issue was the SIIT office in my town of 

The Battlefords. They also pointed out the first thing they did to 

help students be job ready was to get the driver’s licence. So 

again this program’s going to help. 

 

Okay. Last year we pledged $3 million to address the initiatives 

and recommendations made in that joint task force. In the 

2014-15 budget, we have doubled that to $6 million for 

initiatives in that program. 

 

Last year we dedicated $1.5 million to the invitational shared 

services initiative. And that provided support to First Nations 

schools as the same support that was available in the provincial 

schools. This support will provide, among other things, 

programs for reading and literacy and will assist First Nations 

schools to meet the goals set out in our recently announced 

education sector strategic plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are goals that have been set in and through 

and with co-operation and consultation with First Nations 

stakeholders to ensure our First Nations students meet 

provincial assessments and have the same level of success as do 

non-Aboriginal students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another $1.5 million was dedicated to funding for 

Help Me Tell My Story. This initiative offered iPad technology 

to assess First Nations children’s oral language skills and 



5276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

provide feedback to parents, elders, and teachers and enable 

them to be more involved in the children’s education. Parents 

can now become teachers in their own home. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe learning begins in the home and now it can continue in 

the home as well. 

 

I think that FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

Vice-chief Bobby Cameron said it best when he said this about 

the JTF [joint task force] funding, and I quote: “It’s about 

creating opportunities and opening those doors, making our 

children want to come to school and learn in a healthy 

environment. And these JTF recommendations, they’re going to 

do that.” And that is why we are implementing them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So those are just a few of the specific initiatives that we have 

undertaken. In total, Mr. Speaker, we have committed $49 

million directly to First Nations and Métis education. That’s 

including 5.4 million for pre-kindergarten programs. That’s a 

$1.2 million increase. Our total spending in this sector since we 

formed government has been $295 million. 

 

And one of the institutions that are benefiting from some of the 

funding outlined in our 2014 budget was another school in my 

own constituency of North Battleford and that was funding for 

the Sakewew High School. I was very pleased to see in the 

budget $11 million that was allocated for independent schools 

and for the Sakewew High School. This high school has been 

very, very effective, Mr. Speaker, in graduating First Nations 

students and getting them their high school degree so that they 

are ready to move on to post-secondary and take advantage of 

our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are fully aware that the weight of the future is 

through our youth, but we must also engage our First Nations 

population in our plan if we are to improve their chance to 

participate in our robust economy. Towards that end we have 

again expanded our adult basic education program with $5.9 

million targeted specifically to First Nations and Métis, and of 

that amount 25 per cent is allocated for on-reserve 

programming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fully 68 per cent of the adult basic education learners in our 

province are First Nations or Métis. These students are 

continuing to learn and to prepare themselves for the 

workplace. In 2012-2013, 13.8 per cent of the apprentices in 

this province identified as Aboriginal descent. That’s close to 

what Stats Canada said the percentage of . . . [inaudible] . . . in 

our province is, at 15.6 per cent. Yes, we have more to do, but 

our programs are working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our programs are working, but in order to fully 

assess how successful they are, we need to know where we 

have come from. Mr. Speaker, under that NDP government, 

First Nations off-reserve unemployment was at its highest level 

in March of 2006. A staggering 29 per cent of Aboriginal 

people were unemployed. 

 

The education gap actually widened from 1996 to 2006. The 

high school completion rate gap for Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal students went from 17.3 per cent to 21.6 per 

cent. The gap was even worse when you consider just First 

Nations students, as it grew from 20.1 per cent to 27 per cent. 

Self-employed Aboriginal people declined from ’01 to ’06 to 

approximately 2 per cent. Now let’s compare that — or I should 

say contrast that — to what has been happening in 

Saskatchewan since we took office. Aboriginal employment 

continues to grow for the 14th month in a row. In March, it’s up 

800 people, and that adds to the 42,400 that were employed 

here in Saskatchewan in February. Mr. Speaker, that amounts to 

a total increase, since we took office in ’07, of 24 per cent. 

 

Aboriginal youth employment shows 900 more jobs than one 

year ago, a sizable increase of 10.8 per cent. We are very 

pleased to see that northern Saskatchewan, 44 per cent of 

Cameco’s workforce is of Aboriginal descent, further proof that 

our programs and the programs that we are partnered with 

industry are working. They are producing jobs for our 

Aboriginal people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these jobs are not only being created in the 

North. Right here in Regina, according to the Regina & District 

Chamber Of Commerce, the rate for First Nations population 

employment in recent years has grown in the age group 25 to 64 

from 41 per cent to 62 per cent. And that’s a figure from the 

ChamberLink publication in September of 2013. 

 

In wrapping up here, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few 

points. Our efforts in the education sector are working. In 

February 2014, 2,000 students in the U of S were self-declared 

Aboriginal descent. That’s approximately 10 per cent of the 

total enrolment of that institution. And further to that, a total of 

15,000 Aboriginal students are enrolled in various 

post-secondary institutions in this province, and that’s an 

impressive increase of 19 per cent since ’08-09. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that we don’t just talk 

the talk, we walk the walk. Our Crowns are actively recruiting 

and hiring Aboriginal employees. Currently 14 per cent of the 

workforce is now Aboriginal, again very close to what Stats 

Canada says our percentage of Aboriginal people in the 

province are at 15.6. Furthermore in the last five years, 21 per 

cent of external hires are of Aboriginal descent. Very, very 

worthy to note that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I’d like to just make one short comment about an 

Aboriginal youth symposium that I attended earlier this spring 

in Saskatoon. I had the opportunity to speak to 17 young youth, 

Aboriginal people, between the ages of 18 and 29. This was the 

first ever Aboriginal symposium held, and it was in conjunction 

with the Aboriginal Friendship Centres of Saskatchewan. I’m 

pleased to say that our government contributed $20,000 to that 

symposium and let me tell you, those young people at that 

symposium definitely are going to be the future leaders of this 

province. 

 

This government’s total program funding for First Nations and 

Métis for 2014-15 is $189.2 million, an increase of 4.4 million 

from last year, Mr. Speaker. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we 

ensure that all First Nations people have opportunity to 

participate in all of these facilities available in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions and 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5277 

policies to foster greater Aboriginal engagement in the 

provincial economy. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 

Battlefords: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions and 

policies to foster greater Aboriginal engagement in the 

provincial economy. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour to have the opportunity to rise this afternoon in the 

House, or I guess still this morning, and have an opportunity to 

discuss the motion that has been brought forward. There’s a 

number of concerns with the motion, and I want to take the 

short time that’s allocated to me to address a few of those 

concerns. 

 

For 17 years I had the honour, before becoming an elected 

official, to work with the Department of Indian and Northern 

Affairs Canada as their legal adviser for the Department of 

Justice Canada, and during that time we saw the successful 

implementation of Saskatchewan Treaty Land Entitlement 

Framework Agreement. 

 

When I started working there, the agreement had been signed 

and I was involved with some of the first additions to reserve 

under the program. And you know, there were certainly a lot of 

issues to be worked out during that time. And I think at the day, 

you know, all governments were engaged in a significant way 

to ensure that the program succeeded. 

 

But one of the things that I worked on a lot was the economic 

development projects that First Nations identified. And the 

Saskatchewan Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement 

has given those First Nations with outstanding entitlements a 

great opportunity to seek out and find economic development 

opportunities that would be situated on-reserve. And I think one 

of the most significant pieces of the framework agreement, 

when they finally broke through the difficulties that had come 

up because all the available land had been dispersed, one of the 

breakthrough points for the framework agreement was that 

bands could actually buy land anywhere in Saskatchewan and it 

didn’t have to be contiguous to their reserves. 

 

This is a remarkable achievement, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 

think that many people in the province or even in Canada really 

appreciate the significance of that. Because what happened 

when we gave First Nations that opportunity — and we know 

that a lot of the First Nations home reserves are in fairly remote 

areas where opportunities for economic development are not all 

that easy to come by — then the ability for them to purchase 

land closer to economic activity in the province has made a 

significant difference. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And there’s a couple of notable examples, I think, of where this 

has occurred where First Nations have done very, very well and 

been able to pursue their own economic development 

opportunities as a First Nation. And I think it’s making a 

significant difference in their political and cultural and all 

aspects of their life as a First Nation. 

 

One of the ones I’d like to single out and I think is really 

important is the grasslands gas station in Saskatoon that many 

of us drive by all the time. It’s the Shell station . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Grasswood, thank you for the correction. It’s 

the Grasswood Shell, and it’s actually 160 acres. I spent a lot of 

time working on that file and working hard to ensure that the 

concerns raised by all the parties, including the municipalities, 

the urban and rural municipalities in the area, were dealt with 

appropriately under the framework agreement. 

 

But this one single reserve, and this is the English River First 

Nation, whose home reserve is in my colleague from the 

North’s home riding, but they actually saw an opportunity. 

They had also bought some property within the city limits in 

Saskatoon and had done some work there as a mining support 

company. They bought a company that services the mines in 

northern Saskatchewan, and they decided to move out there. 

 

And when you drive by there, Mr. Speaker, you can see a very 

proud First Nations economic development area. They have 

been improving it all along, and there’s still a lot that they plan 

to do on those 160 acres that they have just south of the railway. 

I think that’s an example of what First Nations have been 

asking for, is the opportunity to do it themselves. And I think 

the treaty land entitlement agreement has certainly given that 

opportunity to many, many First Nations who have been able to 

establish an entitlement under that program. 

 

Another good example, I think, of economic development 

opportunities that First Nations have pursued and been 

successful with, with a lot of hard work and a lot, a lot, a lot of 

negotiations with all levels of government, are the casinos, the 

on-reserve casinos. And again, Mr. Speaker, in my time 

working for the federal government I was able to be involved in 

the Prince Albert casino’s establishment as an on-reserve 

casino; the one in Yorkton, that was a specific claim that wasn’t 

under treaty land entitlement; and also the one in Swift Current 

and the one in North Battleford. White Bear casino had already 

been established by the time I started working. But I think it’s a 

good example of how, when a First Nation has a dream and 

they have the ability to reach the dream, that they will be able to 

succeed. 

 

Another very, very good example of that is the Whitecap 

Dakota First Nation just south of Saskatoon, where they 

established not only a casino but a beautiful golf course. And I 

understand they’re now moving forward with a major hotel 

complex. And these kinds of projects I think First Nations are 

proud of. And they’re able to point to them and say, we can do 

this, we can do this ourselves if we’re given the opportunity. 

That leads to a number of other on-reserve economic 

opportunities that First Nations are pursuing, and I think we’ll 

continue to see those in the future. 

 

So I think my point, Mr. Speaker, is that First Nations can do 

this if given the opportunity. And the treaty land entitlement 

program has certainly afforded them that opportunity. But what 



5278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

we see from this government is that they’re not willing to go 

outside that particular box. 

 

And a good example of that is in the community pastures 

program. And we know that when the federal government 

dumped the entire community pastures program a couple of 

years ago, many of the First Nation leaders and First Nation 

people interested in economic development and opportunities 

for their members came forward and said look, this is a good 

opportunity for us. And they came forward with a proposal, and 

they brought it to the table. And they were downright rejected, 

and they weren’t even given the time of day by the minister. So 

I think that’s an example of this government not even wanting 

to entertain the opportunity for First Nations to get engaged in 

different kinds of enterprises in this province. 

 

We know that there is still a significant education gap for First 

Nations, It’s stark. It’s startling. It’s very, very concerning, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have people like economic analysts like Eric 

Howe from the University of Saskatchewan who actually put 

the numbers together and analyzed it, and we know that if we 

could significantly reduce the gap by ensuring that First Nations 

children finish high school and get those opportunities of 

advanced education, that we would actually bring more money 

into our provincial coffers than even the potash industry is 

bringing in. And that’s pretty significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We know that gap still exists. We don’t see a whole lot on the 

part of this government to make any significant efforts to 

reduce that gap. We know they should be pushing harder with 

the federal government, but also just taking it into their own 

hands and ensuring that the . . . I understand it’s as high as a 

gap of 60 per cent or 40 per cent difference for the amount of 

funding that these schools are receiving. And that’s very, very 

concerning. 

 

We’ve heard my colleague from Cumberland repeatedly bring 

forward a petition from the people in the North about owning 

their own home. We know that this is something that gives 

stability. And there’s all kinds of reports that are available on 

homelessness and the effects of high rental costs for people that 

are living below the poverty line. And we see these stories this 

week, even here in the Queen City, of seniors that are homeless. 

And this is something that I think has not been dealt with 

adequately at all by this government. So we’re concerned about 

that. 

 

We know the rental purchase option program was working. It 

was giving northern people the pride they needed in owning 

their own home through a significant program. And it was just 

heartlessly cut without any consideration for the impact it 

would have on people that had engaged in the program, that 

believed that this was a way for them to have the pride and 

dignity of owning their own home. It was an opportunity that 

was snatched away, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was a shameful 

example of the misunderstanding on the part of this government 

of what’s important to northerners and ways that we can 

actually set northerners forward on the first step to 

independence and economic independence. 

 

We know that homelessness and poverty are some of the most 

significant social issues that are facing our people today, 

especially and particularly in a time when we know the 

economy is doing so well. And unfortunately I think, when we 

talk about lean, Mr. Speaker, there’s the need to walk the 

gemba here a little bit and go to the gemba when we talk about 

homelessness. And I would like to challenge the members of 

Executive Council to think about that and to actually go and see 

what the conditions are that many people are living in 

on-reserve and actually experience maybe some one or two 

days in the lives of those clients under this lean kind of 

government that we have. 

 

We would also suggest perhaps spending a night or two with 

some homeless people and trying to find out. And indeed one of 

our members or citizens in Saskatoon right now is undergoing a 

challenge to live below the poverty line. Her and her husband 

are trying to eat on $1.75 a day. And her blog is very 

interesting, and I would suggest everybody take a look at it. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity for 

comment, and I’ll pass it on to the next speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with 

great honour that I rise today to speak to the motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions and 

policies to foster greater Aboriginal engagement in the 

provincial economy. 

 

And just listening to what the member opposite, the few points 

that she made towards the end of her speech, I just want to 

reiterate — and I’m not sure if I’ve said this in the House and I 

probably have — but I actually have lived on a reserve before. 

And I’m probably the only member in this House that’s lived 

on-reserve before. And I’ve also been homeless, so just to let 

that be on the record. 

 

And I’d also like to reiterate that Aboriginal populations are 

dispersed across the province, not just in the northern area of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So in the words of Martin Luther King, Jr., their destiny is tied 

to our destiny, and our success in this province is dependent on 

the success of Aboriginal people in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our government is cognizant of this. And this is why, 

in this year’s budget, the 2014 budget highlights are . . . And I 

think I need to read this again because this does not seem to get 

across the floor very often, or they’re not listening, of how 

much money is in our budget for this year. 

 

So 189.2 million is for targeted program funding for both 

individuals and organizations that benefit First Nations and 

Métis people, up to 4.4 million or 2.4 per cent compared to last 

year. And our government is investing 49 million in funding 

directly for First Nations and Métis education training. With 

this year’s budget, this amounts to over 295 million since we 

took office. 

 

I hear a lot of rhetoric across the floor and have heard in the last 

decade and also heard from family members who are older than 

me, who have lived through the effects of what the NDP 

government have put in place in order, you know, for 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5279 

Aboriginal people. So I just want to let the members across the 

floor . . . the difference between us is they’re rhetoric and ours 

is action. 

 

We also have 6 million for the joint task force improving 

education and employment outcomes, and 5.4 million for 

targeted pre-K programs, an increase over 1.2 million over last 

year. And these increases keep coming, Mr. Speaker: 76.6 

million in gaming agreements, an increase of 3 million over last 

year. And as a graduate of SIIT, and also GDI [Gabriel Dumont 

Institute] has seen 4.1 and 4.2 per cent increases compared to 

the previous budget in Northlands regional college. And I just 

want to reiterate across the floor again, there’s nothing wrong 

with community college education because that opened the door 

for me to get an actual degree and also a graduate degree. 

 

So since the beginning of our first term in government, 

employment for off-reserve Aboriginals has increased by 24.7 

per cent. And in February, Aboriginal employment was up 

forty-two, four hundred, the highest record for the month. In 

March, off-reserve Aboriginal employment grew to 14th 

consecutive month, added 800 more workers to the payroll, 

increasing 1.9 per cent over last year. And I’d appreciate it if 

the member across the floor would listen to what I had to say, 

instead of chirping across the floor. And Aboriginal youth also 

found success in March of this year, with 900 jobs added to the 

job market compared to last March, an increase of 10.8 per cent 

in the 10th consecutive month of year-over-year increases. 

 

So adult basic education, I also benefited from adult basic 

education because I was one of those ones who left school early 

and started a family early. So 5.9 per cent is targeted 

specifically for First Nations and Métis learners to continue to 

close education and employment gaps between Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal people. And I think, I believe it’s more effective 

when somebody actually has gone through what the members 

across the floor speak about in terms of having to access this 

programming in order for education . . . to get an education and 

for that to open the doors for success. 

 

So approximately 25 per cent of the ABE [adult basic 

education] budget is allocated for on-reserve programs, which is 

a first. This government has chosen not to let jurisdictions get in 

the way of making sure that our Aboriginal population can 

access this ABE.  

 

So apprenticeship training, Aboriginal participation increased to 

1,383 in 2012-13, which represents 13.8 per cent of total 

apprentices. I have a few members of my family who are 

apprenticing right now, and they’ve been able to look after their 

families as well as eventually maybe even buy a house once 

they are done their apprenticeship. So this exceeds the 4.3 per 

cent of the total Canadian population that identified as 

Aboriginal in the 2011 national household survey and close to 

Saskatchewan’s 15.6 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to travel with the 

Minister of Advanced Education across the province and listen 

to youth last summer, and their concerns, and what roadblocks 

are definitely . . . what are they facing in order for them to 

access ABE programs or post-secondary or training programs. 

And you know, some of those consultations, we were able to 

come back and pass on to our colleagues here and a lot of it’s 

reflected in this budget. 

 

So this government is very concerned about the Aboriginal 

employment rate in our province, and we recognize the 

correlation between education and employment. Aboriginal 

participation in the economy is critical for the future growth of 

prosperity of Saskatchewan. 

 

And there was the challenge, you know, to Executive Council 

to go and, you know, spend a night on a reserve. I challenge the 

members across the floor to do the same, you know, to actually 

go spend, you know, more than one night on a reserve as well 

as, maybe even in the summertime. You know, we have a lot of 

cultural things going on and we have, you know, we have 

ceremonies where we go into the bush and fast. And maybe 

perhaps a few of them would like to come along. More than 

welcome. I’m from a community that’s very welcoming and 

should they want to participate, definitely. 

 

I would love for them to come along and to see and also to 

listen to a different perspective because at this one particular . . . 

And I’ve told this story before. Last summer I had a group of 

female elders basically sit down with me and let me know, you 

know, the difference between their grandchildren and their 

children, the future in terms of the employment opportunities 

since this government has come into office, which is very 

significant. And it’s very meaningful and it means a lot for 

them to pretty much let me know, you know, what’s affecting 

them and not just rhetoric and not just academics who study and 

actually don’t experience what, you know, the First Nations and 

Métis world is. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I come from, you know, one of the oldest 

Métis families in Saskatchewan as well. So we have a history 

here, you know — my dad’s family, the Campeau family. But I 

also am very well tied into my First Nation, Yellow Quill First 

Nation, which is very, very rich in our cultural preservation. 

And we’ve been able to do a lot of things what is considered old 

style and not contemporary cultural preservation that’s been 

passed down. So I’m very proud to be part of Yellow Quill and 

I’m very, very proud to be Saulteaux, and as well as 

acknowledge my Cree side on my dad’s side. 

 

So you know, I’ve been able to, you know . . . It’s like two 

worlds apart in terms of how my Campeau family embraced 

economic development and how they’ve been able to use that in 

order to move forward and also, you know, create a legacy. My 

uncle, Clarence Campeau, has been able to create an economic 

development legacy moving forward for Métis people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, this government is . . . We know 

the value of including our Aboriginal population in, you know, 

the success. We don’t claim to be, you know, the reason for a 

lot of the entrepreneurship activities that have gone on. But 

definitely we would like to foster and encourage that, support as 

well, and definitely, you know, working trying to help, you 

know, fill the gap and, you know, narrow it in terms of 

education and training. 

 

So with that, I’m very supportive of this motion, and I thank 

you for letting me speak to it. Thank you. 



5280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join in the debate, the 75-minute debate in terms of talking 

about the greater Aboriginal engagement in the provincial 

economy, Mr. Speaker, which is very, very important that we 

do. 

 

And I want to talk about four or five different areas that I think 

we need to do a historical romp, if you will, in terms of some of 

the actions of this particular government and their previous 

cousins. The conservative governments have certainly hindered 

the First Nations and Métis populations over the years and some 

of the actions that they have undertaken caused great harm to 

the First Nations and Métis people. 

 

I listened with interest to what the member just spoke about in 

terms of the First Nations and Métis points that she was raising. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to send to the member a couple of 

articles I think are really important, that the people that may be 

watching this, we need to refresh their memory on a number of 

things and maybe even refresh her memory. 

 

The first article I want to send over, Mr. Speaker, is an article 

being done by Murray Mandryk, which is written in reference 

to the resource revenue-sharing issue that people were talking 

about when we addressed the whole notion of First Nations 

involvement with the economy. It’s very relevant. And the 

headline reads, “Wall writes off First Nations.” That’s the 

headline. And the reason why I think it’s important to reflect 

what the article is talking about is the last election, the Premier 

got up and he made an election issue on resource revenue 

sharing for First Nations people, an issue that is meant to divide 

the people of Saskatchewan, which was unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the second article I want to send to the member, Mr. 

Speaker, which is really important, Mr. Speaker, is another 

article. And the article reads, “Sask. Party candidate apologizes 

over First Nations remark.” And, Mr. Speaker, I want to send 

both of these articles over to the member that just spoke about 

what the NDP have done to hurt the First Nations and Métis 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s really important that we also remember that during 

the Devine era, the province spoke to a number of First Nations 

people in which they talked about potash opportunity in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The then premier at the time spoke 

about giving the First Nations communities 7 per cent of the 

action, if you will — he used that phrase — over the potash 

development of Saskatchewan. And once the Tories were 

elected under Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations 

leaders never heard a mention of that 7 per cent revenue-sharing 

plan that they had negotiated and agreed to with the premier at 

the time, which was Grant Devine. That was one of the 

historical wrongs that the First Nations suffered under many of 

the Conservative governments, cousins I might add to the Sask 

Party. 

 

Now we also talk about some of the cuts to the programs in 

northern Saskatchewan and also southern Saskatchewan. The 

member is absolutely right. We know that there are many First 

Nations and Métis people throughout the whole entire province 

of Saskatchewan. We know that. We don’t have to take a lesson 

from her. 

 

What’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that if you look at what 

was done to specific areas of the province historically that 

negatively affected First Nations and Métis people, the 

conservative governments across the way and the Sask Party 

have done more irreparable harm to First Nations and Métis 

people in the history of any political party. And that’s why on 

this side of the Assembly we often ask ourselves, why would 

anybody of Aboriginal ancestry defend and endorse the Sask 

Party who have done so many things wrong, historically wrong 

to the First Nations and Métis people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to go into the detail about the 

articles because obviously one article talks about a comment 

being made, and the individual has since apologized. And First 

Nations and Métis people are very generous people and they 

accept apologies. So I won’t read into the record what was said. 

But I want to share with that member these two articles, and I 

hope one of the Pages are able to deliver that to the member that 

just spoke. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the examples we talked 

about. When we talked about the Cameco comment, when the 

Premier said to a packed audience in Prince Albert that if the 

First Nations want an answer to the economic woes, something 

to the effect of that, that the answer is Cameco, well, Mr. 

Speaker, that just shows the short-sightedness of the 

Saskatchewan Party when dealing with the First Nations and 

Métis people. And many people were very angry over that 

comment. 

 

You look at some of the First Nations attack ads at the last 

election, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations attack ads that were 

under way by the Saskatchewan Party. And is that bringing the 

people of Saskatchewan together? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely not. 

 

When you look at in northern Saskatchewan when you’re 

kicking out working families from their homes . . . They have 

the opportunity to buy their homes, Mr. Speaker. What this 

government is doing, they’re saying no, you’re going to rent 

forever and we’re going to increase your rent for years to come. 

And you’ll never seek home ownership, you’ll never achieve 

home ownership in northern Saskatchewan because that party 

cancelled that program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then you look at the lack of support in general for First 

Nations overall, whether it’s roads in northern Saskatchewan 

and even pavement for some of the southern bands, Mr. 

Speaker. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, is being supported that the First 

Nation and Métis leaders have put forward, by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. And that’s why on this side of 

the Assembly we sit here and we shake our heads when we hear 

comments of that sort. And, Mr. Speaker, First Nations and 

Métis leaders cannot find in any way, shape, or form how they 

can endorse and support the right wing government of the 

Saskatchewan Party or the conservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other issue I think is really important is that in 

Ottawa right now there is a huge fight. There’s a huge fight 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5281 

around First Nations education. The chiefs and many of the 

people that are impacted by the decision by the Harper 

government to deal with First Nations education, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re in Ottawa right now fighting. And, Mr. Speaker, not a 

peep from the Saskatchewan Party, not a peep from their 

Premier, not a peep from that member or any of the members 

across to help the First Nations people. As the Government of 

Saskatchewan . . . They just finished talking about the 

Government of Saskatchewan. As the Government of 

Saskatchewan, they have not afforded any help whatsoever to 

the First Nations leaders out there that have taken on Ottawa 

over the control of education on First Nations lands, in 

particular First Nations schools. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, look at all the examples. Look at all of the 

examples. The history of wrongs created by the right wing 

government of the conservatives or, in this case, the 

Saskatchewan Party. They have continually, they have 

continually attacked the First Nations and Métis people because 

it’s in their politics to do so. It’s in their best political interest to 

do so. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not leadership. That is not 

leadership in any way, shape, or form. The challenge that 

Saskatchewan has to do is we have to bring all our people 

together. “From many peoples, strength” is the provincial 

motto. That’s what we undertake to determine as a province. 

We should practise it. We should preach it. We should show it 

through leadership, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not getting any 

example of that and any support from this current government 

when it talks about First Nations and Métis people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to also talk about the Clarence 

Campeau Development Fund. There is reference to the Clarence 

Campeau Development Fund in the sense that today we see that 

the Clarence Campeau Development Fund is doing very well. 

They are functioning well. They are operating their entity 

professionally. They are sending resources out to the 

community. And, Mr. Speaker, before the government starts 

patting themselves on the back, those revenues came from the 

gaming agreement, and that gaming framework agreement was 

negotiated by the NDP with FSIN and with the Métis Nation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what’s happening with the 

First Nations and the Métis, it has absolutely nothing to do with 

the government. It has everything to do with the booming 

economy and the fact that many of these industries and sectors 

that create these employment opportunities need First Nations 

and Métis people. 

 

Now I’ll say this on my final comment, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

Professor Howe from the University of Saskatchewan done an 

in-depth study, done an in-depth study and determined that if 

you have proper engagement — which is not happening now, 

which is not happening now — if you have proper engagement 

with the First Nations and Métis people across this province, it 

could mean as much as $90 billion to our provincial economy. 

And I want to make sure it’s 90 billion, not 90 million — $90 

billion. 

 

So it makes not only fairness sense to engage the First Nations 

and Métis people to the extent they should. It makes economic 

sense, Mr. Speaker. You need to empower the community 

leaders. You need to empower the young people. You need to 

train them and give them the proper resources instead of gutting 

programs, instead of sitting idly by as the federal government 

taxes First Nations and Métis communities, instead of trying to 

protect and to prevent any harm to a party that historically done 

many, many things wrong to the First Nations and Métis people 

of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see that evidence all the time. We see it every 

single day in this Assembly. And how anybody could stand up 

and protect and defend the cuts that the Saskatchewan Party 

government have undertaken to many of the First Nations 

programs and the Métis community programs, how they have 

evicted working families out of northern communities and out 

of their northern homes, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on 

and on. 

 

And for the life of me, I still can’t understand why anybody 

could stand up and defend the history of the conservative 

government, or in this case, the right wing Saskatchewan Party 

when it talked about dealing with the First Nations and Métis 

people. She will never convince me nor convince anybody in 

my area that what they’re doing is correct for the First Nations 

and Métis people. It is absolutely wrong. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an honour for 

me as well to enter into this debate on moving this motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions and 

policies to foster greater Aboriginal engagement in the 

provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worth noting that in order for anyone to 

participate in the economy, whether it’s the provincial or the 

national economy, the first thing that you require, Mr. Speaker, 

is a strong and vibrant economy that people would like to 

participate in, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to say that here in 

Saskatchewan at the moment and for the last number of years, 

Mr. Speaker, that our economy has been hitting on virtually all 

cylinders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an economy that is reliant on export 

markets — whether it be manufactured goods; whether it be 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker, agricultural exports in the raw product 

or in the value-added product; whether it be lumber and timber 

industry as it comes back on stream, Mr. Speaker; our fertilizer 

exports, most notably potash; and as well some of our energy 

products that we export out of this province, Mr. Speaker. But 

the fact remains that the economy in Saskatchewan right now is 

very vibrant, very strong, and one that has the potential for all 

members, most notably Aboriginal members of the province to 

participate in. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, with the policies that we 

develop will continue to foster that strong economic activity 

through a number of different initiatives, Mr. Speaker. And 

many of these initiatives were communicated in the last couple 

of years, most notably through the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth, where the growth plan talked about the different 

ministries, Mr. Speaker, and goals for Saskatchewan to ensure 

that we continue to foster this economy, not just lay the 

groundwork so to speak, Mr. Speaker, but very specific goals 

on where the Saskatchewan economy can go in the next number 



5282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

of years. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, action items in the plan for growth often show up 

in the budgets. And most notably in this last budget that was 

released by our Finance minister just a number of days ago in 

the Assembly here, there was $189 million in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, that was dedicated to initiatives that directly benefit 

First Nations and Métis people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. This includes $6 million or a doubling of the 

funding for initiatives related to the joint task force on First 

Nations and Métis education and employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know, as people of Saskatchewan and as a 

Government of Saskatchewan, that participation in the economy 

is critical by Aboriginal people and by all people of 

Saskatchewan. It is critical to the growth and prosperity of 

Saskatchewan. We want to be a meaningful partner with not 

only the FSIN, but with tribal councils, with chiefs, with First 

Nations businesses as well as individual entrepreneurs to try to 

deal with the issues as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see some progress in these areas, but we 

always do realize there is more that needs to be done. But there 

is, Mr. Speaker, some signs of improvement in the last number 

of years, and I’d like to allude to a couple of statistics here. And 

first of all, the off-reserve Aboriginal employment was, in last 

September was 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The off-reserve 

Aboriginal unemployment was 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker, down 

from 14.6 per cent a year previous. 

 

The Aboriginal youth employment was up 1,600 jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, to a total of 10,500. This represents an 18 per cent 

increase year over year, Mr. Speaker, with Aboriginal youth. 

This is important, as the youth of Saskatchewan are the future 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that they are 

participating in the vibrant Saskatchewan economy is a 

tremendous sign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to allude to a number of engagement 

pieces I think that I see up in the area where I live, up in the 

forest fringe I guess you would call it, Mr. Speaker, or the 

northern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the member opposite alluded to Cameco. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I did pull off a couple of facts just off Cameco’s web 

page. In 2011, about 50 per cent of the employees at the 

northern Saskatchewan Cameco operations were from the local 

communities, Mr. Speaker, in the North. And 74 per cent of the 

services to Cameco’s northern mine sites, which is 

approximately $393 million, went to northern businesses, Mr. 

Speaker, which speaks to the economy that is available for 

many to participate in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a little closer to where I live, I see the investment 

opportunities that have been undertaken by the Muskeg Lake 

First Nations, Mr. Speaker, and Chief Cliff Tawpisin there, 

whom I know quite well, Mr. Speaker, with their purchase of 

some property in Saskatoon and some of the property 

development that is taking place there, Mr. Speaker, into the 

service industry and the property management industry. But 

also, Mr. Speaker, through a TLE [treaty land entitlement] 

claim, they have a property known as Pitihkwakew Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, where there’s an opportunity for camping and some 

regional fishing and whatnot, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also opportunities in the area where I live 

with regards to agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And the agriculture 

economy the last couple of years has been quite strong. It’s the 

economy quite often in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I see opportunities where everyone has been 

engaged, but most notably to this motion, there’s been 

Aboriginal engagement in all parts of that economy — whether 

it be in the transport of the product out of the area, Mr. Speaker; 

whether it be in the crop services and protection industry, Mr. 

Speaker, and the supply of those crop production services to 

producers, Mr. Speaker; whether it be in the grain procurement 

end of the agriculture industry; whether it be in the 

manufacturing end, Mr. Speaker, on the north side of 

Saskatoon; or whether it be right in the primary production end 

of agricultural products, Mr. Speaker, either working with other 

producers or producing themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the timber industry starts to take shape along 

the forest fringe, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to draw some attention to 

a forest management group in the area, Mr. Speaker, known as 

Sakâw Askiy Management, which is actually Cree, Mr. 

Speaker, for forest land. And I’d like to read just a couple of 

paragraphs off their website, Mr. Speaker, which explains just a 

little bit about what Sakâw Askiy Management is: 

 

Sakâw Askiy Management Inc. is a unique partnership of 

six forest companie with Saskatchewan operations and two 

First Nations partners. The entity was formed to jointly 

assume the FMA and its management responsibilities. 

 

Sakâw shareholders bring a proven track record in 

business and sustainable forest management, along with 

the traditional knowledge and investment interests of First 

Nations. Sakâw itself does not own any mills, but several 

of its member companies own processing facilities in 

Saskatchewan which will use timber from . . . [this FMA]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve toured most of . . . Just the members, Mr. 

Speaker: Carrier Forest Products, Edgewood Forest Products, 

Meadow Lake Mechanical Pulp, L&M Forest Products, 

Meadow Lake OSB, NorSask Forest Products, as well, Mr. 

Speaker, as A.C. Forestry and Montreal Lake Business 

Ventures.  

 

I’ve toured many of these actual sites, Mr. Speaker, and I must 

say that First Nations engagement in the timber industry is all 

throughout the levels of the industry, Mr. Speaker, from 

ownership of a number of these mills and enterprises, to the 

forestry operations in the forest itself, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, 

and to working in the mill, as well as all of the spinoff 

industries that come as the timber industry ramps up, Mr. 

Speaker, and the trucking and the service industries, Mr. 

Speaker. And again it speaks to the fact of having a strong 

economy provides opportunities for everyone and, in particular, 

Aboriginal engagement in that economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to address one item with regards 

to investment in the North that came up in the last statements, 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5283 

Mr. Speaker. And I would like to talk just a little bit about 

municipal revenue sharing in the North, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have a couple of communities here that I would like to mention. 

And the first is Air Ronge, Mr. Speaker, it’s up from 2007 and 

’08 numbers, Mr. Speaker, 213 per cent in that community; 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, 88 per cent; Buffalo Narrows, up 133 per cent; 

Patuanak, up 101 per cent; and Stony Rapids, up 157 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. The investment in the North, and there’s other 

investments, it was just an example of one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts remain when it comes to Aboriginal 

engagement in the provincial economy. Aboriginal 

unemployment is down. Aboriginal youth employment is up 18 

per cent, as a matter of fact. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan employment numbers are leading the nation. 

This is due to a prosperous economy that we’re fortunate to 

have here in the province. People are able to participate in it, 

including First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government will do everything it can do to foster that strong 

Saskatchewan economy going forward. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s an 

underlying premise for all of the discussions in this House 

today that Aboriginal involvement in the economy is crucial for 

the future of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s difficult 

about talking about this is that so often when the government 

sets out some nice words about this, they then come forward 

with actions that cause a great deal of difficulty for First 

Nations and Métis people, but also for the rest of us in this 

province who have this sick feeling in our gut about what the 

government has done. 

 

I think the biggest example of that is the number of ads that 

have a racist undertone to them that are funded by the Sask 

Party and shown again and again and again on the television at 

exactly the time when the Premier’s out trying to talk about 

how we need to build this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

all members across need to look very carefully at how they 

campaign, how they create divisions in our community, and 

how they say and do these things. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

about that issue, it’s about that issue of how we make sure we 

include everybody in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the strengths of First Nations and 

Métis people in Saskatchewan is that they have lived here a 

long time. They belong to this place. They can teach us about 

how to connect to this place, how to be part of the land. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we have learned much about that from the stories 

and from the things that have happened in this community. But 

unfortunately, when we get into some of these discussions, 

there’s a great deal of hope and then things pull back. Now we 

see it both on the national level and on the provincial level. 

 

One of the areas where we know, from some of the research 

that has been done now, that a decision made by this 

government has had, well more than a couple of years 

experience with it, that was the decision to cancel the 

Aboriginal employment development program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that particular program had a very clear 

focus, and it worked well. And there were many people who 

were involved with that who said, why are you doing this? We 

still don’t really have an answer, but what we do have is a 

University of Saskatchewan professor, Eric Howe, who took a 

look at the effect of the elimination of this program. And he 

said that this was a mistake and that the government should 

reinstate it. 

 

Now when the program was cancelled, there were many words 

about how we’re going to replace it with something else, we’re 

going to do some other things. But, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t 

seen that. And so, Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that we 

have is that sense that things go wrong. 

 

Another example is from northern Saskatchewan. In 2000, there 

was a program put forward which allowed effectively First 

Nations and Métis people living in communities to rent to own 

their properties. They paid rent to effectively a house owned, I 

think through Sask Housing. And the expectation was, as they 

bettered their position, they’d be in a position to buy that home. 

 

All of a sudden, the government cancelled that program. I don’t 

think there was any discussion in the communities, and there 

wasn’t a discussion or even a thought about how this policy 

change affects northern communities. Because one of the 

aspects of this is that . . . And one of the parts that I think we’re 

all proud of, of Saskatchewan people, is how many of the jobs 

in the northern mining industry and other parts of industry in 

the North are held by northern people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that my former colleague or our 

former colleague, Keith Goulet, worked on that issue for years 

to make sure that the jobs would be for those people in northern 

communities as a first choice. Obviously many skills and things 

were needed from all over Western Canada to make sure the 

projects were developed. But part of the I guess whole program 

was that there would be housing, good housing in many of these 

northern communities. And that housing was being built and 

developed and, as we know, where you don’t have a road into a 

community sometimes, or you don’t have a good road or you 

don’t have an all-year road, the housing costs are higher to 

build. 

 

And so practically people knew that they could, with their good 

jobs in some of the northern mines, eventually buy their house. 

Well all of a sudden that policy was changed. People who had 

been working on that premise for quite a number of years were 

told no, we’re not doing that anymore. And in fact we’re going 

to charge you a rent that’s dramatically increased and makes it 

almost, well it makes it impossible to live in these communities. 

 

And so what you then have is people choosing to move out of 

the North or stay up in the North. And it’s those kinds of things 

that cause all kinds of difficulties for people in our province. 

Now practically what we all want I think is that we have a very 

strong First Nation and Métis community that works in 

business, works in education, works in health care. And we 

have many things to be proud of, but it’s these sort of 

gut-wrenching decisions that hit our whole community. And it’s 

in election campaigns or at other times, when one of our major 

parties starts playing this race card, that it causes a lot of 

difficulty. 

 



5284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

[12:00] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that what all of us need to 

recognize is that this is our community for all of us. And 

practically what we have to do is make sure that everybody’s 

included. And that means that we fight hard as a province 

dealing with First Nations education issues. How is it that a 

huge part of our population who go to school on First Nations 

have so much, so many fewer resources for their education than 

the children of the rest of us? That’s not right. Why do we allow 

that to happen? I mean it’s a very difficult issue because you 

end up with looking at the Constitution of Canada. But it’s not 

tolerable, I don’t think on any level, for that type of a situation 

to continue. We see it, and not as much on the health side 

because there’s a substantial integration of health services, but 

there are some disparities there that we also need to look at. But 

all of these things will make our community stronger. 

 

And we know that some of the estimates that you hear, it’s an 

annual theme or I wouldn’t say . . . It’s a constant theme of 

discussion with the chamber of commerce about how to have 

more people involved in all of the aspects of the community, 

both as business owners and others but also as consumers. 

Because the more people that we have who are part of our 

community, the better it is for our whole community. So 

practically, what we have to do is continue to make sure that we 

work hard to include everyone. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to ask a question on this topic. I think it is a very 

important topic for us to be discussing here in the legislature. I 

would like to pose the following question to the member for 

Shellbrook. Here it is: University of Saskatchewan Professor 

Eric Howe released a report last spring that states, “The 

government’s decision to cancel the Aboriginal employment 

development program was a mistake, and the government 

should reinstate it.” Does the member agree with the professor, 

or does he stubbornly dismiss that academic study? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to engagement in the 

provincial economy, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition 

governed the Saskatchewan economy they had no plan for 

growth for this economy. They had no plan for population 

growth in the economy. They didn’t have faith in 

Saskatchewan’s economy, and thereby they did not have faith 

in the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They failed to invest in highways. They failed to invest in 

schools. They failed to invest in hospitals. And they failed to 

invest in training. Mr. Speaker, this failure prevented many 

from also investing in Saskatchewan’s economy, including First 

Nations people. 

 

This all happened under the period of time when the NDP had a 

policy for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Can you 

imagine what would happen now, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t 

have one? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s been over a year since the NDP chose their leader, 

and still we have not heard the opposition’s policy on 

Aboriginal economic engagement. So far all they do is flip-flop. 

 

During the 2011 election campaign, the NDP pledged that they 

would push for a resource revenue-sharing agreement between 

the province and the First Nations community. A Leader-Post 

article from December 2011 quoted the member from 

Rosemont as saying that they were not continuing to push that 

agenda item. The very next day he was quoted in the same 

article saying that the revenue-sharing agreement stands as a 

viable mechanism to bring about the shared prosperity that the 

treaties had envisioned. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: what is your party’s policy on 

resource revenue-sharing agreement with the First Nations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is First 

Nations leaders and Métis leaders have always strived to be part 

of the economy of Saskatchewan. They have always advocated 

that nobody wants a special deal, Mr. Speaker. We all want 

fairness. We want equality. Now what’s really important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that I find it surprising that members of the 

Saskatchewan Party stand up and make accusations about the 

NDP trying to work with First Nations and Métis people. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a history and we’ll continue building on 

that rich history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the First Nations leaders and the Métis people want to be 

involved with the economy. They want fairness. My question is 

to the member that just posed the question. Overall I want to 

ask him back, what has he got to say about the article that I sent 

over there for them to all have a look at, when the headline 

writes, “Wall writes off First Nations”? What is his comment, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — My question is for the member from The 

Battlefords. There must have been a discussion within the 

caucus opposite when they decided to run some of the ads that 

they ran over the last year, especially the ones that were 

attacking our new leader. And I would ask that member if he 

was part of that discussion and whether he agreed with the fact 

that these ads went ahead. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with that premise that 

he’s saying. I don’t believe that our ads were racist ads or they 

were negative ads. We have been pointing out the things that 

we’re doing for First Nations and Métis people across this 

province. Whether it’s in the natives in the North, increasing 

our spending, for example in our highways revenue, highway 

spending for the North, $40 million. That is almost double what 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5285 

we’re spending per person for the south side of this province. 

Those are the kind of things we’re doing. 

 

We heard earlier on discussions about the revenue sharing that 

member talked about. He likes history lessons. Historically the 

NDP have rejected resource revenue sharing for First Nations. 

However then when the panic was on in 2011 before the 

election, they thought it would be a good idea. Two days after 

election, the member from Rosemont said it wasn’t a good idea. 

Two days after that he said it was a good idea. Where do they 

really stand, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members 

opposite continue to use scare tactics and misinformation for 

their own political gain. In regards to a possible memorandum 

of understanding with FSIN, the opposition accused us of 

“secret negotiation,” when in fact the Leader of the Opposition 

was informed of the proposal three days after it was raised. 

They claimed our government was “ramming through a deal” 

when in fact they were informed that changes could happen in 

the fall. Roland Crowe, a senator for FSIN, was commenting on 

the NDP and was quoted in The StarPhoenix as saying they 

“failed us terribly, all for the sake of politics and three-minute 

clips.” 

 

To the member from Athabasca: what is your plan to empower 

First Nations to improve their education and economic 

development outcomes? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well for starters, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t 

gut a bunch of programs that encourage Aboriginal employment 

and training opportunities throughout the entire province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For starters, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t be kicking out working 

men and women in northern Saskatchewan from their homes 

because they simply can’t afford rent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For starters, we wouldn’t make deals with them as they did with 

the 7 per cent of potash revenues when Grant Devine was the 

minister, or the premier, and then gut that program as soon as 

the Conservatives got elected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for starters, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t run a phone bank 

during the election that divided the people of Saskatchewan 

over the resource royalty revenue issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m going to ask that member that just asked the question, 

would he be willing to share with the opposition the transcripts 

of that phone bank when they phoned thousands of people of 

Saskatchewan during the election to ask them whether they 

want the resource royalty revenue-sharing agreement with the 

Indians, or the First Nations and Métis people? Will he share 

that transcript of what was said . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on March 21st, 2013, the 

Premier of this province was giving an address in Prince Albert. 

And this is what he said. He said: 

 

You know, the best program for First Nations, Métis 

people in Saskatchewan is not a program at all — it’s 

Cameco. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook whether he agrees with that statement and 

whether he agrees with his Premier’s abdication of his 

responsibility to First Nations people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, one of the best programs for 

Aboriginal engagement in the provincial economy is the 

Saskatchewan provincial economy and the strength of it, Mr. 

Speaker. The fact remains, Mr. Speaker, the off-reserve 

Aboriginal unemployment rate is down. The youth Aboriginal 

employment rate in Saskatchewan is up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite have not been engaged in 

fostering the Saskatchewan economy and thereby they have not 

possessed the ability for anyone else to engage in that economy, 

Mr. Speaker. This is why Chief Perry Bellegarde stated at the 

signing of the new bilateral agreement with this government, 

and I quote, “By working co-operatively, we reinforce the 

principles of a peaceful coexistence and mutual respect as we 

create a future where First Nations people also benefit from the 

prosperous economy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts again, our Aboriginal unemployment is 

down, Mr. Speaker. Aboriginal youth employment in this 

province is up. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Athabasca keeps answering what he wouldn’t do. We’re 

asking what would you do. What is your party’s policy, current 

policy now on revenue resource sharing with First Nations? 

Answer that question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is 

that the member that looked around him would see that they 

have 49 MLAs and we have nine. We have nine. We have nine, 

so I think that makes you government. So as they’d say in 

northern Saskatchewan, figure it out. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know in Saskatchewan right 

now First Nations people have an unemployment rate of almost 

17 per cent and Métis people have an unemployment rate about 

half that, about 8.5 per cent. This is March 2014. That is three 

times the rate of non-First Nations and Métis people. To the 



5286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

member for Rosthern-Shellbrook, how does he justify that 

figure? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, again, in 2010, Mr. Speaker, the 

Aboriginal employment . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 606 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 606 — The 

Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is indeed a pleasure to rise today and speak on Bill 606, a 

private member’s bill, An Act respecting the Rights of Residents 

in Special Care Facilities and Personal Care Homes. And I 

know my good friend and colleague from Saskatoon 

Riversdale’s put a lot of thought into this, and I hope we all take 

some time over the next little while to really reflect on how 

important this is. 

 

You know, we’ve seen good bipartisan efforts, especially when 

it comes to private member bills, and I that it’s important for 

both sides of the House to put aside partisan thoughts on or 

stances on this issue and think what’s really in the best interests 

for the residents in special care facilities and personal care 

homes. And many, many, by the vast majority of course are 

seniors, but some are not. And we hear those tragic 

circumstances where by chance of either an accident or some 

misfortune, younger people are part of personal care homes or 

special care facilities, but we all absolutely, absolutely deserve 

the dignity and respect of treatment, no matter what we find 

ourselves in. And in terms of that, I think this is an important 

bill. 

 

And we’ve seen success in private member bills where they get 

passed, as we’ve seen with Howard’s law and the asbestos 

registry. It seemed only to make sense. And I think of, for 

example, the reservist legislation that the other side put forward 

when they were in opposition, and we were able to take it and 

incorporate it into labour standards legislation that was before 

the House, and it worked out really well. But definitely the Sask 

Party at the time seized the opportunity to do the right thing, 

and they did. And we worked together. 

 

But we’ve seen situations where a former minister of 

Agriculture . . . Or I’ve put forward legislation about protection 

of service animals, and the minister of Agriculture at the time 

saw fit and thought it was a wise thing to incorporate it into the 

legislation that was before the House, and it worked out really 

well. And that’s what we want at the end of the day, common 

sense solutions for the people of Saskatchewan. And that 

worked out well. We know that there were groups at that point 

who were advocating for protection for service animals. They 

were both the police service in terms of their canine unit, but 

also people with disabilities, their organizations for people who 

use service animals in a day-to-day situation. And they knew 

this was an important issue. It was above politics. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And this is the beauty of this Chamber and of private member 

bills, is that people can bring forward ideas. And I hope that we 

can take a look at this and say, this actually makes a lot of 

sense. And it’s not just my colleague, and she’s very . . . You 

know, we should really listen to her in that, but we know that 

the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan is actually 

advocating for such a thing. And we see that’s happening right 

across Canada. So really it does make sense. 

 

So I think when it comes time to vote, we should be voting in 

favour. And I would urge the other side to consider this and 

take some time and review Bill 606 and how important it is to 

do the right thing by our Saskatchewan residents who are living 

in special care facilities and personal care homes. It’s an 

important thing but something that should not be voted on 

necessarily along party lines. It would be great if the Sask Party 

government endorsed it completely and said yes, we’re going to 

be behind it. 

 

But we’ve seen instances in the House this term, this session 

where, for example, around the P3 [public-private partnership] 

bill, which made a lot of sense, made a lot of sense, we still 

can’t understand why the government would be against 

transparency and accountability and what would be the best 

interests of Saskatchewan citizens. But they felt that it was the 

thing to do. I wouldn’t even say, you know, that was the right 

thing because I think that it doesn’t make any sense at all. And 

this is what the beauty of private member bills are, that they 

really do address common sense solutions to problems that we 

know that are occurring. 

 

And we have seen . . . And I just want to take a minute to reflect 

on the member from Saskatoon Riversdale who gave a great 

introduction to this bill, and I think that she laid it out so well 

on March 13th, 2014. And I want to reflect on some of the 

things she said on Hansard because I think that she really hit it 

on the mark in talking about what this bill really is all about. 

She talks about dignity, respect, and safety. And that’s the 

concern that we’re hearing and we hear too many times, too 

many times. 

 

And sometimes we get the sense that a paternalistic attitude 

exists in too many homes. Now I wouldn’t want to venture a 

guess at how many, but even if it’s one home, that’s not the 

proper attitude when it comes to dealing with our Saskatchewan 

people in these homes. People should be treated with dignity 

and respect, and really that’s the key to being successful. It’s 

really the key to a successful, welcoming, nurturing home. And 

all of our brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, parents, grandparents 



May 1, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5287 

deserve such a situation. 

 

And she reflects on her own parents. In my case, my mom, you 

know, is still with us, and she celebrated her 90th birthday back 

in November. We’re very happy that’s the situation. And she is 

living quite well. But we all worry about the situation that may 

happen where that’s not the case, and we really empathize and 

sympathize with the folks who do find their parents or brothers 

and sisters in personal care homes because it’s a tough, tough 

situation and we want to make that as best as we can, as best as 

we can. So this is what this bill talks about. But we’ve had too 

many situations where, and we know this has happened in the 

House, where people have come to the legislature to bring their 

concerns forward because it seems to be falling on deaf ears 

within the system. And we really need to take leadership and 

this is the opportunity for this Chamber to take leadership in 

passing Bill 606. I think it’s important. 

 

But when people come forward like Carrie Klassen over a year 

ago, and then came back again just a few short weeks ago, to 

talk about her experience with her mother . . . And she doesn’t 

blame the staff, you know. She made it clear that even with the 

place at full staffing, it is still understaffed and people are left in 

unseemly situations, whether it deals with in terms of going to 

the bathroom, getting woken up in the morning, all of those 

things, to the point that people are having to quit their jobs so 

they can look after their parents. That’s not the kind of situation 

we want to see in Saskatchewan. So this is why this bill of 

rights is so, so important. And we need to make sure that the 

situation we find our, as I said, our parents, grandparents, and 

others can’t be tolerated. 

 

So Carrie Klassen came and talked about her situation. But then 

I want to take a minute and just address — and this is 

something that I know my colleague from Riversdale talked 

about — the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. And it 

was a final report that suggests and made six recommendations 

about this particular situation. And they entitled it, Civil Rights 

in Saskatchewan Long-term Care Facilities. And I quote, and 

this is May 2013. Elderly people, I quote: 

 

Elderly people and others in long-term care are entitled to 

the same respect as other citizens . . . 

 

Violation of civil rights of long-term residents is a . . . 

[form] of abuse . . . [which] may range from life 

threatening abuse to simple disrespect for the autonomy 

and privacy of residents . . . 

 

They go on talk about: 

 

The focus of this paper is on violations of the rights of 

residents, particularly when they do not involve physical 

abuse, and particularly when they may not be effectively 

addressed by . . . [existing] protocols . . . 

 

They go on, and I quote: “New steps should be taken to ensure 

civil rights are recognized in long-term care.” That’s so, so 

critical. And I think we’re at a point in Saskatchewan, you 

know, that we should step up. And we understand that you look 

across Canada, Ontario, Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], all 

have taken up this call. 

 

So they have really made six proactive reports: 

 

1. A residents’ bill of rights should be required for all 

long-term care homes. 

 

2. Legislation should set out a minimum standard for a 

residents’ bill of rights, with each long-term care home 

drafting its own document. 

 

3. Legislation should provide a default residents’ bill of 

rights to apply in the event a long-term care home does not 

draft its own. 

 

4. Each long-term care home should be required to 

prominently post its residents’ bill of rights. 

 

5. Legislation should provide an enforcement mechanism 

for the residents’ bill of rights. 

 

6. Reporting incidents of abuse against residents should be 

mandatory for staff and operators of long-term care 

homes . . . 

 

So that’s what it really talks about is proactive. They do talk 

about whether you need to have an independent agency. They 

felt not at this time and/or an independent advocate is not 

needed at this time. 

 

But it goes and talks bout how critically important this is. And 

we know that they have been talking about this for quite a 

while. And they talk about a report that has been dealt with at 

the federal, provincial, territorial ministers responsible for 

seniors talking about this. And they talk about studies across 

Canada. 

 

And they talk about the issue that about paternalism, which I 

just alluded to, that we want to make sure that that’s not the 

case in long-term care homes. In fact it’s an atmosphere of 

dignity and respect. It talks about, quoting CNPEA [Canadian 

Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse] that “In 

institutional settings, such forms of abuse are not always 

obvious. Subtle emotional harms may occur such as treating 

older people like children . . . and disregarding their wishes.” 

 

So it goes on and talks about this is something that they’ve been 

talking about for almost ten years, 2006. So that would be 

coming up fairly quickly. So we really need to step up and do 

the right thing here. 

 

So they talk about really how we need to improve education. 

This is a step towards improving living conditions. And training 

in abuse awareness provided to staff is uneven across the 

provinces, that in fact that this is something that needs to be 

consistent. And my colleague from Riversdale addressed the 

inconsistent, uneven treatment and services provided to 

residents needs to be, really needs to be addressed. 

 

Now they talk about Manitoba having a really proactive 

approach. They say in Manitoba, all long-term care homes must 

develop a residents’ bill of rights that meet a legislative 

standard. That’s what we’re suggesting here. But both Ontario 

and British Columbia have legislative specific bills of rights for 

long-term care residents. 



5288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2014 

So this is something that’s really, really important. It says, and I 

quote: 

 

The Commission prefers the Manitoba approach because it 

actively engages the facilities and residents in designing 

protections for civil rights. Engaging these partners will 

assist in furthering the education function of the bill of 

rights. 

 

So that’s a good thing. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just my 

colleague from Riversdale who’s brought this forward. No, this 

is something that the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan is advocating for. And I think it’s time that we do 

step up and we do pass Bill 606. 

 

It does talk about . . . And I just want to take a minute to reflect 

on the preamble because that really sets the tone for the bill: 

 

WHEREAS residents in care have the right to dignity, 

respect and safety; 

 

WHEREAS residents in care deserve basic guarantees of 

the quality of care they ought to receive; 

 

WHEREAS residents in care have the right to 

individualized care that meets or exceeds minimum quality 

of care standards; and 

 

WHEREAS it is the responsibility of the provincial 

government to ensure consistent standards of care in 

facilities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s the whereas. That’s the frame that my colleague is 

suggesting, and I think this is appropriate. This is really 

appropriate, talking about basic guarantees, that people do have 

the right to individual care standards. 

 

But we also have minimum quality of care standards. You can 

have both. You can have both, and it’s really important that we 

understand that it is the responsibility of the government to set 

minimum quality of care standards. And we’ve had debates, 

we’ve had questions in the House at length about this. We 

understand and we support and this Act calls for residents in 

care having individual care, and that being prescribed or written 

out, and that people understand that that’s the case. 

 

Best practices really indicate individualized care. But there has 

to be a base, a minimum quality of care that people cannot fall 

below, and that staffing really needs to be there to address at 

least that. That has to be addressed at the very minimum, but 

hopefully we can get to a higher standard than that. 

 

So it talks about what a bill must contain, and of course care 

plans that: 

 

are specific to each resident; 

 

are based on their abilities, physical, social, and emotional 

needs . . . cultural and spiritual preferences 

 

[but also] comply with the minimum quality of care 

standards established by the provincial government 

through regulations.  

. . . the right of residents [are] to be treated with courtesy 

and respect in a way that promotes their dignity and 

individuality;  

 

the right of residents to be sheltered, fed, dressed, 

groomed, and cared for in a manner consistent with their 

needs;  

 

the right of residents or their supporters to have the right to 

give or refuse consent to treatment, including medication, 

in accordance with the law. 

 

the rights of residents, subject to safety regulations and the 

privacy rights of other residents, to be encouraged to 

exercise their freedom of choice whenever possible, 

including the freedom to do the following:  

 

exercise their choice of religion, culture, or language;  

 

communicate with . . . [visitors and friends and family]; 

 

choose their recreational activities; 

 

choose the personal items that . . . [they may keep in the 

rooms]; 

 

select the clothing to be worn each day [their food]; 

 

And the rights of residents of reasonable privacy, and the right 

to be provided with a safe and clean environment, and the right 

of residents or their supporters to transparency and 

accountability, including several other things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important piece of legislation. 

And I do really want to call on both sides of the House to give 

some consideration of this. I hope this gets to a vote. And I do 

hope that it can have some success and that people can give this 

some due consideration because I think it is a bill that we 

should be all passing. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll now take 

my place and adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5265 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5265 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5265, 5266 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5265 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5265 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5265 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5265 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5266 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5266 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5266 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5267 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5267 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5267 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 May Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5267 

 Remembering Lindy Kasperski 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5267 

 Record Corporate Donation to Heritage Centre 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5268 

 Construction Company’s Century of Achievements 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5268 

 Moose Jaw Chosen as Reading Town Canada 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5268 

 Missing Children’s Month 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5269 

 National Immunization Awareness Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5269 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 University of Saskatchewan Review Process 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5269 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5269 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5271 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5271 

 Traffic Safety in the North 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5272 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5272 

 Camping Fee Increases 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5273 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5273 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5274 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5274 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Aboriginal Engagement in the Provincial Economy 

  Cox ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5274, 5284 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5277, 5284 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5278 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5280, 5284 

  Moe ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5281, 5284 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5283, 5284 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5284 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5285 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5285 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5286 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


