
























































Hansard: March 17, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 17, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4719 
 March 17, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
House, someone who needs no introduction, someone who this 
institution is used to seeing seated there, or even where you are, 
but now is in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, the former lieutenant 
governor for the province of Saskatchewan; the former Clerk of 
this Legislative Assembly; the provincial historian, 
Saskatchewan’s leading historical scholar, I might say, certainly 
one of them; an individual who has never turned down the 
opportunity for public service to assist in public policy matters, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it was the efforts of the government with 
respect to properly honouring our first premier, Walter Scott, or 
more recently as announced today by the Minister of Central 
Services, a new naming policy for the province of 
Saskatchewan.  
 
Because of the good work of our guest and his 
recommendations I’d like all members, if they would, to join 
me in welcoming back to the Legislative Assembly Dr. Gordon 
Barnhart. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming Dr. Barnhart to the legislature. As the Premier 
points out, no stranger to this Assembly and certainly no 
stranger to the people of the province. So thank you for the 
different roles that you have served in already and thank you for 
your ongoing work in ensuring that Canadian democracy is 
alive and well and going strong. Thank you. I’d ask all 
members to join me also again in welcoming Dr. Barnhart. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, seated in the west 
gallery is a group of 16 students and two instructors from the 
Aboriginal police preparation program at SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. And I’ll be 
explaining this program a bit further through a member’s 
statement, but joining us today are Allison Beatty — just give 
us a wave — Tara Bellegarde, Kristina Buhse, Delvin Cappo, 
Tanner Kehler, Antonia Lerat, Miranda Mebs, Brandon 
Parisien, Benjamin Pieczonka, Brittany Rempel, James 
Robertson, Connor Schoenthaler, Shalaine Starblanket, Burton 
Steele, Tejpal Virk, and Zoe Willis. 
 
Along with them are their two instructors, Marlene Dormuth 
and James Pratt, both retired after 25 years of outstanding 
service with the Regina Police Service. They both worked in the 

Children’s Justice Centre and also as a cultural relations 
recruitment. And I would ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Coronation Park in welcoming these 
guests from the SIAST police Aboriginal preparation course to 
their legislature. 
 
I’ve had the privilege of attending the grad at an occasion in the 
not too distant past, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a rigorous program. 
It’s very interesting to see the change that these individuals go 
through in the program and to see the opportunities they then go 
on to postgraduation. So it’s good to see the class here today. 
And it’s always good to see Marlene Dormuth and especially 
Jim Pratt here at their Legislative Assembly, two individuals 
that have done much for the people of Saskatchewan in so many 
different capacities these years on. Anyway please join with me 
in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon I have two sets of introductions to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
First, joining us in the west gallery is Dr. Ahmed Farooq and 
Dr. Patanjali Chaturvedi. Mr. Speaker, these two doctors are 
interventional radiologists who are based here in Regina and 
they’re doing some pretty innovative work on prostate artery 
embolization. They’re accompanied by Judy Davis, the 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of the Hospitals of 
Regina Foundation. Mr. Speaker, we’ll learn more about these 
two doctors in a member’s statement by one of my colleagues 
in a few moments. So I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, also in the west 
gallery we’re joined by six individuals who I am very pleased to 
be able to introduce this afternoon. First of all, Dr. Susan Shaw, 
who’s the Chair of the Health Quality Council of Saskatchewan 
and also the department head of the adult critical care at 
Saskatoon Health Region; Christina Denysek who is 
vice-president of human resources at Sunrise Health Region; 
Heidi Blommaert, the director of operational support at Sunrise 
Health Region; Ngaire Woodroffe Browne who is a director at 
Extendicare veterans’ program at Wascana Rehab Centre; 
Heather Thiessen who, Mr. Speaker, has been a patient adviser 
for several years now and, in 2013 at our annual health care 
quality summit, was named our first patient ambassador. Thank 
you, Heather, for being here. 
 
As well, Kim Camboia. Mr. Speaker, Kim Camboia is a mother 
of a three-year-old with cystic fibrosis, and they’ve been in and 
out of hospitals, as you can imagine, a number of times. Mr. 
Speaker, what started out as being a part of the children’s 
hospital design — in fact Kim used one of her daughter’s baby 
blankets to actually unveil the design for the children’s hospital 



4720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

— that really has ignited a passion in Kim for quality 
improvement within the health care system. 
 
Kim since then has been involved in four rapid process 
improvement workshops, six 3P [production preparation 
process] events, and several patient panels at the Saskatoon 
Health Region. She now serves as an RPIW [rapid process 
improvement workshop] mentor to new patient and family 
advocates who are just now getting involved in lean 
improvement. 
 
I had the opportunity to have lunch with these six individuals, 
Mr. Speaker, and am very, very pleased to be able to introduce 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the opposition to join with the Minister of Health in 
welcoming these guests in the west gallery to their legislature: 
the two doctors who are doing it sounds like some incredibly 
innovative work, and we look forward to hearing about that 
work further in the member’s statement, as well as Dr. Susan 
Shaw with the Health Quality Council and those who have been 
involved in working on making health care better in this 
province. With that, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to add to introductions 
that have already been offered. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize the work of Marlene and Jim, and the entire cohort 
from the Aboriginal police preparation program. 
 
I had an opportunity to speak briefly with the students this 
morning, and they highlighted the work of the program as it 
related to discipline, which was easy to identify as they were 
standing at attention and really spoke to their commitment to 
their professionalism. They also spoke about the connection 
between learning and earning, and then finally they were able to 
talk about their bright career prospects that they have in 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
And so from Gull Lake to Meadow Lake and well beyond, I’d 
like to just offer the opportunity for all of us to join in and thank 
these students and Marlene and Jim for being here today. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
students to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to stand and recognize the Aboriginal policing force 
students and . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And just in my language, Mr. Speaker, Cree language. I’ve just 
told them that they have to continue working hard. It really 

inspires me, and many other children throughout our 
communities, to see Aboriginal people take their assertive place 
in Saskatchewan and to keep working very hard because we’re 
very proud of you. You’re the best. 
 
And remember, the last part of my Cree translation, Mr. 
Speaker, is I told them not to stop me speeding when I’m going 
home on weekends once they become police officers. But again, 
very proud of you, keep up the great work and you’re a good 
role model for our kids. And thanks so much for the instructors 
who are making that extra effort. Merci tcho. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to recognize and introduce one of our independent 
officers, Dr. Michael Boda, Saskatchewan’s Chief Electoral 
Officer, who’s joined us in your gallery along with a number of 
other folks who are in town for a conference and training 
session. These are the folks from right across the province in 
constituencies, all of our constituencies, who are going to be 
conducting the next provincial election.  
 
And we thank you so much for your service and for your hard 
work, and we look forward to I think Dr. Barnhart addressing 
the group later today. So I want to recognize them and welcome 
all these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the Government House Leader in welcoming 
the Chief Electoral Officer, Dr. Michael Boda, to his 
Legislative Assembly and all of the guests from the length and 
breadth of Saskatchewan, these servants of democracy who are 
here to improve their skills, to get sworn in, to hear a few 
reflections from Dr. Gordon Barnhart on the practice of 
democracy in our province, and to see them here today and to 
realize their commitment to helping us do our job on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan is indeed very inspiring. 
 
So I join with the Government House Leader in welcoming 
these servants of democracy to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome 
Mr. Gordon Barnhart, the former lieutenant governor, former 
Clerk of the Senate, and former Clerk of the Saskatchewan 
Assembly back to the Legislative Assembly. I now know what 
it feels like to be the last speaker to the podium. Somebody has 
already said everything that you were going to say. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Go ahead anyway. 
 
The Speaker: — I intend to. I would like to introduce to 
members of the Assembly, guests from Elections Saskatchewan 
that we have in our gallery today. Leading this group, we have 
with us our provincial Chief Electoral Officer, Dr. Michael 
Boda. With Dr. Boda are the new returning officers and election 
clerks. 
 
Over the past several months, staff from the Office of the Chief 
Electoral Officer, which is more commonly known as Elections 
Saskatchewan, have been following a merit-based process in 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4721 

recruiting, interviewing, and hiring returning officers and 
election clerks for each of the province’s 61 constituencies that 
will come into effect when the writ of election is next issued. 
These senior election officials are gathering for the first time as 
a group and are undergoing an orientation in the world of 
election management and the specific rules and requirements of 
Saskatchewan’s electoral law. 
 
In just a few hours, my colleagues at the Board of Internal 
Economy and I will be joining Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan for the official swearing-in of 
constituency returning officers in a formal appointment 
ceremony. I would ask all the members of the House to 
welcome our senior election officials to the Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for 
education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 
services that government provides the citizens, and this 
government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 
and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence. And we know that this government has 
failed to deliver a real plan to close the Aboriginal education 
gap, support English as an additional language students, support 
community schools and their communities and students. And 
we know that we must build the best education system for today 
and for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents within Regina 
and in support of safety on Dewdney Avenue and calling on this 
government to act to move the dangerous heavy-haul truck 
traffic off of Dewdney Avenue. Certainly residents are upset by 
the unacceptable delay by that government in acting to ensure 
safety and to address a problem created by that government. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue, west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina communities and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the calls to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dreams of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly calls the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province, the beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, very much Mr. Speaker. I’m 
presenting a petition on highways in northern Saskatchewan. 
This is in relation to Highway 123 to the communities of 
Cumberland House and to the Cumberland First Nations: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize that upgrades, repairs, and 
maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 
residents and must be undertaken immediately. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from throughout Saskatchewan, and the ones that have signed 
this particular petition page are from Air Ronge. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very proud to present this petition on behalf of the 
people of Cumberland House and Cumberland House First 
Nations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 



4722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
petitioners state that the gym at Sacred Heart Community 
School in north central Regina is now quite literally falling 
apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for 
students or staff. The petitioners are well aware that a 
temporary solution has been provided, relocating students to the 
old sanctuary of the old Sacred Heart Church, but they call for a 
permanent solution. 
 
They point out that the school and the community have raised 
this issue with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 
without resolution. They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart 
has played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 
literacy leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 
successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 
out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 
north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 
whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 
enrolment has increased by 100-plus students over the past four 
years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 
improving. And they point out that, as a matter of basic fairness 
and common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a 
gym. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by neighbours of Sacred 
Heart Community School here in the city of Regina. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

St. Patrick’s Day 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today is 
St. Patrick’s Day, a great day of celebration for Irish people, 
their culture, and all things Irish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, St. Patrick’s Day is an important annual 
celebration for the people of Ireland and the Irish patron saint. 
St. Patrick was a Christian missionary in the 5th century who 
worked on bringing Christianity to Ireland. He was beaten by 
thugs, harassed by the Irish royalty, and reprimanded by his 
British superiors. 
 
After his death, St. Patrick was largely forgotten, but over time, 
his mythology has grown. It is said he introduced the Irish to 
the concept of the Holy Trinity by using a three-leafed clover to 
represent the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Today St. 
Patrick’s Day involves public parades and festivals and the 
wearing of green attire or shamrocks, and Christians attend 
church services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Saskatchewan was founded, one in ten of 

our residents were of Irish origin, so Irish culture is built into 
the foundations of our great province. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 
members of this Assembly join me today in recognizing patron 
saint St. Patrick, and I hope that everyone takes a little time out 
today to celebrate all things Irish. To all my Irish friends, 
sláinte. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today is St. Patrick’s Day, the 
annual celebration of Ireland’s patron saint. It’s a day for much 
festivity and merriment, a day for everyone, whether we have 
Irish blood flowing through our veins or not, to honour and 
celebrate the gifts of the Irish. And those gifts and contributions 
have been many, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1905, as has been stated, when Saskatchewan officially 
became a province, 10 per cent of our population was Irish. The 
Irish played a crucial role in building our province in those 
early days, and they’ve been a vital force in our province right 
to this merry day. And what a very merry day it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our very own O’Hanlon’s Pub in downtown Regina has been 
the Guinness capital of Canada for the last few years, serving 
more pints of Guinness, the black and delicious, on St. Patrick’s 
Day than any other pub in all of Canada. 
 
However Saskatchewan people celebrate St. Patrick’s Day, I 
hope it’s a good one, a fun one, and a safe one. And, Mr. 
Speaker, to you and to all members of this Assembly and to all 
Saskatchewan people, but especially those of Irish descent, I 
wish a very happy St. Patrick’s Day. May the luck of the Irish 
enfold you. May the blessings of St. Patrick behold you. Erin go 
bragh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Prostate Artery Embolization Project 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
privileged today to talk about the innovative research that Dr. 
Patanjali Chaturvedi and Dr. Ahmed Farooq are engaged in 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. Chaturvedi and Dr. Farooq are interventional radiologists in 
Regina who are instrumental in the prostate artery embolization 
trial for patients suffering from a benign prostate condition 
called benign prostatic hypertrophy, BPH. More than 50 per 
cent of men age 50 years and older will have BPH, with the 
number going up to 90 per cent by 80 years of age. Prostate 
enlargement can lead to urinary symptoms as well as infections 
and bladder stone formation. These infections can be 
life-threatening, especially when left untreated. 
 
Prostate artery embolization is a procedure that reduces 
enlargement of the prostate gland. It is less invasive and 
requires fewer health system resources than other procedures 
currently being used to treat BPH. This is the first research trial 
of its kind in Saskatchewan and in Canada. The two-year trial is 
focused on treating 50 patients and recording the data to 
continue the research and development of PAE [prostate artery 
embolization]. 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4723 

Mr. Speaker, this project is of critical importance as it will 
hopefully lead to better health for all men everywhere. I’d like 
to ask all members to join me in thanking Dr. Chaturvedi and 
Dr. Farooq for their groundbreaking work right here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Safety on Dewdney Avenue 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to come 
together with community members and community leaders this 
past week and to push for safety on Dewdney Avenue. We 
came together for a door-to-door community petition drive to 
call for action by that provincial government to ensure safety 
and get the dangerous heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney 
Avenue. The response was overwhelming. 
 
When the province established the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] a couple of years ago, they neglected to have a plan in 
place to ensure the resulting safe flow of traffic. The result has 
been that Dewdney Avenue, in the middle of a residential 
neighbourhood with homes, schools, child cares, seniors’ 
homes, parks, and tourism sites, has been inundated with 
heavy-haul truck traffic at all hours of day and night. This is 
nothing short of a major safety concern, and it impacts the 
well-being of families and residents. It’s dangerous. It’s loud. It 
shakes homes, and it’s damaging property. 
 
The community is calling for immediate actions to get these 
trucks off of Dewdney. The long-term solution needs to be 
building the west bypass, but an immediate, interim, short-term 
solution is required. Rebuilding a short section of Pinkie Road, 
including a small bridge just west of Regina so that trucks can 
bypass Dewdney, is a good option. 
 
The GTH is a provincial project, thus it’s only appropriate that 
the province takes responsibility and immediately provides the 
necessary funding and works with the city of Regina towards an 
urgent and a long-term solution. This government can no longer 
ignore this issue. Any further delays are entirely unacceptable 
and, as community members say, the risks of not acting are 
simply too large. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Aboriginal Police Preparation Program 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Further to what I 
said earlier in my introduction, today in the House we have the 
graduating class and two of the instructors from SIAST 
Aboriginal police preparation program. 
 
This program was developed by SIAST and the Saskatchewan 
police Aboriginal recruitment committee to address the gaps in 
skills that were preventing potential Aboriginal recruits from 
entering into policing careers. It is a 28-week program that is 
demanding, both academically and physically, to prepare 
students for a career in law enforcement or security. Courses 
include criminal law, criminal justice issues, addictions, suicide 
intervention, history of policing, and many more. 
 

It also now includes the 40-hour security guard training, and 
students are able to write the exam and be licensed upon 
completion of the program. Graduates of this program have 
gained employment with the RCMP, municipal police and 
border services, airport and mine security, corrections, casinos, 
the military, Ranch Ehrlo, and courthouse security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in February 2014, off-reserve Aboriginal 
employment was up by 4.2 per cent. That’s 13 consecutive 
months of year-over-year increases. It is programs like the 
Aboriginal police preparation that contribute to the increased 
Aboriginal employment in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these 
graduates will help keep Saskatchewan a safe place to live, 
work, and raise our families. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 16 members 
of the graduating class of the Aboriginal police preparation 
program and wish them all the best in their future endeavours. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Agreement Facilitates Moves Between Provinces 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday the 
New West premiers came to an agreement that will make it 
easier for people moving between the provinces to license their 
car and continue their apprenticeships. Starting in April 2015, 
people who move between the three provinces won’t need to 
get their cars inspected if their vehicles have been inspected or 
are four years old, nor will they need an inspection if one is 
done at a designated facility in the last 90 days. 
 
The premiers have also agreed that apprentices in the skills 
trade will be able to move without having to restart their 
training. This is a measure that will be better for employers who 
operate in more than one province and would allow Western 
provinces to share training resources. 
 
In an effort to lessen the financial burden on students and 
parents, a memorandum of understanding has been signed on 
open-source education resources. This MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] is an example of tangible results for the 
Saskatchewan people that are achieved through the New West 
Partnership co-operation. Mr. Speaker, open education 
resources reduce costs for students, increase access to the latest 
research, and help faculty to share and create knowledge. 
Through this agreement, students who are enrolled in some of 
the most popular post-secondary courses will gain access to free 
open textbooks. 
 
This MOU is an encouraging first step for Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, and British Columbia in fostering ongoing engagement 
with students, faculty, post-secondary institutions across the 
West. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Solutions for Grain Backlog on Railways 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The current rail backlog 



4724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

facing Saskatchewan farmers is a very serious issue, one our 
government recognizes and has been working to address for 
quite some time. I joined with the Minister of Agriculture, the 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, and the Minister of 
Economy in a delegation to work on this issue, and we 
consulted with industry stakeholders, other governments and, 
most importantly, Saskatchewan producers to find solutions. 
 
Last Thursday our Minister of Agriculture sent a letter to the 
federal Minister of Agriculture as well as the Minister of 
Transport with regards to their commitment to introduce 
emergency legislation when parliament resumes. 
 
[14:00] 
 
A few of the changes we are requesting that the federal 
government implement are mechanisms to ensure 
accountability between shippers and railways, including 
mandatory service level agreements to ensure grain companies 
fulfill their contract obligations with producers, and to 
immediately provide targets for car shipments in excess of 
13,000 cars per week with future increases as needed and an 
increase in penalties from the current $100,000 under the order 
in council to a minimum of $250,000 per day, and that any 
funds collected directly benefit the producers who bear the costs 
of the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard precious few solutions other than 
joint running rights from those members opposite. And I would 
like to call on the member from Nutana as well as the Leader of 
the Opposition to release what suggestions they have 
communicated to the federal government or to support this 
government in its request on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
producers. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Consultant Fees and Lean Initiatives 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
are rightly frustrated that this government is spending $40 
million on one contract to a US [United States] consultant, 
especially when this government rejected $8.5 million in urgent 
requests for care facilities for desperately needed staff, repairs, 
and equipment. But Saskatchewan people are especially baffled 
when they learn that this $40 million contract includes putting 
our health care workers through Japanese cultural training. My 
very specific question to the Premier: what exactly happens in 
these Japanese cultural training sessions for health care 
workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government is investing 
$40 million over four years in lean for health care, and it’ll be 
brought then again across government. So that’s $10 million a 
year, Mr. Speaker. It’s about point two per cent of the health 
budget that we’re investing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how’s it working so far? Well we’ve invested $26 
million so far. We’ve already saved $40 million, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s just on the operational side, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already 
saved 20 to $30 million in the design of the children’s hospital 
on top of that, 2 to $4 million in annual operating costs at the 
Moose Jaw hospital when it’s opened as a result of lean. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to continue with that program because we 
have already achieved efficiencies greater than the cost — the 
10 million per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last, the Leader of the Opposition 
likened those in the health care system who are supportive of 
lean to being members of a cult. Mr. Speaker, these are 
clear-thinking, principled health care professionals — 
administrators, yes, but also patients, doctors, and nurses that 
deserve better from members of this House. Will he apologize 
to those members of the public service and the health care 
delivery service system for likening them to cult members? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there are good aspects to lean, but 
this government has allowed the lean process to become fat. 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has forced common sense 
underground. 
 
Over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, my inbox filled up from health 
care workers who are afraid to speak out, Mr. Speaker, who are 
afraid to voice their opinions because of the culture that is being 
created. This government, Mr. Speaker, is spending $40 million 
on just one consultant, and that doesn’t even include the other 
costs that health regions are picking up for additional lean 
contracts and other lean costs in other ministries. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that this government is flying in 
senseis from Japan and paying them $3,500 a day to give 
training to Saskatchewan health care workers. So I think when 
you’re spending $3,500 a day on one sensei from Japan, and 
there are more senseis, that Saskatchewan people deserve better 
answers. So my specific question to the Premier was this: what 
exactly happens in the Japanese cultural training sessions for 
health care workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is happening in those 
sessions is garnering the support of patients who are involved in 
the process, and health care professionals. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
garnering the support of the president of SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] who says, “A focus on patient- and 
family-centred care using best practice evidence and Lean 
principles will improve the patient experience and return 
nursing to a rewarding career.” I don’t think she’s a member of 
a cult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is reflected what is happening in these sessions and what a 
patient team member said when Louise Frederick said, “This 
experience . . . is very empowering. I am confident patients are 
being listened to. This is a game changer for patients.” Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder if she’s a member of a cult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will read, as the member continues to ask 
questions, quotes from oncologists who will basically describe 
their experience, and that goes directly to the member’s 
question — oncologists, nurses, health care professionals, 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4725 

health care administrators who are saying, this is good work on 
behalf of patients. We’re finding efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I say to the Leader of the Opposition, we can have a 
debate about our lean project. That’s absolutely meet and right 
that we would. But, Mr. Speaker, we ought to do it without him 
castigating or characterizing those involved in the process as 
cult members. Will he simply stand up and say sorry to those 
health care professionals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — This is the problem we’re seeing from this 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. The tone being set from the top is that if 
anyone questions the fact that John Black and Associates has 
been given a licence to print money, somehow, Mr. Speaker, 
that they’re the problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is a government that has 
allowed lean to become fat. The problem is a government that 
has replaced common sense with forced learning lessons, Mr. 
Speaker, that people are forced to follow. 
 
Here’s a tweet that came on March 7th from a senior health 
region official. It says, “Sensei Iwata reminded 
@SaskatoonHealth today of the importance of teamwork, 
communication with the gemba and focus on internal 
customers.” Now I don’t know about the gemba and the internal 
customer stuff, Mr. Speaker, but I know that recognizing the 
importance of teamwork and communication isn’t rocket 
science. It’s common sense. 
 
My question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why are we paying 
Japanese senseis to fly to Saskatchewan, pay them $3,500 a 
day, $2,000 for flights, when they’re talking about 
communication, Mr. Speaker, and teamwork? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the same reason that 
the Virginia Mason Hospital in Seattle paid John Black and 
Associates for that very thing. Maybe the same reason that 
Seattle Children’s Hospital did the same thing, or Park Nicollet, 
Minneapolis, or health care institutions from around the world, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If these savings, these efficiencies, these improvements were so 
self-evident, why didn’t members opposite get to it for 16 years 
of government? Their definition of lean was closing 52 
hospitals, slashing nurse training seats, and ensuring that we 
don’t have the proper complement of doctors. 
 
On our side, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite the opposite: more doctors 
practising, more nurses with a growing population, not a 
declining population. That’s the difference. And lean has 
already paid for itself, Mr. Speaker. It’s not only paid for itself 
financially. We’re finding improvements in service. And that’s 
why people like Dr. Gary Groot who’s a general surgical 
oncologist said, “I got into this because there’s only once or 
twice in a lifetime where you get a chance to make a big 
change, something that’s really transformative and 
fundamentally different.” Will he apologize to this oncologist 
for characterizing him as a cult member, Mr. Speaker? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been getting steady messages 
from front-line health workers who are afraid to speak out, who 
are afraid to speak out, specifically because of the tone that the 
Premier is setting on this issue. I’ve been hearing from 
front-line health workers. I say, Mr. Speaker, let’s work with 
those front-line health care workers to make our system better. 
Let’s not turn lean into a cash cow for US consultants, which 
has happened under this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while many of the health care professionals I 
speak to identify the good aspects of lean, they point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that much of this is common sense that they already 
knew and that they’ve long identified as ways to improve the 
system. So if the good aspects of lean, Mr. Speaker, about 
management intentionally listening to those on the front lines 
and making the necessary changes, the question that 
Saskatchewan people have, Mr. Speaker, and the question that I 
have to the Premier is: why are we spending $40 million on a 
cash cow contract to a US consultant? Why are we paying 
Japanese senseis $3,500 a day to come give Japanese cultural 
training to health care workers? Why aren’t we listening to 
front-line workers and using common sense as a guide? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if this was all achievable just 
through NDP [New Democratic Party] common sense, why in 
2005 did the current member for Lakeview and the then Health 
minister approve a budget, a pilot project for lean, Mr. Speaker, 
in the Five Hills . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well in the Five 
Hills Health Region. What was the total amount of that budget? 
Point two per cent, the exact same amount this government is 
investing in lean today. 
 
Well the Hon. Leader of the Opposition stood up and said, 
anybody can figure this out. Why can’t we just figure it out as a 
. . . Why was the NDP opposite, when in government, going to 
do, pursue the same thing? And I’m looking now at the member 
for Lakeview. Maybe he wants to stand up and say why they 
needed lean consultants in 2005 but it’s wrong to need them 
today in 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I have said all along, there are 
good aspects to lean. The problem is, and this is what I hear 
from every health care worker, virtually every health care 
worker I speak to, Mr. Speaker, is that this government has 
gone overboard, Mr. Speaker. They have allowed it to turn into 
a cash cow for consultants as opposed to making a responsible 
investment, Mr. Speaker, and working with front-line health 
care providers. 
 
Front-line health care providers, Mr. Speaker, are telling me 
that they are finding that lean is actually complicating their 
work. They’re frustrated. They’re frustrated by the Japanese 
words that they’re forced to learn, the days out for training 
where they’re in workshops, Mr. Speaker, where they learn and 
they practise building paper airplanes together, Mr. Speaker. 
And they’re frustrated with the paperwork that they now need 
to fill out. What’s especially concerning to these front-line 



4726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

health care workers is that they are afraid to speak out. They’re 
afraid to speak out because of the overblown adulation that we 
have seen from this government. It’s completely unacceptable 
that this government would spend $40 million to create a 
culture in our health care system where front-line providers are 
afraid to speak out. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he end the big contracts today 
and direct those dollars to the front lines where Saskatchewan 
people need them? 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to confine their 
commentary to the floor of the Assembly and not enter into 
debate with people in the galleries. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. David Kopriva is a 
vascular surgeon and he said this about this current lean project 
— by the way, the one that has been undertaken by these 
consultants, the one, Mr. Speaker, that has already been paid for 
by the savings found and we’re only two years into it. Here’s 
what he said: “The greatest achievement, I think, is to shake up 
the surgical system from complacency. It’s to put this out there 
that we have to improve what we’re doing.” He was talking 
specifically about lean, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the kind of health care professional the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition has referred to as being . . . likened him to being 
a cult member, Mr. Speaker. We do need to have a debate. We 
certainly can have that. Obviously they’ve taken their position. 
We’ve taken ours. But what the Leader of the Opposition really 
needs to do is stand up and apologize to health care workers 
who believe in what they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re providing reductions in terms of time 
between diagnosis and care. They’re providing more efficient 
systems of just ways to manage our blood, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re doing it through lean techniques. They’re doing it 
through what they’re learning through lean, Mr. Speaker. And a 
great, great majority of them, I believe, are excited about the 
potential of lean not just to save money; to provide better care. 
 
Will he now apologize to those people on the front lines who 
believe in what they are doing, Mr. Speaker, the ones he 
characterized as members of a cult? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Conditions in Personal Care Homes 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we asked the Premier, the 
Health minister, and the Rural Health minister last week, how 
many private care homes are currently violating the personal 
care home regulations and jeopardizing the quality of care for 
seniors. Despite repeated questions, the Premier, the Health 
minister, and the Rural Health minister were unable to answer 
that very specific, very important question. So again to the 
minister: does he have an answer yet? How many private care 
homes are violating the regulations and jeopardizing the quality 
of care for seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to be really careful to answer that question so 
that I don’t perhaps agree with the member opposite’s premise 
to say that personal care home operators are putting our 
residents, their customers, their clients, in jeopardy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there are different levels of 
deficiencies in terms of what is pointed out by the consultations, 
Mr. Speaker. That changes from a day-to-day basis, or 
week-to-week, depending on when inspection, when the facility 
inspection is up in terms of the inspection cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of deficiencies to the point where it causes concern, 
where we contemplate pulling a licence, every year we average 
one to two facilities that we do close, pull the licence, Mr. 
Speaker. And the number would be the same in 2014, that we 
are working with that same number. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there are only about 240 private 
care homes in our province. This should not be a difficult 
question to answer. If the government is properly inspecting 
these care homes, identifying problems, and then following up 
on those problems, the minister should easily be able to report 
how many care homes are currently, currently breaching the 
regulations and jeopardizing the quality of care for seniors. 
 
So either the government doesn’t know the answer, or it doesn’t 
want the public to know the answer. Either way, that is 
unacceptable. So again, to the Health minister: how many 
private care homes are currently flagged for follow-up because 
they are jeopardizing the quality of care for seniors? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll perhaps repeat what I just answered earlier, Mr. 
Speaker. In terms of the inspection cycle, which takes place 
throughout the year for the 242 personal care homes, Mr. 
Speaker, deficiencies when they’re identified . . . Sometimes 
they can be taken care of right then, during the inspection, Mr. 
Speaker, wouldn’t register as a deficiency when the report is 
then issued to the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker. Others are 
given a certain amount of time to finish up those deficiencies. 
So again, in the follow-up work that we do as a ministry, those 
will clear up, Mr. Speaker, depending on how much time we’ve 
given as a ministry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of that will be published, Mr. Speaker. We will 
be providing that to the public in the next couple of weeks, once 
the regulations are passed. Mr. Speaker, I would question 
whether or not the members opposite still believe that we could 
publish that information without passing legislation, 
regulations, like they seemed to insist just a week ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4727 

Lease Payments for Crown Lands 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, because of the grain 
transportation crisis and the subsequent cash flow crisis 
producers are facing, the Minister of Agriculture has asked 
financial institutions to give producers a break and be flexible 
with their payments. And that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also said that the government would be flexible 
with those cash-strapped farmers who are falling behind on 
lease payments for Crown land. But the minister said, quote, 
last week . . . Last week he said, “The leases are due December 
31st each year, and every outstanding account has been 
contacted by telephone and we’re trying to give them as much 
time as they can to get current.” 
 
But many producers are facing a situation where they may not 
be able to sell their grain for several months. To the minister: 
does he still stand by that statement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s 
record crop is, as everyone knows by now, testing the limits of 
the grain transportation system. And with not being able to 
move grain, farmers are facing some cash flow issues. 
 
A letter has been sent to financial institutions in Saskatchewan 
to encourage them to work with producers regarding cash flow 
requirements and to be flexible with loan repayments. And, Mr. 
Speaker, land branch is doing the very same thing. These rents 
are all due at the end of the year, Mr. Speaker, and we’re being 
patient with those who are in arrears and will continue to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Darcy Livingston is a producer 
who farms about an hour east of Regina. His bins are full of 
grain, and because of that he couldn’t afford to pay this year’s 
government lease fee. 
 
Darcy wanted to work with the government to pay what he 
could and he offered partial payment, but in late January he 
received a letter from the Ministry of Agriculture saying that his 
land lease was about to be cancelled if he didn’t pay up in full. 
That letter referred to sections in The Provincial Lands Act 
which actually give the minister discretion on whether or not to 
cancel a lease. But when Darcy spoke with the government, he 
says they wouldn’t budge, and they demanded he pay up in full 
or lose his lease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister tell the media he’s being 
flexible with lessees and farmers when he was actually shaking 
them down and threatening to take away their lease land? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Every year, Mr. Speaker, the leases 
come due at the end of the year, and every year 90-some per 
cent of producers pay them. And every year during the 16 years 
that the NDP were in power, there were a few who didn’t. And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, during the last full five years of NDP 

government, the government cancelled 332 leases. In the first 
five years of our government, Mr. Speaker, we cancelled far 
less than half that many. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons 
from them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Darcy Livingston borrowed the 
money from his brother to pay this government for those lease 
fees. He didn’t want to lose access to the land he’s been farming 
on for years. But it shouldn’t have to come to this, Mr. Speaker. 
Darcy is not alone. This grain transportation crisis has caused 
major financial problems for producers across our province. 
Their bins are full but they cannot sell their grain to pay their 
bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government shouldn’t just be giving lip 
service here saying they are flexible. They should actually be 
flexible with those producers when it comes to paying for their 
leases. To that minister: how many other producers in crisis 
have had their leases threatened by this government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, whether producers lease 
land from private individuals or whether they lease it from the 
government, one thing that has to be paid every single year is 
the lease, or you don’t have the land. Mr. Speaker, it’s no 
different with government than it is private. It’s never been any 
different. It was certainly no different under those members, 
Mr. Speaker, when they were government. In fact as I said, they 
cancelled more than twice as many leases as we have in the 
same time period. And, Mr. Speaker, we have no legislative 
authority in lands branch to grant credit. But the credit-granting 
agencies have been approached by myself and have expressed 
an interest in being flexible. 
 
So you know, there’s nothing different this year as far as land 
lease cancellations go than there ever was in the 16 years that 
those members were in power, except we’re not doing half as 
many. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, despite being the first 
government in Saskatchewan to fail an audit, and in fact the 
first government in Canada’s history to fail an audit, that 
Finance minister, that Premier, and that government still aren’t 
listening to the independent auditor. 
 
A failed audit is a big deal, Mr. Speaker. It would be enough for 
a publicly traded company to be delisted from a stock exchange. 
It would have legal implications for any private company, in 
this province or otherwise. So the Premier and the Finance 
minister should be ashamed of the current failure of that audit, 
and they should be determined to never fail an audit again. 
 
To the Finance minister: will he guarantee here today that 
Wednesday’s budget will follow Canada’s generally accepted 
accounting principles and will pass the auditor’s scrutiny? 



4728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said in this Assembly many times to the member opposite 
is the system that has been followed by this government since 
2007 with the publishing of a summary budget and the 
publishing of a General Revenue Fund, which we refer to as our 
operating or chequebook side, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting. The member opposite from Athabasca continues to 
chirp, continues to yell in his place, when he understands that 
the system that his colleague, the former Finance minister, Jim 
Melenchuk, put in place . . . And he should remember that, for 
goodness’ sakes. He was part of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The system that was put in place in 2004-05 was the system that 
is what we have followed. It includes the summary budget and 
includes the General Revenue Fund budget, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s nothing different but I know that member wouldn’t 
understand. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Finance minister just 
doesn’t seem to have clued in that he’s the first government in 
this province’s history and in Canada’s history to fail an audit, 
Mr. Speaker. And you know, if that Finance minister would 
actually read the auditor’s report, they’d see that it’s due to a 
new accounting scheme created by his government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First, this government is inappropriately accounting pension 
costs. Second, it pretends that transfers coming from bank 
accounts are new revenues. Third, it didn’t record the debt it has 
forced on to universities, health regions, and school boards, for 
which they’ve agreed to pay both the principal and the interest. 
And fourth, it did not properly record assets constructed under 
its newly contrived shared ownership scheme. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Finance minister at least admit here today that these are the 
four reasons that they failed the audit and that they’re as a result 
of a new scheme created by his government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the people of Saskatchewan is that 
the summary financials which we produce, similar to what the 
NDP produced prior to 2007, have received, Mr. Speaker . . . 
The summaries, the summary statements, which includes all of 
government — it includes the ministries, the agencies, the 
Crown corporations, the not-for-profit, insurance organizations; 
it includes the regional colleges, the regional health authorities, 
the school boards, Mr. Speaker, the Crowns; it includes 
everything, Mr. Speaker — and since the government 
introduced it in 2004-2005, there has been an unqualified audit, 
Mr. Speaker, unqualified, and we continued to have received 
that unqualified opinion on the summaries. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what part of being the first 
government in Canada’s history to fail an audit does that 
government, that Finance minister, and that Premier simply not 
appreciate? 

If that Premier and that Finance minister would only turn to 
pages 11 through 15 of the auditor’s report, they would see their 
new scheme being detailed as to why they failed an audit. The 
minister can wax on about summaries, but the fact is when that 
Premier runs billboards, issues news releases and 
advertisements across this province, they’re based off the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] books that they failed an audit on, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the pension costs that are recorded 
incorrectly, because of pretending revenues are revenues when 
they’re not, Mr. Speaker, and of course because of hiding debt 
on health regions, universities, and school boards across this 
province as well as its new shared ownership scheme, detailed 
very clearly on page 12 for that minister. 
 
Again to the Finance minister: will his government listen to the 
auditor and ensure it doesn’t repeat the practices in 
Wednesday’s budget? Very clearly, yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, an interesting, a very 
interesting choice of words from the member opposite who is 
suggesting that the summaries, as verified by the auditor, are 
somehow incomplete. He’s suggesting that the debts and 
everything else that was in summaries are somehow inaccurate, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what he said. “There is 
not a full reporting and it’s hid” — that’s the quote that he said, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask him to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, because the 
summaries contain all of the information. They are unqualified, 
Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? This province 
has a unique position. It’s got a balanced budget. It’s got a 
growing economy. It’s got a growing population. It’s got a 
growing number of students enrolled in our schools, Mr. 
Speaker, something that that former NDP government wouldn’t 
have known a thing about. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s the responsibility of this government to continue to address 
crime in our province so that Saskatchewan continues to be a 
safe place for citizens to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Four years ago our government developed legislation, The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act, to help take the profit out of 
crime through the seizure of property found to be linked to 
unlawful activity. The Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund was 
formed pursuant to the Act to assist in the fight against crime. 
The proceeds accumulated from unlawful activity are now able 
to be used to help address crime because of that legislation. The 
efforts in law enforcement and the Ministry of Justice assist in 
keeping communities safe and also provide additional resources 
for police operations and victims services in our province. 
 
Today we announced an important step in helping the 
suppression of crime and helping victims of crime in 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4729 

communities across Saskatchewan by investing money through 
the Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund. Since the fund was 
established in 2009, it has grown to $1.31 million, and we are 
now investing a portion of those funds into organizations that 
are most in need of support, such as Regina’s Police Service 
and the Ministry of Justice victims services branch. 
 
Today we provided the first payout of $200,000 from the fund. 
The fund, operated by the Ministry of Justice, has provided the 
Regina Police Service with $100,000 and the Victims’ Fund 
with $100,000. The funding in the Victims’ Fund will be used 
to support ongoing services for victims of crime in 
Saskatchewan. We’re pleased to distribute funding to police 
services and support ongoing services for victims of crime in 
Saskatchewan. This fund will continue to be important as we 
work together to reduce crime and victimization in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fund is important as we work together to 
reduce crime and victimization in our province. By investing 
money back into our communities, we demonstrate another 
example of our strong commitment to communities and families 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
congratulate the Ministry of Justice on their use of this money 
that they have put together from the proceeds of crime 
legislation which we have in the province. And I know that the 
money will be well used by the Regina Police Service and by 
victims services, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we make sure 
that these kinds of dollars are used appropriately. 
 
I’m also quite pleased to know that my questions that I asked of 
the minister last Monday night triggered some of this release of 
money because I had suggested that the Minister of Finance 
was looking for money for his budget, and there was about $1.3 
million sitting in this fund which hadn’t been spent for four 
years. And so all of a sudden today we see that $200,000 of that 
money is being spent. And I think that’s the role of the 
opposition, is to make sure money that’s collected for a specific 
purpose is used for that purpose. And I thank the minister for 
that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
bring up the debate on the Canada-Korea free trade deal. Mr. 
Speaker, this is something that we think is fundamental to the 
growth, Mr. Speaker, and prosperity of our province as well as 
our country. And we think it’s very important to put this debate 
forward to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
will most certainly want to have their opinion put on the record, 
to have their say, Mr. Speaker, on something that is 
fundamental to Saskatchewan and to the competitive 
advantages that we have here in our province. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at trade, Saskatchewan is 
particularly leveraged in this regard. We are the province with 
the largest trade per capita, Mr. Speaker, in Canada, and this 
sort of initiative from our federal government is something we 
support very much. 
 
When we put out our plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, we targeted 
specifically Asia and the growing markets in Asia, Mr. Speaker, 
where we think that Canada and specifically Saskatchewan’s 
exports should be targeted. And, Mr. Speaker, this agreement 
comes on the heels of the EU [European Union] trade 
agreement in 2013. But before that, Mr. Speaker, we had over 
20 years where the trade file lay fallow. Today, Mr. Speaker, 
we have seen the EU trade deal which has moved the ball 
forward in a very meaningful way for Canada and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Korean trade deal, Mr. Speaker, announced last week, 
again specifically important for Saskatchewan. And we are 
going to continue to advocate and speak publicly about the 
importance we think that the trade deals will have on our 
province, specifically the Trans-Pacific Partnership which is 
what we hope is next, opening up new markets, better markets 
for our producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, I’m certain, would have 
looked through the very, very detailed summary, 74 pages of 
this agreement that came out last Monday. I’m certain that they 
would have found more fulsome information, Mr. Speaker, on 
the Internet and through their colleagues, Mr. Speaker, in the 
trade department federally, and that they will certainly have 
some fairly specific comments in this regard. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to lay the context a little bit about this 
trade deal and why I think it is so important and fundamentally 
positive for our province. We are a province that is a province 
of producers. We are not a province of mass consumption, so 
we have to produce and export. In 2007, Mr. Speaker, our 
province produced a large, almost $20 billion worth of products 
which we exported around the world. In the six short years 
following that, Mr. Speaker, we have increased it to over 32 
billion, almost $33 billion. That’s a 70.2 per cent increase in 
productive capacity and export capacity that we now have and 
we now send around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an organization that’s been engaged in 
Saskatchewan for quite some period of time, but an aggressive 
group, Mr. Speaker, called STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership: this past year, 42 trade missions to 27 
countries. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an aggressive group. It’s led 
by Lionel LaBelle. He’s the CEO over at STEP. He has 
relationships around the world. He’s got a very aggressive team 
that speaks the languages and knows the cultures, that leads 
trade missions, leads industry from Saskatchewan to access 
these markets. And they do it very successfully, Mr. Speaker. 
That is part of the Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are our federal agreements, but to lay a little 
context, our government has been one that from the time we 
came forward after the 2007 election, we have been strong 
advocates for trade across the board. We initiated the New West 
Partnership. We were a signatory to that, Mr. Speaker. We have 
actively pursued trade agreements and improvements to trade 



4730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

agreements within Canada. Saskatchewan has championed the 
dispute resolution process, business to government, under the 
AIT [Agreement on Internal Trade]. It has now been ratified in 
nine out of 10 provinces. We wait on New Brunswick, Mr. 
Speaker, but that was a Canadian initiative. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, in late December, Saskatchewan put 
forward a trade dispute with the province of Quebec in regards 
to non-dairy creamers. We have said publicly, we have acted 
publicly that where there is a violation of trade agreements, we 
will aggressively pursue these in regards to the producers in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And that is a commitment we make and 
will continue to make. Because we know with the arable land 
advantages we have in our province, the fertile soil we have in 
our province, the industrious culture, the industrious people, 
Mr. Speaker, that comprise the population of this province, we 
have competitive advantages that are uncompared across 
Canada and around the world, Mr. Speaker. And given the 
access, given the chance, we know that Saskatchewan people 
will outcompete almost anyone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In regards to Korea, Mr. Speaker, this is a great market for us. 
This is the first free trade deal that Canada has ever inked with 
an Asian nation. Mr. Speaker, we hope the first of many. Korea, 
a $1.1 trillion economy, 50 million people. Mr. Speaker, this 
free trade agreement gives our producers access, and 
preferential access, even more preferential than the US and the 
EU who have signed free trade agreements as late as 2011. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, ag exports to South Korea face high 
tariffs. An average of 53.7 per cent tariffs were faced in 2012. 
Once this is fully implemented, this trade agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, 98.2 per cent of these tariffs will be abolished. 
 
Saskatchewan’s exports to Korea: $150 million in agriculture 
and agri-food products, 54 million in industrial goods, and 6.9 
million in forestry products. But, Mr. Speaker, this has come 
back a long way from our high of just a few years ago. We, Mr. 
Speaker, in 2011, before 2011 we were exporting about $300 
million worth of products. Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s well under 
100 million. And that is because, as I mentioned earlier, EU and 
the US had signed free trade agreements in 2011 which gave 
them preference over Canadian goods, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we have seen in that short period of time is agri-food 
products have dropped over 80 per cent. We have seen wheat 
specifically drop over 80 per cent, and we have seen canola oil 
exports drop over 85 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this is something 
that in all those products we think we can compete with anyone 
in the world, given a level playing field. And this trade 
agreement is going to give us that level playing field that we 
desire. 
 
A few more highlights, Mr. Speaker, is when this comes into 
force, we’ll see immediate access for wheat, rye, oats, canary 
seed, and unroasted malt going to zero duty. Unroasted malt 
had a 269 per cent duty, Mr. Speaker. When we look at oats, it 
currently has a duty of 554 per cent. Mr. Speaker, almost 
impossible for our producers to compete with producers from 
other places in the world that have this sort of immediate and 
duty-free access. We will see, Mr. Speaker, over a period of 
time, beef, pork, pulse crops, Mr. Speaker, that will see 
phase-outs of those duties, again very important access for our 

producers. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, something that we don’t often think about 
is duties on potash. Korea had a provision to put a 6.5 per cent 
duty on potash. And that, Mr. Speaker, would be, with this 
agreement, will go to immediate zero duty. Welding machinery, 
Mr. Speaker, again we will see immediate access. 
 
Something embedded in this, Mr. Speaker . . . I saw a little bit 
of press on it. I think it’s just interesting; we talk about our 
culture going around the world. Rye whisky had a duty on it, 
Mr. Speaker. Under this trade agreement, people in Korea can 
access and enjoy good Canadian rye whisky, and that’s a little 
bit of Canada that I think is important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think my colleagues listen to me politely, but 
think I’m a little theoretical when I quote people like Adam 
Smith. But I’m going to do it again here today, and I request the 
indulgence of the members opposite as well. 
 
Adam Smith, Mr. Speaker, the prolific writer, wrote Wealth of 
Nations, advocating for a lot of things but largely free trade and 
how free trade benefits both parties involved. And Adam Smith 
spoke about agriculture and the wine industry. This is his 
comments in Wealth of Nations: by means of glasses, hot 
houses, and hot walls, very good grapes can be raised in 
Scotland, and very good wine too can be made from them but 
about 50 times the expense of which for at least as good of 
quality can be bought from foreign countries of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s saying that in northern Scotland, they can 
produce wine with a lot of technology and a lot of cost. But he 
goes on to say, why would you when Scotland has competitive 
advantages in other things such as sheep or Scotch, Mr. 
Speaker? He was advocating that maybe the Scottish 
countryside would be better utilized making Scotch, and they 
could trade it straight across for French burgundy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that theme is something that I think is reflected in this 
trade agreement. 
 
But I did want to make the point that for a good trade 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, you need two sides. One country 
cannot dictate free trade on another. It is an agreement between 
countries. And part of being a government that believes in free 
trade is being a government that will defend free trade, Mr. 
Speaker, it will aggressively defend free trade, that will 
negotiate a good deal for both parties. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
cornerstone of any trade agreement that we would put forward 
and the scrutiny that we would put to any trade agreement that 
our federal government would put forward on our behalf. 
 
Looking through this agreement, Mr. Speaker, we feel it is a 
very positive one and one that allows us room to grow. I will 
look forward to the comments from the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. They historically have been on multiple sides of the 
free trade fence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m getting a couple of members opposite that are 
arguing with this fact. I will read for them then, Mr. Speaker, if 
they like. Mr. Romanow, former premier of the province, 
former New Democratic premier, he said, and this was in 
regards to the free trade agreement with the United States, and 
I’m going to quote, “That’s why I say it’s a sellout of Canada 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4731 

and Saskatchewan heritage pure and simple.” Mr. Speaker, 
Romanow thought that trade would sell out the culture of 
Canada, and, Mr. Speaker, today we’re talking about a free 
trade deal with Korea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell members opposite, members on this side, 
that I don’t believe we’re going to lose our culture and our 
heritage with this trade deal. However, I will admit to the 
members opposite that over the last several years, as I go to my 
daughters’ school dances, that Gangnam Style, a pure Korean 
export, has truly been catching on. I do not know of a trade 
deal, however, Mr. Speaker, that would either support or inhibit 
this cultural phenomenon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this view that sellout of our province of trade 
deals, Mr. Speaker, the member for Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, the 
current member of Lakeview in regards to the New West 
Partnership called it a sellout trade deal. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
working with Alberta and British Columbia, the New West 
Partnership, Mr. Speaker, these are the provinces which are 
leading Canada. We’re part of that group, Mr. Speaker, for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, and I would challenge 
the members opposite to support that trade deal. I’d challenge 
them to support this trade deal. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap my comments up here fairly 
shortly, but as we work our way through this discussion, Mr. 
Speaker, as the members opposite have an opportunity to get on 
their feet to discuss this trade deal, trade deals in general, Mr. 
Speaker, I hope that the member for Athabasca, the member 
that was calling across the floor moments ago, will recognize 
that in this trade deal, forestry products, forestry products, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to have open access to Korea, to an Asian 
market. And that member, Mr. Speaker, from Athabasca knows 
how important that is to his community and how much his 
communities, how much his communities contribute to this 
province. This trade deal will bolster their efforts to grow their 
businesses, to grow their communities, and I think that he 
should stand on this floor and support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member, the critic for Agriculture, gets 
on her feet, I hope that she supports this trade deal, the open and 
free access for pulse, for wheat, for barley, for hogs, Mr. 
Speaker, for cattle. I hope that the member, the critic for 
Agriculture, stands on her feet and supports this, and when 
she’s meeting with the Friends of the Wheat Board next, that 
they support her in regards to free and open access for their 
wheat. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition takes an 
opportunity to get on his feet and to support this trade deal, that, 
Mr. Speaker, when he is deciding whether he’s representing the 
people of Saskatchewan, the agricultural producers that this is a 
good deal for, that he stands in this House and says so. And 
when it’s time to vote in this House, that he is here and says 
aye, Mr. Speaker, in support of this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a province of traders. We are a productive, 
fertile province with a lot to offer the world. Trade deals like 
this open those doors, and we are going to support it. And with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make my motion: 

That this Assembly support the Canada-Korea free trade 
agreement reached by the federal government on March 
10, 2014; and: 

 
That this Assembly asserts that the Canada-Korea free 
trade agreement will benefit Saskatchewan’s producers and 
economy as the agreement includes: (1) an elimination of 
duties on wheat, flax, canola seed and meal, mustard, rye, 
and oats; (2) the phase-out of duties against our canola oil, 
beef, and pork; (3) the phase-out of duties on our chickpeas 
and lentils over a three- to five-year period; (4) the 
elimination of duties on our forestry and value-added wood 
products; and (5) the elimination of duties on 
Saskatchewan potash. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move this 
motion and put it before the House. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 
and Resources: 
 

That this Assembly support the Canada-Korea free trade 
agreement reached by the federal government on March 
10, 2014; and: 

 
That this Assembly asserts that the Canada-Korea free 
trade agreement will benefit Saskatchewan’s producers and 
economy as the agreement includes: (1) the elimination of 
duties on our wheat, flax, canola seed and meal, mustard, 
rye, and oats; (2) the phase-out of duties against our canola 
oil, beef, and pork; (3) the phase-out of duties on our 
chickpeas and lentils over a three- to five-year period; (4) 
the elimination of duties on our forestry and value-added 
wood products; and (5) the elimination of duties on 
Saskatchewan potash. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We welcome 
the news about the trade agreement with South Korea. Certainly 
we know the drivers of Saskatchewan’s economy all across this 
province will benefit from this agreement. Certainly 
Saskatchewan produces world-class products and including 
some of the best crops and agricultural products in the world. 
So it’s a good thing when we open up new markets for what 
Saskatchewan has to sell to the world. 
 
New Democrats support expanding and diversifying our trade 
relationships. New Democrats believe in trade with democratic 
countries with high standards like South Korea tend to make. 
We know they tend to make good trading partners with a 
benefit for the province. 
 
South Korea itself is a very large economy. It has high 
standards within its economy, and so a well-negotiated trade 
agreement would certainly be welcome and has tremendous 
potential for the province of Saskatchewan. South Korea itself, I 
believe, is the fourth largest economy in Asia and has 50 
million people within it. So it presents a lot of opportunity to 
our province, to our producers, to businesses across the 
province, and to our economy. 
 



4732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

So we support in principle the agreement that’s been reached 
between Canada and South Korea. Of course we don’t know all 
of the details yet, but we’ll certainly be looking at all the details 
as they continue to emerge. But we’re supportive. We’re 
supportive of what we know as far as it relates to the agreement 
with Saskatchewan, the benefit to Saskatchewan’s economy, 
and the benefits it will bring to our agricultural producers. 
Sorry, the members opposite are making a little bit of noise . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . What’s the question? So as I’m 
stating and members are making noise, I thought they wanted to 
enter into the discussion here. As I say, we support the trade 
agreement that’s been put before us and we see a lot of benefits 
for Saskatchewan, our businesses, our producers, and our 
economy. 
 
The agreement will eliminate duties on Saskatchewan wheat, 
flax, canola seed, meal, mustard, rye, and oats. This is certainly 
a benefit to Saskatchewan producers. It will phase out duties on 
Saskatchewan chickpeas, lentils, canola oil, beef, and pork, 
although I know producers would like to see those duties 
eliminated at a much quicker rate. I know this is an important 
measure for Saskatchewan pork producers across 
Saskatchewan. And we need to be certainly always mindful of 
the challenging environment that they’re often facing. So we 
see this opportunity as a good one. 
 
It will also eliminate duties on forestry and value-added wood 
products, and it will eliminate duties on Saskatchewan potash. 
These are very good measures for our agricultural producers, 
our forestry industry, our potash industry, and for Saskatchewan 
as a whole. 
 
And we know that when the United States signed its free trade 
agreement with South Korea, as well as the European Union, 
when they signed their agreement with South Korea, that 
created a competitive disadvantage to our exporters, to our 
country, to our province. We recognize that in 2011, the last 
year before the United States signed an agreement, the trade 
agreement with South Korea, our province exported $195 
million worth of wheat to South Korea. By last year wheat 
shipments had fallen by more than 80 per cent to a value of $33 
million. That speaks to the volume of the trade that we need to 
rebuild and pick back up, and it speaks to the importance of this 
trade agreement when the European Union and the United 
States have entered into deals that, as I say, have caused a 
competitive disadvantage for our producers, who deserve better. 
 
We’ve also seen a similar dynamic with canola oil back in 2011 
before the US had a free trade agreement with South Korea. 
Saskatchewan exported $22 million worth of canola oil to South 
Korea and by last year that had also fallen by 85 per cent. So 
this is an important step and an important agreement to regrow 
our share of that trade and to make sure the markets are 
broadened for Saskatchewan’s producers. So as I’ve said, a 
well-negotiated agreement that corrects the competitive 
disadvantages that have recently been working against our 
producers and our businesses is certainly a good thing. 
 
We’ll continue to speak to a very important matter though that’s 
tied directly to this, and of course that’s the need for that 
government and the federal government to fix the broken 
transportation system, the grain transportation system and the 
system that’s going to get our exports to market to make sure 

we can meet those economic opportunities presented to us. And 
we’re going to continue to press for meaningful action to allow 
that broken system to be fixed, to make sure our producers have 
those opportunities to get their world-class products to market. 
 
In terms of the agreement, we like what we know so far. We 
certainly look forward to further dialogue and discussion of the 
details as it relates to the full impact, but what we see is 
positive. We welcome progress on this trade agreement with 
South Korea, and we support the agreement in principle 
because supporting and expanding, diversifying our trade 
relationships, and because we think democratic countries with 
high standards like South Korea make very good trading 
partners. For all of this and the opportunity it presents to 
Saskatchewan people, businesses, producers in our economy, 
we see a lot of hope and opportunity in this trade deal. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Will you take the question as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize . . . Okay. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:55 until 15:21.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas  52] 
 
Wall Morgan Stewart 
Draude Duncan Krawetz 
Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 
Harpauer Toth Doherty 
Norris Reiter McMillan 
Heppner Harrison Wyant 
Tell Weekes Elhard 
Hart Bradshaw Bjornerud 
Hutchinson Makowsky Ottenbreit 
Campeau Wilson Marchuk 
Ross Kirsch Michelson 
Doke Cox Merriman 
Jurgens Steinley Hickie 
Lawrence Tochor Moe 
Parent Phillips Docherty 
Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 
Vermette Belanger Chartier 
Nilson   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 52; those 
opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4733 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 116 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter discussion here for a brief time as it relates to 
Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act. We’ve had 
some discussion on the floor of this Assembly about this Act 
and the changes. I’ve reviewed the comments from the minister 
as it relates to these changes, and we’ve been doing some 
consultation with stakeholders and partners of the 
municipalities all across our province. And we’ll continue that 
work as it relates to this Act. 
 
Certainly I just want to recognize the municipal leaders across 
this province that are so committed to the well-being of their 
communities, the future of their communities, and I see it; I see 
it often. I see it when I step into an RM [rural municipality] 
office anywhere in this province and sit down with a reeve and 
council or an administrator. Or I see it as well when we sit 
down with any one of our mayors and councils across this 
province. 
 
And I see it, of course, when we see the congregation of these 
organizations such as last week at the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities for their convention here in 
Regina last week where you have thousands of delegates, I 
believe over 1,800 that come together with a commitment to 
their communities and their province. These are good people 
that care about their communities and certainly work to make 
improvements, just the same as those urban municipalities and 
those leaders and administrators, those mayors and councillors 
all across this province that are working every day to make a 
difference in our communities across Saskatchewan. It’s those 
sorts of individuals that we will ensure we’ve properly 
consulted on legislation like this. 
 
We see unfortunately, far too often, that current government 
ram forward with legislative changes without listening to or 
without properly consulting those directly on the ground. Now 
I’m not suggesting that that’s the case with this legislation here 
today. We’ll make sure we follow up directly with the minister 
in committee to get a full understanding of the scope of 
consultations that built this legislation, and make sure we have a 
full understanding as we’ve been engaging municipalities of 
their understanding of this legislation. 
 
Any time there’s legislative changes, we want to make sure that 
the opportunity’s been taken to fully understand the 
consequences intended or unintended on the ground — in this 
case in communities across Saskatchewan — and making sure 
as well that you’re taking that opportunity to provide the 

resources and opportunities required to make sure that the 
changes are as broad and meet the needs of communities the 
way that they should. 
 
The minister has brought forward that there’s a few different 
reasons for this legislation. He highlights five key areas as he 
suggests, and I’ll just touch on each of these. The first one the 
minister suggests provides a better criteria on which to 
determine whether unincorporated communities and areas have 
sufficient capacity for local governance and municipal status. 
So this is important making sure that if they’re to take a step 
and make sure that they’re able to incorporate as a community, 
possibly becoming an organized hamlet, I suspect, or another 
municipal entity, that they have sufficient capacity and make 
sure that there’s some terms set out, I understand here in this 
legislation, to make that clear. 
 
I also understand the minister says that another objective of this 
legislation is to provide objective criteria for action when 
municipalities are no longer able to function and meet their 
statutory requirements as local governments. That certainly 
sounds reasonable, sounds common sense. Certainly we can 
think of some examples where that may be the case, and we 
hear these circumstances shared with us from individuals from 
time to time across the province. We just want to make sure that 
the provisions put forward, the plan put forward by that 
government is a respectful one and is common sense and isn’t 
providing that minister with too much of a heavy hand in the 
democratic affairs of communities. So we want to make sure we 
analyze it from that perspective. So making sure that they’ve 
found the right balance on that front. 
 
The third point that the minister suggests will be achieved 
through this legislation is to provide more flexibility and choice 
for interested urban and rural municipalities to voluntarily 
restructure to form a new type of municipality known as a 
municipal district. I think the word that’s important to me on 
this piece is voluntary. And you know, I think that that’s 
important for our democratically elected municipal leaders 
across our province, rural and urban, to make sure that they are 
able to enter into these sorts of agreements in a voluntary 
fashion, not forced by government with a heavy hand. And 
that’s the sort of review we’ll be providing, this measure right 
here, to make sure that this is in fact voluntary. 
 
Certainly the benefits of some regional planning and regional 
districts have a lot of merit, have, you know, a lot of potential. 
And when we’re thinking of making sure we’re planning from 
the opportunity, challenge and pressures and growth we have 
here today, we need to make sure that we’re making the right 
choices right now and that we’re getting the best value for 
taxpayers’ dollars, making sure that we’re meeting the needs of 
entire regions. And so certainly this sort of planning approach 
in principle is one that we are supportive of. 
 
But it’s very important that that minister and that that Premier 
understand the importance of the piece there, and that’s the 
word being voluntary. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The fifth piece that the minister has spoken to is that the 
changes he suggests will enhance property owners and the 



4734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

minister’s ability to ensure municipal compliance with 
legislation and regulations, and constrain potential misuse of 
local property tax tools and tax abatements. We’ll be looking 
for further detail from the minister on this piece here, certainly 
to ensure there’s measures in place to provide property 
taxpayers some level of transparency and accountability in the 
strong measure of transparency and accountability. And 
improved transparency and accountability is something that we 
would support. 
 
But we want to get an understanding from the minister what 
specific scenarios he’s identified and specific cases he’s 
possibly dealing with about what he suggests are a misuse of 
local property tax tools and tax abatements, and 
non-compliance that he’s speaking of in some municipalities. 
So it’s important for that minister to be clear on the 
circumstances that he’s identified, the issues he’s dealing with 
on that front. Because so many, if not the vast, vast majority of 
our municipal leaders and municipalities are so thoughtful in 
their work, committed to making a difference, and certainly 
aren’t going to be putting their municipalities in a position of 
non-compliance or to misuse, as the minister suggests, local 
property tax tools. So we’ll get a full understanding of the 
number of municipalities he’s dealing with, some of the specific 
cases, what the actions are that the minister’s taking now, and 
how effective are they going to be in addressing the challenge 
that he’s identified. 
 
As we’ve said, this government has far too often pushed 
forward with legislation without proper listening to 
stakeholders. We see that in education. We see the impacts of 
that in education, the failures of this government to listen to 
stakeholders. We need to make sure we get this right with the 
municipalities of Saskatchewan. 
 
We also need to make sure that they’re better supported from a 
perspective around funding the infrastructure they need here in 
this province. Far too often I see that government and that 
minister brush off the important role of the provincial 
government in assisting to build the infrastructure we need in 
the growing communities across Saskatchewan. So we’ll be 
looking for actions and plans and meaningful resources to go 
with it in the coming days and weeks on that front. Because it’s 
very important that we, of course, support the municipalities 
across Saskatchewan, do so in a smart way, support their good 
work, and that we also understand that the consequences of that 
government not stepping up to the plate and providing an 
adequate share to the municipalities of infrastructure dollars 
falls heavily onto the backs of families already pressured in 
many cases by affordability, and as well businesses across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what we see is a government over the past little while that’s 
been neglecting an important role of assisting communities to 
build the infrastructure that we need. We see them abdicating 
that responsibility and putting that heavily onto the backs of 
property taxpayers all across Saskatchewan. I know many will 
identify that. So this is an area as well, we’ll continue to 
advocate with this provincial government to make sure that a 
meaningful infrastructure plan is put in place to assist our 
growing communities building the infrastructure they need, and 
taking the heavy burden off of property taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan — families and businesses — that’s being added 

to them in an unhelpful way by this government who’s not 
stepping up to the plate in the way that they need to. 
 
As it relates to the changes brought forward here today, we will 
certainly examine them in much closer detail. We certainly have 
questions as it relates to them. We’ll do that at the committee 
structure. So at this point in time, I refer Bill No. 116, The 
Municipalities Amendment Act to committee. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. Oh, the 
question before the Assembly is a motion by the minister that 
Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 
shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The bill stands referred 
to the standing committee on intergovernmental justice and 
agencies. 
 

Bill No. 117 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
simply a follow-up to Bill No. 116, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, this being the consequential amendments to go 
with it. The minister’s detailed here that this Act makes 
amendments to one bilingual Act, The Non-profit Corporations 
Act, 1995 as a result of the introduction of The Municipalities 
Act that we were just speaking about moments ago. 
 
I don’t have a whole bunch to say to this legislation. We’ve 
spoke to the important roles already that municipalities fulfill to 
the people of Saskatchewan, the committed, dedicated 
municipal leaders that are democratically elected in our rural 
and urban municipalities across Saskatchewan. Of course we’re 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4735 

thankful for their leadership, as well as we’re thankful for the 
fine administrators in both those municipal and urban 
municipalities across Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister goes on to say that the change to The Non-profit 
Corporations Act, 1995 is required to add a reference to a 
municipal district to the definition of municipalities. Seems to 
make sense. And he says that it also provides flexibility and 
choice for interested urban and rural municipalities to 
voluntarily join together to form a new type of municipality for 
the benefit of their residents. So there is a couple of legislative 
changes here, some consequential changes as it relates to the 
bill that we’ve been talking about. 
 
As I’ve said again and I want to impress it upon that minister 
once again is that it’s really key that those partnerships, those 
districts are formed in a voluntary fashion and not forced by 
way of a heavy hand from government. That’s something that 
we’re going to make sure we’re ensuring is the case as we move 
forward. 
 
We spoke about the important role of that government doing a 
better job of stepping up to the plate to actually support the 
infrastructure funding that our growing communities need 
because the consequence of not doing that fails to provide our 
communities with the infrastructure they need to meet the needs 
of families. And it also falls directly as a heavy cost onto 
households with a bigger and bigger property tax bill because 
this government’s absent from an important role in funding that 
infrastructure. And of course that bigger and bigger property tax 
bill also falls directly back onto business owners, businesses all 
across the province. 
 
But at this point in time we will follow up with these sorts of 
questions in committee. We’ll also make sure that we continue 
to track in the coming days the actions of this government as it 
relates to infrastructure for municipalities across Saskatchewan, 
knowing the need is pressing, knowing the time is now for them 
to be providing support to build the infrastructure required 
across our province. 
 
That being said, I don’t have any further questions other than 
those questions we’ll be following up with at the committee 
structure. Thanks, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 
Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 117, The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 
shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2013 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 

Bill No. 118 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. I’m glad to join debate on Bill No. 118, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. I guess I’ll say right off the bat, 
Mr. Speaker, this seems to be fairly decent legislation. But as I 
get into my remarks, Mr. Speaker, it’s plain, looking at the 
changes heralded by the minister as this being part of some sort 
of milestone or landmark legislation for the institution in 
question, that this in fact amounts to a name change. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, while again name changes are fine, 
and certainly this is an institution where name changes can be 
used to mark out the different periods of the history of this 
institution, again in terms of the actual function of the 
organization, the way that the institute is doing its business in 
Saskatchewan, the powers accorded to the institution under the 
other Acts, Mr. Speaker, again I don’t know that this is 
necessarily landmark nor historic. But it is certainly a name 
change, and of course that name change is to the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic from the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology or SIAST. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of taking, not a degree or a certificate at 
SIAST, Mr. Speaker, but I have had the pleasure and the benefit 
of taking a class at the then SIAST Wascana Campus and as 
well, Mr. Speaker, through different movies, have been very 
interested in the work that this institution does in equipping that 
potential workforce with the actual tools to get the job done out 
there in the labour force and economy and society, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. 
 
But to the legislation itself, what is being proposed? First off 
there is again changing the name from SIAST to becoming a 
polytechnic. Again fine. Fair enough, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Interesting to note that other jurisdictions, as was pointed out in 
the second reading speech by my colleague from Nutana, in 
New Zealand the reverse is sort of taking place in terms of 
polytechnics changing their names to a technical college. But 
again it’s, you know, these changes in the nomenclature, the 
shift in the lexicon, they happen. They happen in different ways 
in different parts of the globe, but again does it really change 
what SIAST is able to do? 



4736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

In marshalling the arguments for the purpose of this rebranding 
or this renaming exercise, the minister in his second reading 
speech referred to enabling SIAST to participate in 
Polytechnics Canada. And again, fine. In terms of our 
universities, they certainly participate in their umbrella 
organizations nationally and that is as it should be. But the thing 
that’s funny in that regards, Mr. Speaker, is that, quoting from 
the minister’s second reading speech: 
 

Mr. Speaker, SIAST is the newest member of Polytechnics 
Canada and joins other prestigious organizations, including 
the British Columbia Institute of Technology, the Southern 
Alberta Institute of Technology Polytechnic, and the 
Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, as well as Red 
River College. 

 
And again, that’s from November 25th, 2013. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, for an institution that once upon a time was 
called the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, with the Moose 
Jaw campus or the different campuses throughout the province, 
the way that was consolidated into SIAST and the different 
campuses of SIAST in, I believe, 1986. And you know, again 
here we have another change in nomenclature and fair enough.  
 
But it’s interesting to note that the minister, in referencing the 
different institutions that this will supposedly facilitate 
participation in Polytechnics Canada, the fact that you’ve got 
institute of technologies, you’ve got institute of technologies 
polytechnic, and colleges, and again, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
points to the fact that, you know, there wasn’t any sort of 
holdback or barrier to the participation of SIAST in 
Polytechnics Canada previously. So to bring that in is a bit, a bit 
of a stretch. 
 
[15:45] 
 
In terms of the association of degree-granting authority with 
polytechnic institutions, Mr. Speaker, again SIAST already has 
some degree-granting authority, which is good and as it should 
be, and again to make sure that you’ve got both that balance of 
the offerings and the quality of the credential. Therefore the 
people of Saskatchewan, when they go to participate in these 
courses, that’s again as it should be. But it is, I would note, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, not something changed by this 
legislation. That was the current state of affairs, and all this 
legislation does is perhaps reiterate and restate that fact. But in 
terms of a change in law, that status was already in play. 
 
Something that is new, but arguably again they’re clarified in 
law, and that’s great — you know, I’m sure every ministry’s got 
their legal drafters that want to make sure that they’re earning 
their keep — but in terms of clarifying the ability of SIAST to 
fundraise for property, again that’s good. There are lots of 
different ways that people can make donations to support a 
given institution. And in the case of SIAST to have that 
clarified again, good, but it’s hardly a change in the game as 
you might say, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
 
I guess that’s about all I’ve got to say for the time being, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, on this particular piece of legislation. 
There’s a consequential amendments suite that I’ll comment 
further on. But in terms of this legislation, the proof will be in 

the pudding as regards to the budget that we get tabled in this 
legislature on Wednesday, as regards to the support for SIAST 
or for the Saskatchewan Polytechnic or what have you. And that 
is I think the one that we’re all watching for. 
 
But in terms of what changes flow from this piece of 
legislation, aside from that ability to more clearly receive 
property as part of the charitable requests program for SIAST, 
it’s again, in terms of the ability to participate in Polytechnics 
Canada, in terms of the ability to grant degrees and pursue 
research and development opportunities, I don’t know that this 
is necessarily neither historic nor a landmark piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. But it’s fine. It’s fair enough. 
 
And I guess one of the other questions that we’ll certainly 
pursue in committee is, you know, in terms of the rebranding 
exercise. There are always predicted benefits and expected costs 
that go into something like this, Mr. Speaker. So is this a 
variation on the landmark public administration effort of this 
government to change the title of departments to ministries? 
Well, we’ll find out, Mr. Chair of Committees, what is the cost 
in terms of signage and letterhead and all the other things that 
go with branding, again for SIAST which has done a very 
successful job of getting its name out there in the community, 
and in terms of being a real institution of choice for many 
Saskatchewan people and indeed people throughout Canada and 
around the world. 
 
Those are some questions that we’ll have in committee, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, but for the time being we’re, on the 
official opposition side, prepared to see this piece of legislation, 
Bill 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act moved to 
committee. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 
Assembly is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 118, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 
shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4737 

Bill No. 119 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Pleased to join debate on Bill No. 119, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013. Again Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 
loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s been consequential amendments. The 
substance, as is often the case, is in the preceding bill. Certainly 
that’s the case in 118, and these are changes arising 
consequentially from Bill No. 118. 
 
Now as I’ve just discussed, Mr. Chair of Committees, Bill No. 
118 is hardly — I don’t know — ground shaking, 
earth-shattering in terms of its legislation. It’s a fine enough 
piece of legislation in and of itself, but essentially what it 
accomplishes, Mr. Chair of Committees, is a name change 
moving from SIAST to the Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
A lot of the things that the minister referenced in his second 
reading speech for the preceding Act, Bill 118, are already part 
of the mandate of SIAST. And be it the granting of degrees, be 
it the participation in the Polytechnics Canada, again, Mr. 
Speaker, the main sort of change is clarifying the ability to 
receive property as a donation to the institution. Great, but as 
we change from SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic, again 
we’ll be interested to see what sort of costs are involved in 
terms of rebranding, renaming, ordering new letterhead, 
ordering new signage, launching new campaigns, and again for 
a trademark that was very well regarded in the community and 
indeed across this country and broadly. 
 
Fair enough, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen similar changes like this 
before, moving from the Saskatchewan institute of technology 
— I believe the member from Saskatoon Southeast was a 
student there once upon a time — moving to SIAST where I 
certainly had the pleasure of taking a class and a number of 
family and friends have had opportunity to take classes and 
certificates at SIAST, Mr. Speaker, and now moving to the era 
of Saskatchewan Polytechnic. Again that’s fine; that’s great, but 
there are more meaningful ways that this government can aid 
and promote the work of be it SIAST or be it the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic. And we’ll be seeing the measure of those supports 
coming with the budget to be tabled here relatively shortly, Mr. 
Chair of Committees. 
 
Again as regards the specific changes in the legislation, there 
are consequential amendments to the bilingual enactments of 
The Education Act, 1995 and The Teacher Certification and 
Classification Regulations, 2002, again of, you know, strictly 
technical in nature reads heavy, heavy-duty housekeeping, Mr. 
Speaker, but pertaining to quite literally changing from where it 
said SIAST in the old legislation to Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

in the new legislation. 
 
So again hardly the stuff the Caramilk secret is made of, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, and with that we are prepared to see the 
discussion of this legislation at the committee stage. And so at 
this time the official opposition is prepared to see this Bill No. 
119 moved to committee. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 
Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 119, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 
shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman of 
Committees. I designate that Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate of Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act, 
here this afternoon. Certainly this Act has been long awaited by 
many in this province — and in many ways slow walked by 
government — to make sure that we have in place in 
Saskatchewan a modern, effective, common sense piece of 
lobbyists legislation that ensures that it provides some 
transparency and accountability to advocacy and lobbying. 
 
I would want to say that it’s important for us to recognize, as 
part of a healthy democracy, the activities of advocacy or 
lobbying are natural and in many ways important. That’s 
important to the strength and effectiveness of a government and 
to an opposition and to democracy as a whole. So this 
legislation, the goal of this legislation should be to be simply 
providing a level of transparency and accountability to that 



4738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

advocacy, to that lobbying. 
 
But I want to make sure that I recognize that as part of a healthy 
democracy, it’s very important that a group of individuals or 
that respective organizations or those with specific interests are 
able to share their perspective. And it’s the responsibility, and 
an important responsibility, of a government and of elected 
members to understand where organizations, where people, 
where businesses are coming from and what their goals are and 
how that fits into the process. 
 
But it is very important that we do have organizations and 
people across the province advocating the kinds of changes that 
they understand or that they feel they need on the ground in 
their communities or in their places of work to drive the change 
they believe to be important. 
 
We’ll be making sure that this is simply not window dressing. 
We want to make sure that this is an effective Act. And that’s 
certainly important. We will have some discussion at the 
committee structure as to who this includes and who it 
excludes. And we want to make sure that that inclusion and 
exclusion list is appropriate because I think there’s some 
questions that exist on that front. If one organization is 
included, why are other organizations not included in that 
registry? 
 
We want to make sure of course as well that this works for 
organizations, for people, for associations to connect with 
government and elected officials, but for Saskatchewan people 
to have some transparency and accountability provided back to 
them as it relates to the advocating and lobbying that may occur 
to a government or to elected members. So we have questions 
on these fronts as we move forward. 
 
I do want to recognize the work of the committee, and I know 
that they engaged in a process where they received various 
submissions, presentations, and examples that exist across 
Canada. I want to thank all committee members, frankly, for 
their service on that committee, and I want to specifically thank 
the member for Nutana representing the opposition on that 
process. 
 
And I know that the member from Nutana . . . I also want to 
thank her for when the final report was put together and the 
recommendations were put forward, the member from Nutana 
put forward two very constructive pieces and put forward a 
minority position and some minority recommendations. And I 
believe that, if I understand it correctly, one of those 
recommendations was accepted by the minister, and that’s 
something that certainly I value and that I appreciate. As it 
relates to the other recommendation that wasn’t accepted, I look 
forward to the committee process and the member from Nutana 
and other members being able to seek some clarity as to why 
that recommendation wasn’t adopted. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So I thank all members for their contributions. I’d like to thank 
any organizations across Saskatchewan who have contributed to 
this piece of legislation. As I’ve said, we do feel that this piece 
of legislation has been slow walked by government to get to the 
floor of the Assembly and to be enacted. That being said, we’ll 

certainly work to make sure that we have an effective lobbyist 
registry here in the province. 
 
And I’d also like to recognize that sometimes the word lobby, 
as I say, has a sinister sort of tone to it almost, and in some 
cases that’s fair. But in many cases, when I think of the 
organizations across Saskatchewan and associations across 
Saskatchewan and communities across Saskatchewan and 
businesses across Saskatchewan who may engage, providing 
their ideas, their possible solutions, their concerns, their needs 
to government and to opposition, this is something that’s 
important in bettering our province and allowing various 
perspectives to be heard, as long as government of the day and 
members understand who they’re there to represent, being all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So this lobbyist Act is potentially a good step forward, but we 
need to make sure we get it right, and we’ll continue to make 
contributions through the committee process to ensure we do 
just that. So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, we look forward 
as an opposition to having discussions and questions that we 
have satisfied and heard at the committee structure. Thank you. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 
Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 120, The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 
shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
for Regina Lakeview. 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4739 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 122, An Act to amend The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. And, Mr. Speaker, there are a 
number of changes that are being made to this particular 
legislation that makes the rules clearer for First Nations gaming 
licensing authority. It also allows for some other corporate 
structures to be available for the Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
And basically I think there are quite a number of amendments 
to regulations that allow for a more efficient operation of the 
whole liquor and gaming licensing situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
So practically we’ve got a fairly substantial bill. It has lots of 
pages compared to some of the other ones we’ve been looking 
at, but ultimately what’s being done here relates to sorting out 
new rules that maybe more accurately reflect what’s happening 
in society at this time. I don’t think that they moved to some of 
the wide open or more open situations that we have in some 
other jurisdictions in Canada or in the United States, but there is 
a recognition that the responsible use of alcohol is part of how 
our society operates. 
 
It’s clear that the abuse of alcohol, it still is an important issue 
to be dealt with within the province. And so any changes that 
affect that area are of concern I think to people that are here. 
But basically what are some of the changes that are made here? 
And I think we need to go through the legislation to take a look 
at what some of the changes are. 
 
It’s interesting that one of the first changes relates to the ability 
for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority to issue a 
liquor permit to an Indian band. And so therefore we’ve ended 
up having to have a definition of an Indian band, and then also 
to deal with the whole issue of on-reserve certificates of 
registration and on-reserve activities versus off-reserve. And 
effectively this requires this legislation and rules under this 
legislation that would then facilitate the ability of the provincial 
government to enter into agreements with the First Nations 
gaming authorities to make sure that there are effective rules 
that cover the whole province.  
 
This often becomes a challenge as we move forward because 
there often aren’t as clear as arrangements as everybody would 
like as to what differences there may be and what authority 
there may be. And so it’s hoped that this legislation will provide 
some of that clarity that will allow for the operation of the, 
obviously casinos and other hotels and things that are located 
on First Nations, and for the activities which are working and 
operating right across the province, no matter what local 
jurisdiction is involved in governing the activity.  
 
And so some of the changes that we have here do relate to those 
kinds of issues. And also one of the ways that the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority regulates the business of the gaming side and 
the alcohol side — but more the gaming side — relates to how 
they license and how they define who are employees and how 
they . . . what authority they have as effectively certified 
employees under the gaming legislation. 
 
And so practically what this legislation attempts to do is to 
further define those relationships and then goes into a whole 
number of areas, whether it’s . . . [inaudible] . . . or whether it’s 
how you actually can transfer the ability to do different 
activities and make sure that there is a continual line of 

responsibility in these activities. 
 
And so that’s important because many of these issues don’t, you 
know, aren’t really issues in the community until a problem 
arises. It’s then when there’s an attempt to enforce or deal with 
a particular incident that the laws then have to be crystal clear 
as to how they should be applied. And I think some of the 
changes that we have in this legislation do come out of various 
enforcement efforts that have not been as clear in their result as 
everybody anticipated, and so the goal here is to try to clarify 
the places where there are problems. 
 
It’s a bit hard in this Assembly to actually sort out exactly what 
these particular rules are meant to combat, and I think we’ll 
probably have a chance in the committee to ask a lot of 
questions about some of the specific clauses and what incident 
or what story or what history there is to the problem that we 
have. Because you create fairly complicated legislation. You 
work at making sure that it’s operating in the most effective 
way that it can, and then when there are . . . problems arise 
when you come back and change the legislation. 
 
Unfortunately in the minister’s comments we don’t have 
specific incidents described there. I think that is actually a place 
where questions in committee can provide further information 
and guidance for us as legislators, but also for lawyers and 
judges if matters later end up going to court. And so we’ll be 
asking questions about why some of these specific amendments 
have been made and what the intent is. 
 
I know for example in some material that was provided under 
section 5, there’s an amendment here which gives the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority discretion to both 
assess a combined monetary penalty and a suspension against a 
permittee or a registrant. And this is there to specifically correct 
a situation where in court or in some kind of an administrative 
hearing the section that exists now was interpreted to say that 
you had to be either or; it couldn’t be both. And so that’s an 
example of the kinds of technical things that are being 
discussed in the legislation that, I mean I think they make sense, 
but practically we may need to hear a bit more about that 
particular example as to why this provision has been brought 
forward. 
 
Now another interesting aspect of the legislation itself is that 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority at this stage doesn’t have the 
ability to set up subsidiary corporations, and so this legislation 
is adding a new clause that allows for subsidiary corporations. 
We don’t know why that provision is being added. It could be 
related to some new business ventures that they want to enter 
into. It could relate to maybe some joint public-private 
operations that are going to go ahead where they would need 
some different corporate structures. It could relate to the new 
building that they’re putting out on the Global Transportation 
Hub, or we’re not sure what this particular clause relates to. 
 
But it does raise the question that was prominent in the review 
of all of the finances of the province 22 years ago, which is, will 
all of the subsidiary operations be fully accountable to the 
government, to the auditors, to everyone else? And we will 
want to ask some questions about this whole concept of creating 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 
subsidiaries to make sure that there’s a business reason for it, an 



4740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

important reason for it, and not that it’s some way to figure out 
another path to borrow money or to do projects that would not 
be accountable to the legislature. So that’s a question that we 
have. 
 
Now there are also issues that continue around conflict of 
interest, and once again there are some very serious 
consequences around conflict of interest as it relates to both the 
liquor rules and the gaming rules, and so it’s important that 
these types of rules be as clear as possible. And so practically 
we need to ask some questions about that. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Also then once you actually have a charge laid or a complaint 
laid against a registrant or someone who is licensed under the 
legislation, you end up with a whole hearing process. And so 
practically there are some changes being made to the process of 
the hearings, whether it’s the notice provisions or the actual 
process in the hearing itself, Those kinds of things are I think 
good, but we need to understand why they’re being done. We 
don’t have very much information from the minister yet on how 
some of these changes will assist with the ultimate goal of the 
legislation which is to provide an orderly and reasonable way to 
license both liquor issues and gaming issues. 
 
And so there are changes then to that whole enforcement 
process including the hearings that are part of what we’re seeing 
here, and we need to make sure that those things are being dealt 
with appropriately. 
 
There are a whole number of housekeeping kind of changes, 
and I don’t think that many of them are of much consequence to 
individuals who are governed by this legislation, but practically 
they are changes made in response to suggestions from both 
civil servants who work in this area but also, I’m sure, 
individual people who are governed by the legislation. 
 
There’s a clause in section 13 that makes some amendments 
around how a commission can deal with matters where there’s 
complaints or concerns. And this clause gives some more power 
to the commission that’s dealing with these matters to basically 
postpone or adjourn a matter if somebody doesn’t show up. 
Right now the only option for people, or for the commission, is 
to make a decision based on the material that’s been filed. And I 
think we can all see that there may be situations where that’s 
not appropriate, where the filed material isn’t up to date or 
there’s something that’s missing. And this gives much more 
flexibility to the commission, and I think that’s a positive 
change that’s here in the legislation. But once again, it may be 
helpful for all of us to actually hear about the situation or 
situations where this arose so that we have on the record for 
future decision makers, on the commission or in the courts, a 
little bit of the background of why these changes were made. 
 
So there are continued clarifications of the processes involved 
and setting up some limitation periods which are very clear. 
We’ll have questions about that in committee, but at this stage 
we don’t really know why the changes are being made. 
 
So the next section, which I guess is section 15 of the amending 
legislation, deals with all of the issues around suspensions or 
cancellations by a First Nations gaming licensing authority. 

And these rules have been put into one place, and I think 
practically they will clarify and make it easier for people who 
are caught in that whole process to know what their 
responsibilities are and what powers the commission has in 
dealing with them. 
 
And as we move on in the legislation, I think there are more 
places where that clarity is there clearly, and it’s a recognition 
that, when you have a First Nations licensing agency involved 
as well, you need to have some very specific rules about the 
interplay with what’s happening with that agency. 
 
Okay. Now once again there are . . . This is a bilingual Act and 
so there are changes that have to be made to the bilingual Act to 
make sure it’s in line with the English version of the Act as both 
versions have full force of the law. And so there are some 
changes that will happen there as well. 
 
Another interesting aspect of this particular legislation is 
section 24. And effectively what the legislation does is extend 
the authority that the legislation has over those physical areas, 
those parts of the province, the land and the province, that’s 
presently on a First Nation. And this corrects a problem, 
obviously, that’s arisen, in that the present Act does not seem to 
fully cover all parts of the province. 
 
And one of the reasons this came up was that the legislation 
talked about municipalities as the group that covers the whole 
province, and on top of that, the northern Saskatchewan 
administration district, provincial and regional parks, and 
summer and winter resort areas, or a national park. But 
obviously there was a case or an incident that arose where a 
First Nation said, well we’re not part of the municipality and so 
therefore we’re not covered under this legislation. And so no 
matter what other parts of this legislation get thrown out, this 
particular clause does appear to set some clarity on that issue. 
 
We haven’t heard or seen anything that suggests that First 
Nations have been consulted about this particular part of the 
legislation, and that will be something that we will want to ask 
when we go to committee. Because if in fact the courts have 
held or the commission has held that the legislation doesn’t 
apply on First Nations, that has all kinds of implications for the 
liquor and gaming licensing legislation of the province. 
 
And so I would see that that particular section, section 24, is 
one that requires further conversation in committee and further 
clarification by the minister and officials as to what particular 
situation arose that ended up having this particular amendment 
coming forth. It may be that that’s the one incident that allowed 
for the legislation to be reopened, and then all these other 
changes are being made because the legislation’s open. But I 
don’t know that for sure. That’s just my speculation. 
 
As we proceed through the legislation — we’re getting closer to 
the end of it here — there are more definitions that deal with the 
specific questions that arise around this issue of whether the 
legislation applies on a First Nation. And if it does, then it sets 
out how some of the clauses will be interpreted in that situation. 
The assumption of the legislation is that it applies to every 
square inch of Saskatchewan, and that if there are places where 
it doesn’t cover, then we’re going to fix that and we’re going to 
make it so that there’s a rule like that. 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4741 

Now one of the interesting clauses in the legislation that reflects 
the changes in how society operates is section 33 of the 
amending legislation which amends, or actually deletes section 
76. And I will read you the existing clause 76 because it’s a bit 
interesting: 
 

76(1) Subject to subsection (2), the authority may require 
any permittee to whom a permit for the sale of beer is 
issued to have available for sale in his or her permitted 
premises, in reasonable quantities at all times, one or more 
of the brands or kinds of beer produced by each permitted 
manufacturer in Saskatchewan other than a permitted 
manufacturer mentioned in subsection (2). 

 
And then subsection (2) says: 
 

This section does not apply to a manufacturer who is a 
permittee and whose products are not sold by any person 
other than the manufacturer through premises for which the 
manufacture holds a permit. 

 
Now obviously there’s brew pubs providing beer that they make 
on their premises. They don’t have to have the products of all 
the other ones. But if you have some products from 
Saskatchewan producers, then you need to have a whole array. 
 
Well this legislation eliminates that clause and eliminates 
something I guess which is a bit of an anomaly and clearly 
restricts the choices available to a vendor or a permittee, as they 
call it, to sell products. But obviously the original clauses were 
there to protect Saskatchewan producers of alcoholic products, 
and at obviously a certain time in the history of Canada, that 
was an important factor. We know that every province had 
these rules that protected their own local markets, and when 
those rules started to fall apart is when the production was 
concentrated in a few spots across Western Canada. 
 
We know that breweries for example in Saskatchewan were in 
Saskatoon and Regina, Prince Albert, I think maybe even 
Moose Jaw at one point, and a few other places. But when the 
rules around making sure that products were produced in 
Saskatchewan were relaxed or eliminated, the beer was 
produced primarily I think in Edmonton and Vancouver. And 
now when you have the size of some of the breweries that we 
have that are world-class size, including the Molson Coors 
brewery in Golden, Colorado, or some of the ones that are 
around Milwaukee, effectively you don’t need production in 
very many places to cover the whole market with these 
international products. 
 
But the flip side of that is that — and this legislation I think 
reflects that — is that many local businesses are able to start 
breweries or brew pub products, and we actually have a much 
greater array of choices around beer in Saskatchewan or in 
Alberta or British Columbia or Manitoba than we’ve had for 
many, many years. And most of the time that’s a good thing as 
most of these types of beer are quite good. 
 
And so practically here we have the legislative amendment that 
gets rid of a part of our history and gets rid of a part of that old 
system of one jurisdiction controlling what happens with a 
particular activity. So it’s interesting to look at all of the issues 
that are there. 

Now the next section, 34, is another amending section which 
actually removes some fairly substantial issues. And it’s not 
entirely clear how this is used, but I know it has a long history 
in the province as it relates to the whole issue of prohibition 
because at one point you were able to get alcohol from your 
veterinarian or from your pharmacist or from your dentist or 
your doctor for medicinal purposes that kind of overrode any of 
the prohibitions against the use of alcohol. And this clause, the 
clause that’s there which is section 77 in the existing legislation 
or section 34 in this amending legislation, basically gets rid of 
this whole idea of medical permits or the ability or the necessity 
to have a permit for using an alcohol product for a pet or for 
some other of these medicinal purposes. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And so it doesn’t totally eliminate the concept in the sense that 
if you’re a medical or veterinary professional, you have to get 
your alcohol products through the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, but it does eliminate a lot of the licensing 
processes that were there. 
 
And so once again it’s an interesting 21st century perspective 
on legislation. And so I think we’ll have a chance to ask the 
minister about this because it is a bit interesting where there is 
still some power left within the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
to deal with these types of uses of alcohol, but I think 
practically the intervention of the state in this area is getting less 
and less and less. 
 
So another section that’s here is section 38. And right now if 
you’re an educational institution that teaches bartending or 
mixology, you have to get a specific licence from the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority to allow for the authorization of use of 
alcohol in your institution. And this provision here will 
eliminate the necessity of getting a permit for that type of work. 
Practically it’s less administrative burden on the educational 
institutions and also for SLGA, so I don’t think we have any 
problem with that. But once again it’s an interesting thing that’s 
happening here. 
 
Another clause that’s being added or further defined relates to 
beverage alcohol as denatured and not fit for consumption on its 
own. This will add further definitions about that so that that 
particular type of product is controlled, and it’s clear here how 
it can be distributed within the province. And so once again 
there are these changes that are taking place to our whole 
system and obviously they’re in response to different incidents 
that have arisen. And practically if there are any questions, well 
we will have them answered by the minister and staff in 
committee. 
 
Now another area which is I think effectively trying to deal with 
a situation where underage people work in restaurants, there are 
some clarifications around the rules around how that underage 
person can be part of the service in the restaurant. And that’s a 
practical change that I think is an attempt to deal with what are 
some technical problems. I know some restaurants that I’ve 
been into in other jurisdictions would have a line on the floor 
and if you’re sitting on one side of the line, the 16-year-old 
server couldn’t bring your meal to you. They had to get another 
person to take it across the line. I think this whole idea is saying 
that’s maybe a little bit of overkill and let’s make sure we don’t 



4742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

have that kind of a situation in Saskatchewan. So as I say, there 
are lots of interesting changes that are being made around how 
minors can be employed and what things they can do. 
 
So another interesting change is section 44, and that’s where we 
repeal section 121 of the existing legislation because it removes 
the requirement that a permittee does not install or allow the 
installation of tables and seating that exceeds an amount set by 
SLGA. This provision isn’t required anymore, it says because 
SLGA doesn’t set capacity rules anymore. I think all of us 
remembered seeing the licence on the wall that would say, I 
don’t know, so many tables and so many people allowed into a 
particular licensed establishment. I think that kind of a 
provision has been eliminated, and this further eliminates it 
from the rules that we have. 
 
So it’s once again I think positive, but there may be some 
questions that we’ll have around some of these things because 
once again, it’s a particular incident that’s arisen that has 
created the need for the change in the legislation. 
 
And once again it’s about the history of how we regulated the 
use of alcohol in this province and how that has changed. I 
guess we’re getting close to almost 100 years to all of the really 
strong prohibition legislation that was introduced across the 
country. And it had a fair number of benefits on one side, both 
for the people that operated on the side, and also for some of the 
communities. And it was clearly a response to the abuse of 
alcohol that was general in some of the pioneering communities 
of the province that had been created. 
 
And I suppose I could reference the fact that another restaurant 
and good place to have a meal with wine in Moose Jaw burned 
down this week right next to River Street, which was notorious 
100 years ago. And in some ways it was places like River Street 
and all of the bars and liquor establishments there that were the 
original impetus for the kind of legislation that we are now 
undoing. 
 
And so I think practically we see how things change, and we 
also see how we still have to be on our guard about the safe use 
of alcohol, and maybe the rules don’t need to be quite so 
prescriptive, which is what we’re seeing with this particular 
legislation. 
 
So now I think practically that most of the changes at the end of 
the legislation result, will relate to some of the enforcement 
provisions, and then obviously there’s a whole section of 
regulatory changes that are required. So the regulatory power in 
existing section 185 has been expanded somewhat, and that’s in 
section 58 of this amending Bill No. 122. 
 
So practically, the provisions of this legislation will be 
implemented and proclaimed and put in place, I’m sure, in 
sections as the regulations that back up the legislation are put in 
place. I wouldn’t be surprised if it takes two or three years for 
all of the regulations to be in place that deal with all of the 
specific issues in this Bill No. 122. 
 
But practically, we have a piece of legislation that looks like it 
responds to the needs that are there in the community. We have 
quite a bit of information about how those needs are being 
responded to. But when we end up going forward with the 

legislation, I think there will be other questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve talked for a little while on this, 
but a number of my other colleagues are interested in speaking 
to this particular legislation. So at this point I will adjourn 
debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 123 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 123, An Act to repeal 
miscellaneous obsolete Public and Private Statutes and to make 
certain consequential amendments. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation is being brought 
forward to repeal a number of public and private health Acts 
that the minister has deemed them to be, I guess, obsolete and 
outdated. But I think it’s interesting to actually take a look at 
the legislation that’s listed in this particular Act. And 
sometimes the present perspective on the legislation maybe 
needs to be reconciled or dealt with in conjunction with the 
legislation that was originally there. 
 
I think one of the pieces, the first piece, the signature piece of 
the legislation that’s being repealed is The Dental Care Act. 
And as we all know, The Dental Care Act was an important part 
of the legislation brought forward by Premier Blakeney in the 
’70s, and it had basically a whole system of care, dental care for 
children in our school systems. And I know years ago when I 
was the Health minister, I’d often run into people who had their 
birthday, sort of, in the ’70s who talked about how they made it 
to, you know, adulthood without a single dental problem 
because of this very efficient system of care of their teeth. 
 
And so you know, you end up wanting to applaud the 
perspective that was taken at that point to make sure that dental 
care was part of a broader part, a broader aspect of health care 
and quite a practical way of providing that care through the 
school system. And clearly the dentists were involved in the 
dental care when there were more major problems identified, 
but much of the screening and the fluoride treatments and those 
kinds of things, initial examinations were done in the dental 
offices that were located in elementary schools. And I think 
every elementary school had that particular nurse’s dental care 
station and people were provided with that care. 
 
Now when the government changed in 1982, there was a pretty 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4743 

strong lobby to change this legislation. It took a number of 
years before that happened, but eventually that whole system 
was dismantled. But one of the legacies of the system was all of 
these children in Saskatchewan that had no cavities. They grew 
up without cavities, and it’s an interesting experiment. 
 
I know a number of years ago, I was in an international health 
policy discussion in Salt Lake City with officials from the 
American Dental Association, and one of the people who was 
part of the discussion had been one of the administrators of this 
program here in Saskatchewan who was now out in British 
Columbia. And when he explained this whole program to the 
dentists who were there from the American Dental Association 
— and there were a number of them that were very much what 
we would call community dentists in some of the areas of their 
cities that didn’t have a lot of resources — they were quite 
intrigued by this. 
 
And since that time there have been initiatives, one in Alaska 
that has in some ways been modelled on what was done in 
Saskatchewan to provide dental care across broad spaces where 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked 
for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Yorkton. 
 
[16:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
thanks to the member across for allowing leave to introduce 
some special guests of mine. In the west gallery is a very 
special niece to me, Ms. Petra Ottenbreit-Born. With her is her 
friend, Maelle Magnan. They are doing a social studies project 
focusing on our heritage, and the girls chose the Legislative 
Building for part of their project. And Petra knows this as Uncle 
Greg’s work, so they’ve come to visit me here today. 
 
Along with them is Petra’s mom, my only sister and younger 
sister Glenna and my brother-in-law Wybo. And Glenna’s a 
physiotherapist in Regina here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
brother-in-law Wybo is a grade 2 teacher, French immersion 
teacher at Elsie Mironuck School here in Regina as well. I’d ask 
all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to have a 
elementary school teacher here to hear about this whole 
program of dental care that we did have in our province many 
years ago. 
 
But one of the things, one of the reasons I wanted to raise this 
today was that I know, as I said, in the state of Alaska they now 
have developed a system that was based on the system we had 
here because of the fact they don’t have dentists to go to many 
of the far-flung parts of Alaska. But there’s also some similar 
programs going on in the state of Minnesota and a few other 
states to make sure that dental care is provided across the whole 
spectrum. 
 
And what we’re doing here is we’re . . . The minister’s brought 
forward this particular legislation to repeal it, and I imagine it’s 
to say, well we don’t want to have any memory of that 
particular program here. But I think it is the type of concept, it’s 
the type of idea that we may need to look at again as we provide 
care across the province, and it may be a factor that is there as 
people look at how health services are provided across 
Saskatchewan. So that’s section 2 of this legislation, repeals 
The Dental Care Act. 
 
The next section 3 is the repeal of the Act called The Medical 
and Hospitalization Tax Repeal Act. And effectively people 
don’t always remember it, but there was a hospitalization tax or 
medical tax that was across the province on your property taxes. 
And it’s been quite a long time since that happened. I think this 
particular legislation relates to that. You would end up having 
your education tax, but also a tax related to some other 
activities within your local area. And so it’s a recognition once 
again that some of the solutions that were used to provide 
services to people changed and so this particular bill was 
brought forward here. 
 
Now the next piece of legislation that’s been removed is The 
Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act. And this 
one’s a little more complicated in a way. But effectively what 
this relates to is one method that community clinics were . . . 
one Act whereby community clinics were created. And so we 
now have legislation that allows for a couple of other ways that 
community clinics are incorporated, so this one isn’t needed. 
But at one time, it was a recognition that there would be an 
association that was . . . where people would come together to 
figure out how to fund locally — not on a province-wide basis 
— some of their medical and hospital benefits. 
 
And so once again, this is a piece of the history of 
Saskatchewan which is being eliminated. And if you go down 
to section 8, you see that this was like an insurance premium 
because clearly The Insurance Premiums Tax Act has to be 
amended when this is changed because under our taxes on 
insurance premiums, which a lot of people don’t even realize 
are there, this was another place where taxes were collected by 
the provincial government on a form of insurance which was 
under The Mutual Medical and Hospital Associations Act. So 
once again it’s a time of change or a time in how we do 
particular things. Clearly at one point it was important to come 



4744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2014 

together as local communities to make sure everybody in your 
local community would have sufficient care both on the medical 
side and on the hospital side. 
 
Section 5 of this legislation relates to the fourth public Act 
which is repealed and that’s the Saskatchewan citizens’ heritage 
program Act. And so this one is being repealed. This is another 
interesting piece of legislation because it relates to the specific 
break that was given to senior citizens — those citizens of the 
province aged 65 and over — as it related to their property 
taxes on their homes. And it was a way of acknowledging that 
many of our senior citizens didn’t have as much income as 
other members of the community and if they were going to be 
able to stay in their homes, there had to be a rebate program that 
provided them a little bit of an extra cushion. 
 
Now we haven’t had that for quite a number of years in the 
province but with the cost of living going up and the cost of 
housing going up, it does raise the question of what will our 
21st century response be to people who have a difficult time 
affording their taxes on their home as well as their utilities as 
well as all of the other expenses related to where they live. And 
I could foresee the day where there may be some other form of 
benefit that helps people who are seniors or there may have 
some other definitions included that will give a special benefit 
to people so that they can stay in their homes. And as we know, 
that used to be an issue maybe more in the cities in the province 
and not so much in some of the smaller communities. But now 
we see in smaller communities the costs are going up in 
equivalent ways, and in some of the smaller cities in the 
province, there are some pretty substantial costs in how that all 
works. 
 
And so here we have a program that’s been on the books, and 
all it would have taken was to put in a new regulation and put 
some new amounts into the benefits that’s there and once again 
you could have had a program that provides some tax relief on 
people’s living areas. 
 
So there we have four pieces of legislation which are being 
repealed by this Bill No. 123, and this title of the bill is An Act 
to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Public and Private Statutes. 
Well I think it’s, you know, a question of whether the concepts 
are obsolete. I would argue that the dental care issue has not 
been resolved. We still have a number of issues around there. 
So maybe this bill is old, but the concept of providing dental 
care is not an obsolete concept and is one that we will need to 
address. 
 
I think the medical and hospitalization tax and the mutual 
medical and hospital benefits association legislation, which is 
sections 3 and 4, they once again are maybe from a different 
time and place about how we provide services. And I think 
there’d be a little more of a sense that those ones are obsolete. 
But once again it’s about how we provide for our families and 
friends and neighbours in these kinds of care. 
 
And then section 5, which is the senior citizens’ heritage 
program, where it’s assistance on cost of living, I think there are 
many seniors in our province right now who would say this 
would be something that could give them some hope, give them 
a bit of help, and maybe deal with some of the pressures that are 
there. We may revisit this whole issue as some of the pressures 

further build up. 
 
And then the second division of this particular legislation 
relates to the consequential amendments and practically, when 
you’ve eliminated the four public Acts that we talk about, you 
have some other amendments required. And so obviously The 
Dental Care Act, the whole dental disciplines Act has to be, a 
portion of that has to be repealed that references The Dental 
Care Act, and so that’s what happens in section 6. 
 
In section 7 there’s a reference to The Health Information 
Protection Act as it relates to some of this legislation. And so 
that one is, a section of that is repealed. And as I indicated 
before, you can’t charge premiums, insurance premium tax on 
an insurance premium that no longer exists. And so that part has 
been changed. 
 
And then there’s some changes that need to be made to The 
Pharmacy Act, I think, to reference use of certain medications 
in facilities that are part of that whole legislation. 
 
So then part II of the Act relates to a whole number of private 
Acts that are repealed. And this is a bit of an interesting one but 
I think, as I read through all of the sections, we’ll see that this 
does relate to a change in how the Catholic hospitals of 
Saskatchewan have been organized. And it used to be that each 
particular institution had its own legislation. 
 
So you have in section 10 legislation, private member’s bill, or 
private Act to deal with the Lady Minto Union Hospital in 
Edam. Well we don’t hear much about that place anymore, and 
so this is recognizing that this legislation can be changed. But I 
know the different successors, a lot of this is the Catholic 
hospital association or health care association of Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 11 relates to Les Soeurs de la Charite de Notre Dame 
d’Evron. And that’s a place that I’m not sure any of us have 
seen. I’m not quite sure where that one is, actually. 
 
The next section, 12, relates to a tax exemption for certain 
property of the Sisters of Charity, which is the Providence 
Hospital in Moose Jaw. And as we know, that has been changed 
and is in part of the Five Hills health district now. 
 
Section 13 is An Act to incorporate Regina Grey Nuns’ 
Hospital — Pasqua Hospital as we know it now and that’s 
there. 
 
Section 14 is An Act to incorporate St. Joseph’s Hospital (Grey 
Nuns) of Gravelbourg. And that’s repealed. And that’s a 
hospital I think that, well it’s still providing good service down 
in that area, but a little bit different name and different 
structure. 
 
Then there’s an Act here that was confirming an agreement 
between the city of Yorkton and the Yorkton Union Hospital 
board. That one obviously is from another era, another time. 
And then we get to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Introduction of guests. 
 



March 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4745 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 
Park has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to join 
my colleague from Yorkton in welcoming the Ottenbreit family. 
They’re constituents of mine, and it’s really a pleasure to have 
you in the gallery. And again I’d like to have all the members 
here welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

(continued) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In light of the 
time and extra things that I need to say about this, at this point I 
will request that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 123. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 123. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
order to facilitate work of committees tonight, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4719 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4719 
  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4719, 4745 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4719, 4720 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4719 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4720 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4720 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4720 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4720 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4720 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4743 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4721 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4721 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4721 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4721 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4721 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 St. Patrick’s Day 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4722 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4722 
 Prostate Artery Embolization Project 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4722 
 Safety on Dewdney Avenue 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4723 
 Aboriginal Police Preparation Program 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4723 
 Agreement Facilitates Moves Between Provinces 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4723 
 Solutions for Grain Backlog on Railways 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4723 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Consultant Fees and Lean Initiatives 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4724 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4724 
 Conditions in Personal Care Homes 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4726 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4726 
 Lease Payments for Crown Lands 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4727 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4727 
 Reporting of Provincial Finances 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4727 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4728 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4728 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4729 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4729 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4731 
 Recorded division ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4732 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4733 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4734 
 



 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4734 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4735 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4735 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4736 
 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4737 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4737 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4737 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4738 
 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4739 
 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4742 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


