




















































Hansard: March 27, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, MARCH 27, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4977 

 March 27, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I would like to introduce three 

gentlemen seated in your gallery. Two of them are 

representatives from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities or SARM, President David Marit and 

Vice-president Ray Orb. And I’d ask you to give a wave. I think 

most people in this outfit know you, but just the same. 

 

Also seated with them is Mr. Franck Groeneweg, the new Chair 

of the Saskatchewan Canola Development Commission. Franck 

farms in the Edgeley area. Franck is new to the Chair role, and I 

wish him the very best in that. 

 

I’d like to ask all of my colleagues to join me in thanking all 

three of these gentlemen for their leadership and their 

contributions to our agricultural industry and to the province, 

and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister and welcome David Marit, 

president of SARM, to his Assembly here today and thank him 

for his leadership in the province, also to welcome Ray here as 

well, thanking him for his leadership. And Franck, nice to see 

you, and thank you for your leadership in agriculture and 

particularly your role in canola. So I ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming these members, these Saskatchewan 

residents and leaders, to their Assembly. 

 

And while still on my feet, I’m pleased to introduce Connor 

Ferrie to his Assembly. Connor is a political science student at 

the University of Regina. He’s been working with me as an 

intern. It’s been a pleasure working with Connor. Connor hails 

from Coronach, and we’ve had a really enjoyable time. 

Connor’s had the chance to come out and see some of the 

connections an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

makes in the community. He’s been out to community events. 

He’s even been out to the Outdoor Hockey League in 

Rosemont. He’s also attended budget day and some of the 

proceedings here, including the Public Accounts Committee. So 

I ask all members to welcome Connor Ferrie to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join with the Minister of Agriculture and the member opposite 

in welcoming our guests from SARM and the canola 

commission here this morning. 

 

And particularly I’d like to extend a welcome to the reeve of my 

municipality, Ray Orb. Ray’s been a long-serving reeve and has 

been involved with SARM at the provincial level for many 

years. And Ray and my association go back many years when I 

served a short period of time on the RM [rural municipality] 

council and served for many years on what we called at that 

time the ag committee and organized a number of spring 

ratepayer suppers. So I’d like to ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming our guests this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not often 

we have folks down from Meadow Lake, and it’s great to see 

two very good friends of mine here today, Merv and Blanche 

Johnson, two pillars of our community in Meadow Lake. Dr. 

Johnson has been a doctor for many, many decades in Meadow, 

and it’s just great to see them down here. And I look forward to 

having a chat after question period. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of education. And we 

know that education is one of the most vital services the 

government provides to citizens. And we know that this 

government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 

and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 

educational excellence, and that this government has failed to 

develop a real plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, 

support English as an additional language students, support 

community schools and their communities and students. 

 

We know that this government has adopted a P3 [public-private 

partnership] privatization approach to building the new schools 

the province needs, even though the scheme will cost more than 

traditionally built schools and will leave out community needs 

in the design of the schools. And we know that we must build 

the best education system for today and for Saskatchewan’s 

future. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan, that 

reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents who are 



4978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

concerned with the safety on Dewdney Avenue, and they want 

to see the rerouting of the heavy-haul truck traffic that has 

inundated Dewdney Avenue. It’s unsafe, and certainly they 

state that any further delays of this government are 

unacceptable to address a problem and an unsafe condition 

created by that government. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 

Avenue west of city centre, to ensure the safety and 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users, 

and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 

the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 

and be developed through consultation with the city of 

Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina and 

Bethune. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 

the RPO. That means the dream of homeownership is destroyed 

for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

rise today to present a petition in support of making major 

improvements to Highway 155 of northwestern Saskatchewan. 

The people that have signed the petition are from all throughout 

the land, Mr. Speaker, but the petition that I’m presenting today 

are primarily being signed from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer, respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

ensure that the provincial government commit to repairing 

and upgrading Highway 155. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again as I indicated, we have signatures from 

all throughout Saskatchewan on many petitions, and this 

particular page are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so 

present. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Appreciation for Retiring Director of Autism 

Resource Centre 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Martin 

Luther King Jr. once said that the arc of the moral universe is 

long but it bends towards justice. Mr. Speaker, ARC, or the 

Autism Resource Centre, always brings that quote to mind for 

me and it was certainly on my mind yesterday as I had the 

privilege to join with the Minister of Social Services, the 

member from Coronation Park, and my friend and colleague the 

member from Rosemont at a celebration yesterday marking the 

retirement of Theresa Savaria after 23 standout years as the 

executive director of Autism Resource Centre. 

 

Theresa Savaria is one of those amazing people that does 

indeed make sure that the arc of the universe bends towards 

justice and towards caring and compassion and action. ARC has 

been working to help individuals living with autism live up to 

their full potential through awareness, education, and 

meaningful programming since 1977. And since 1991, Theresa 

Savaria has been an integral part of that journey. 

 

As a non-profit, community-based organization in Regina, ARC 

helps people with autism spectrum disorder as well as their 

families. Though ARC was initially geared towards helping 

children and families with autism, further programs have been 

introduced transitioning ARC towards helping older individuals 

with the challenge of entering the workforce. 

 

All Saskatchewan people deserve an opportunity to participate 

fully and be engaged to the best of their abilities. ARC, with the 

help of Theresa Savaria, has made big steps in that direction. 

We are sure that a change of position won’t make her lose her 

passion for helping community. And it was so great to see all 

the people from across the province and indeed across Western 

Canada come out to say thank you to her yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in expressing 

our gratitude to Theresa Savaria for her years of community 

work as well as her work with ARC to help address the needs of 

people living with autism spectrum disorder. We thank her for 

her tremendous legacy of action, of caring and compassion, of 

leadership and love. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure to rise 

before you today and recognize our Battlefords and district 

Citizen of the Year. This year’s recipient was Jerry Wintonyk. 

 

Jerry is so very worthy of this recognition, Mr. Speaker. He has 

been our North Battleford building inspector for 38 years. In 

that capacity, he has been a tremendous ambassador for our city 

and has always provided excellent professional service to 

anyone who called on him. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that evening highlighted not only his 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4979 

professional duties, but the countless hours that he dedicated to 

numerous charities and organizations in our community. Jerry 

has been the chairman of our Battlefords Union Hospital 

Foundation and has worked tirelessly in organizing the Wayne 

Pruden Memorial Golf Tournament, one of that organization’s 

major fundraisers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time doesn’t permit me to talk about all that Jerry 

has contributed to our community, so I will just highlight some 

of his involvements: Canadian Cancer Society, Heart and 

Stroke Foundation, Empty Stocking fund, Battlefords United 

Way, Kidney Foundation, and on and on it goes. 

 

Along with this, Jerry has also been very active in his 

professional association, having been a director of the 

Saskatchewan Building Officials Association for 28 years, 

membership Chair for 19 years, and president in 1985. He has 

always shared his knowledge and experience with new 

members to that association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have known Jerry for 42 years. I’m honoured to 

call him a friend. You know, he was the goaltender for our 

hockey team for many years. And with the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford and myself playing in front of him, you can 

imagine he had a lot of busy nights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Jerry on this well-deserved recognition and 

thank him for all that he does for our community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Indian Head Reservist Commands Canadian Warship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on March 15th of this 

year, Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Glace Bay, commanded by 

Indian Head’s own Lieutenant Commander Victoria DeVita, 

participated in Operation Caribbe, a multinational drug 

interdiction operation covering the Caribbean Basin and the 

eastern Pacific Ocean. 

 

As part of that operation, sailors from Glace Bay boarded and 

searched a fishing vessel for drugs. Shortly thereafter, the 

fishing vessel caught fire and sank and 2400 kilograms of 

cocaine was recovered. Glace Bay has been commended for 

their effective role in this important work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lieutenant Commander DeVita, like most of the 

crew of Glace Bay, is a naval reservist on full-time service. 

There are approximately 4,000 full- and part-time naval 

reservists across Canada with 24 naval reserve divisions, 

including HMC [Her Majesty’s Canadian] ships Queen in 

Regina and Unicorn in Saskatoon. It’s fair to say that sailors 

from Saskatchewan have built a reputation as among the best in 

the world with remarkable contributions. Naval reservists 

augment the regular navy and also provide the core crews for 

the Kingston-class coastal defence vessels, including both 

Glace Bay and the HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] 

Saskatoon. 

 

Lieutenant Commander DeVita also has the distinction of being 

only the fourth woman in history to command a Canadian 

warship. Hers has been a distinguished career to date, and I am 

confident she will continue to serve Saskatchewan proud and I 

know Indian Head proud. I ask all colleagues to join with me in 

extending a Bravo Zulu, the traditional naval signal for well 

done, to HMCS Glace Bay and her captain. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Unity Graduate Named Junior Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 

Assembly today to recognize Jonathan Neigum, a young man 

from the town of Unity who’s known for excelling at all he 

does. He was recently named the 2013 Junior Citizen of the 

Year for the northwest region at a ceremony in The Battlefords, 

and this title was well deserved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Jonathan was a 2013 high school graduate who won several 

scholarships last spring and was a highly decorated volunteer 

while attending Unity High School. Jonathan excelled 

academically, graduating high school with a 98.7 overall 

average, which makes me wonder what he did wrong. Anyway 

he also is a successful curler, winning provincial bronze medal 

in 2012. As a member of the Unity Curling Club, he instructed 

young curlers during evening sessions, teaching upwards of 50 

junior curlers. 

 

Among other activities, the young man served as the school 

council’s treasurer and the students against drunk driving 

treasurer. At the induction ceremony, Jonathan cited his 

great-aunt as the main reason for why he got so involved in 

volunteer work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last spring I had the honour of presenting Jonathan 

with a $1,000 Sask Ag scholarship. The money will go towards 

pursuing post-secondary education at the University of 

Saskatchewan where he aspires to obtain a law degree. That’s 

maybe where he went wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Mr. Jonathan Neigum on all his 

accomplishments and wish him the best with his future 

endeavours. And he will be staying in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Peacock Toilers Provincial Basketball Champions 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I know some 

members have already recognized the outstanding efforts made 

by high school basketball teams across the province at Hoopla 

last weekend, but I would be remiss if I didn’t highlight how 

momentous a weekend it was for A.E. Peacock Collegiate in 

Moose Jaw. What made this so special was that both the 

Peacock boys and girls won provincial titles in their respective 

championship divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Peacock boys beat the Prince Albert St. Mary 

Marauders to win the Hoopla provincial 4A title. Head coach 



4980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

Bryan Adams credited the strong defence for the win, while 

assertive offence performance came from five different players, 

all with double-figure scoring. 

 

Meanwhile the Peacock girls won the school’s first provincial 

girls’ basketball championship since 1994, as they defeated 

Notre Dame in the 4A girls’ final. It’s interesting to note, Mr. 

Speaker, that Coach Renee Verge had led the team to the title 

game in three of the past four years only to see it slip away, 

making this victory even extra sweet. 

 

It’s the first time since 1956 that both the Peacock boys’ and 

girls’ teams have won the provincial basketball title in the same 

year. I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating Moose 

Jaw’s A.E. Peacock Collegiate Toilers boys and girls on 

winning their respective provincial titles. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Good News From the Forest Industry 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our forests are 

one of the great resources our province is blessed with, and 

every day more and more good news is coming out of the forest 

industry. 

 

Today 7 of the 11 mills in our province have returned to 

production, including the Big River mill. Saskatchewan sold 

over $650 million in forestry products last year. Our 

government wants to see this industry continue to grow. That is 

why yesterday our government announced a new streamlined 

timber dues system that is more market-based and consistent 

across the industry. It was developed in consultation with the 

industry and will enable the forest industry to continue its 

steady growth. This is quite a turnaround from the days of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] government. 

 

The NDP cared so much about the forest industry, their 

government commissioned a forest competitiveness report in 

2006 and then refused to implement any of it. With the report 

shelved, the NDP then tried, in the last days before the 2007 

election, a $100 million gamble of taxpayers’ money as a vote 

grab. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition has completely ignored our 

province’s forest industry, and ironically even his famous tree 

book didn’t have a plan for the industry. On this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next statement. I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Support for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let 

me read a quote from today’s Regina Leader-Post on page A2, 

and I quote: “The NDP had no comment.” What was it in 

relation to? Only the biggest economic issue currently facing 

our province, the grain transportation backlog. And the 

Saskatchewan NDP had no comment, which is perhaps fitting. 

It just about sums up in one line their entire approach and 

record when it comes to supporting our agriculture producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has now asked 87 

questions since this sitting of the legislature began. How many 

have been on the ag issue? Not one. How many have been on 

the grain transportation backlog? Not one. Our government has 

been standing up for our producers and working to get grain 

moving. This is an extremely serious issue and the Leader of 

the Opposition seems both unwilling and incapable of speaking 

to it. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, his official position is that quote, the 

NDP has no comment. 

 

It’s time for the Leader of the Opposition to do the right thing. 

He can stand in his place right here, right now, and support our 

producers. We’re about to find out if he’s willing to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been trying to 

get some decent answers from this government about its 

massive lean project, about how much it will cost Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. But this government hasn’t been entirely 

forthcoming. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the government refused 

to provide answers to our written questions asking how much 

taxpayers have spent over the last three years to fly Japanese 

senseis from Japan to Saskatchewan.  

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: why won’t his 

government answer this very basic question? How much have 

taxpayers spent to fly Japanese senseis from Japan to 

Saskatchewan over the last three years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answers to his question is 

pretty clear and has been offered in the Assembly many times 

by the minister: $26 million I think spent to date on a $40 

million contract, roughly point two per cent of the overall 

Health spending over the next four years. 

 

Here’s the good news, Mr. Speaker. There has already been 

more taxpayers’ money saved as a result of lean than the entire 

project cost, and we’ve seen improvement in patient care. But 

the answer is $26 million spent to date, Mr. Speaker, more than 

that saved. Mr. Speaker, $40 million over the life of the 

contract, more than that to be saved as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the specific question was how 

much taxpayers have spent to fly Japanese senseis over the last 

three years. 

 

There was another question, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

tabled yesterday and they refused to answer. They refused to 

provide an answer to the written question on how much they 

have spent on on-site Japan kanban seminars over the last three 

years. 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4981 

So my question once again to the Premier: why won’t his 

government answer this very basic question? How much has 

been spent over the last three years on on-site Japan kanban 

seminars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, taxpayers do want to know 

what these things cost, what a contract costs. Mr. Speaker, they 

want to know and they do know. The answer is $40 million. 

That’s the total cost of the contract over four years. 

 

We’re going to remain in budget. If anything, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to work to come in under budget in the overall 

investment that we’re going to make in the province. The good 

news is we’ve already saved more in taxpayers’ dollars than the 

original contract cost, all the while improving patient-centred 

care, all the while empowering the front line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to date we’ve spent $26 million. That has also 

been recovered. More than that’s been recovered in savings as a 

result of lean, Mr. Speaker. That is the total cost of the contract 

to date, the total cost being $40 million. It’s a matter of the 

public record. Once again, the good news, Mr. Speaker, already 

more has been saved than the total contract will cost. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is talking of 

so-called savings, he should know what the expenses are. He 

should be easily able to say how much they’ve spent on sensei 

and on on-site kanban seminars, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know why 

he doesn’t want Saskatchewan taxpayers to know how much 

they’ve spent on flying senseis from Japan to Saskatchewan. I 

don’t know why he doesn’t want taxpayers to know how much 

they’ve spent on on-site Japan kanban seminars, Mr. Speaker. 

But perhaps it’s because they are embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. 

Perhaps it’s because even proponents, pro-lean people are 

sharply criticizing this government for its approach. 

 

We can think, Mr. Speaker, of the local expert, the lean black 

belt expert who has problems with this government’s approach 

to its massive lean pet project, identifying, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 

poorly structured. It’s overly, too costly, full of hype, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s obsessed with Japanese terminology and 

Japanese senseis. 

 

My question for the Premier: if he’s too embarrassed to actually 

say how much they’ve spent on senseis, how much they’ve 

spent on the kanban seminars, Mr. Speaker, then it’s time to 

cancel the fat cash cow contract. Will he do that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

I’ve indicated in the past, and as the Premier has indicated, the 

contract with John Black and Associates, as a part of what 

we’ve spent at the Ministry of Health and the regional health 

authorities, totals to date $26 million, of which we have saved 

already $39.9 million. And in fact we had a meeting in Moose 

Jaw just a couple of weeks ago, and I think there’ll be even 

more savings to report coming out of that meeting and in the 

following weeks to add to the $39.9 million. 

Mr. Speaker, the JBA [John Black and Associates] contract that 

we have signed today, we’ve spent with JBA approximately 

$18.8 million as a ministry. That is a four-year contract that we 

have the option to renew at each year interval, Mr. Speaker. 

And so we are just at the beginning stages of our lean journey. 

But certainly the most significant lean transformation work that 

is being done all across health systems in Canada is taking place 

in Saskatchewan, to the point where other provinces — 

including Ontario, including British Columbia, including NDP 

Manitoba — are looking at what we are doing in Saskatchewan 

and looking to see exactly how we have deployed lean across 

the system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as this government takes the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer on this lean journey, how about they 

detail the journey expenses of the Japanese senseis who are 

flying from Japan to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? It’s no 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is too embarrassed to 

stand up in the Assembly and say how much they are spending 

on the kanban seminars, how much they are spending on the 

Japanese senseis. I think he’s too embarrassed because even 

solid Sask Party supporters, Mr. Speaker, are embarrassed by 

this. 

 

We see a quote, Mr. Speaker, from retired nurse C.E. 

Rathwell’s letter to the paper. And she said, “I’m deeply 

disappointed the premier ‘drank the Kool-Aid’ on the ‘lean’ 

method.” She says, Mr. Speaker, that lean is “. . . an extreme 

waste of money and a sham.” She says, “ . . . there are too many 

overpaid administrators and not enough frontline health-care 

workers.” 

 

Here’s another quote. She says, “We don’t need . . . Japanese 

‘senseis’ to fix our very sick health-care system. We just need a 

bit of common sense to restore our once enviable system.” 

 

I agree with her, Mr. Speaker. We don’t need the senseis. We 

don’t need the kanban training. We don’t need more overpaid 

administrators, Mr. Speaker. We need some honesty and some 

clear answers from the government when it comes to the 

expenses for this lean project. 

 

Will the Premier have the courage to stand today and say how 

much they’re paying for the senseis and the kanban seminars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

I said before, Mr. Speaker, the contract with John Black and 

Associates and the people that John Black employs, whether 

that be consultants or the employees of his own organization, 

has totalled to date $18.8 million. The health regions have spent 

an additional $6.7 million, for a total to this point of $26 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the Leader of the 

Opposition, mentioned somebody that had a concern about lean. 

In fact the Premier phoned that individual to find out more 

about what their concern is. We’re interested in knowing what 

that concern is. We’ve offered to the Leader of the Opposition 

to provide the feedback that he’s received — and apparently his 



4982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

inbox is full — redact the information and provide it to us 

because we’re interested in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we know from the savings that we are seeing in the system 

— whether that be on the blood services, whether that be on 

reducing wait times for mental health, whether that be on 

efficiencies and MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scans — 

that this is something that is working for the patients. It is 

improving care. It is improving safety. And I think we’re on the 

right track in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for School Division 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

increasingly clear that students and educators are going to take a 

hit for that government’s budget choices. Saskatoon Public 

School Division say they will be getting $128 less per student 

this year. That leaves the division with a $2.9 million shortfall, 

this at a time that the division is growing in population and 

complexity. And that means resources for our classrooms will 

be stretched even thinner and that there will be cuts forced upon 

students and classrooms. To the Education minister: how can he 

justify this cut to students and classrooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always right for school 

boards to advocate for their students, and we respect that. But I 

think we ought to step back a minute and look at what the 

reality of the numbers are. This budget year, Saskatoon Public 

School Division received a 2.9 per cent increase in funding. 

Provincially there was an increase of 2.4 per cent to the 

operating grant. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re projecting a 2.4 increase in enrolment in 

the upcoming year. We provide them additional funding for 

that. That means in the last seven years Saskatoon Public has 

seen an operating increase of over 33 per cent while at the same 

time their enrolments have only increased by 16 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the funding model is not calculated on a per 

student basis but if you want to look at it that way, in 

2007-2008, Saskatoon Public received $7,626 per student and 

this year will receive $10,199 per student, an increase of 33.7 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard about the new 

math. I’m not exactly sure what you’d call the minister’s math 

though. I will take the Chair of the Saskatoon Public School 

Board’s word who says, “So not very complicated math tells 

you we’re actually getting less money per student.” Saskatoon’s 

Public School Division says its funding will be in shortfall of 

$2.9 million and that, per student, they’ll be cut $128 per 

student. 

 

And this is what that Education minister had to say yesterday: 

 

It’s not a matter that we want to get into the math. I’m 

going to meet with them and I will certainly work out as 

many issues as we’ve got and, you know, explain to them 

the methodology and the calculation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty sure Saskatoon Public School Division 

knows how to do the math, and I’m pretty sure they don’t need 

the Education minister to come out and explain his failed 

methodology. What I do know they need is that government to 

step up to the plate and make investments where they matter in 

the lives of students. To the Education minister: why is that 

government failing to do just that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister 

mentioned something from his seat. The funding for school 

divisions is in excess of $1.8 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to say and criticize my 

willingness to sit down and talk to a school division is 

something that’s simply unacceptable. I will always be willing 

to sit down and talk to and meet with school divisions and sort 

out the methodology. 

 

There was a new funding model created at the request of the 

school divisions. They worked their way through it, Mr. 

Speaker. As it’s being applied, we will continue to sit down and 

work with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to make matters worse, 

Saskatoon’s Public School Division asked for 11 portable 

classrooms. They need those because their enrolment is 

growing by 500 students, Mr. Speaker. They asked for 11, but 

this government gave them two, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m sure 

that Education minister doesn’t want to get into that math 

either, and I’m sure he maybe even has some methodology to 

try to explain that two is somehow greater than 11, Mr. 

Speaker. But the reality for students in classrooms is that 

they’re already facing crowded conditions. This will only make 

it worse, and it’s not conducive to good learning outcomes. 

 

To the Education minister: when will this government get 

serious about fixing the basics in our education system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re always willing to sit 

down and sort out things with the school division. I’m quite 

prepared to do that. We’ve indicated publicly, Mr. Speaker, that 

when schools get to be 129 per cent utilization, then we’re 

prepared to provide portables. We do it on the basis of funding 

that’s available. And, Mr. Speaker, this year we spent $7 

million on additional capital. We have a record investment, Mr. 

Speaker, in capital. 

 

Within the Saskatoon Public School Division, we’re providing 

four new joint-use schools, which is a total of eight schools. Mr. 

Speaker, in addition to that we are providing a variety of 

different funding and upgrading projects for Saskatoon Public. 

We will continue to work with them to make sure that the needs 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4983 

of the students are addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a pattern with that 

government. It neglects the basics. It ignores the real issues on 

the front lines and it just plows ahead with its own agenda. 

 

In health, care facilities put forward urgent requests. The 

Saskatoon Health Region needs 450 care aides. It’s asked for 

only 38. The government forced them to scale that back to 19 

care aides. Now the Saskatoon Public School Division needs 11 

portables, and this government says, no, all you’re getting is 

two. And oh, by the way, we’re also cutting your student 

funding, forcing the division to make cuts for students. 

Meanwhile that government, that Premier is spending untold 

millions on pet projects like lean and standardized testing. 

 

To the Education minister: why is this government continually 

neglecting the basics in our education system while plowing 

ahead with its costly and misguided pet projects. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in Saskatoon and area we are spending $146 million since 

we’ve been in government. Ten major capital projects: 

Willowgrove, Nutana Collegiate, Holy Family, Georges Vanier, 

Holy Cross, St. Matthew, E.D. Feehan, St. Mary, Martensville 

High School, Warman; 21 relocatables; 180 renovations 

projects; 14 early year projects; six joint-use P3 projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve done an incredible amount of things there. 

And what have the members done? You can talk about what 

their expenditures are when they closed 176 schools, because 

the expenditures that went to those schools is zero because the 

people have left. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Federal Grain Transportation Legislation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government has occasionally 

tried to claim that the grain transportation crisis is its number 

one issue this session, but it didn’t even mention the crisis in its 

budget speech. It’s an economic catastrophe facing our 

province, and the total cost to producers is in the billions. 

 

Yesterday’s federal legislation is too little and too late. Gerry 

Ritz did not listen to farmers and he didn’t listen to 

Saskatchewan. The penalties are way too weak. The actions 

taken are way too few. But our Ag minister told reporters 

yesterday, “On this file we were on the same page. I’m 

convinced of that and the Saskatchewan Conservative caucus 

was too.” But today he’s written a letter to the feds 

flip-flopping. It reads an entirely different message from what 

he was saying yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is Ritz’s legislation. Why is this government 

patting the feds on the back publicly when they are failing 

producers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hardly know where 

to start with this one. I was going to say, the way the member 

started out, Mr. Speaker, I was going to say, it sounds like she’s 

reading my press releases, but apparently only part of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not particularly pleased with what’s in the 

legislation, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we’re unhappy 

with what’s not in it. We’d asked for more. We did a lot of 

work on this file since last May 31st, and we led Western 

Canada on this file. And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we got no 

support from those members across there — not that leader or 

that critic. They didn’t write a letter. They didn’t send an email. 

They didn’t make a phone call. They couldn’t even bother to 

text the federal minister in support . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may finish his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The end of my 

answer is that they have been absolutely no help in this file 

whatsoever. They’ve been a hindrance. We could have used a 

little support from the opposition. I recognize that the federal 

government doesn’t have a lot of faith in this opposition, but at 

least it would show solidarity here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, why is our Ag minister more 

worried about being friends with Gerry Ritz and the 

Conservative caucus than actually standing up for 

Saskatchewan? The other Saskatchewan Conservative MPs 

[Member of Parliament], the other Saskatchewan Conservative 

MPs won’t even speak up for producers, and the bill announced 

yesterday is a dismal failure, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t have 

higher penalties for rail companies that don’t comply. It doesn’t 

build any of the needed capacity we need in the grain system, 

and it doesn’t do nearly enough to get the needed increase in 

rail cars that will get this grain moving. It’s weak. It’s late to the 

punch. And it won’t help the captive farmers who are losing 

billions of dollars. 

 

To the minister: why is he continuing to defend what the feds 

are doing instead of demanding that the federal government 

actually table legislation that will help farmers in Saskatchewan 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This bill, as 

deficient — that’s a word I used to describe it in an interview 

yesterday — as it is, will help. That’s absolutely wrong what 

the member just said. It will help. 

 

However, we are disappointed, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

disappointed that the level of service agreements that we asked 

for, with reciprocal penalties between the railways and the 

shippers that we asked for are not in the bill. We’re 

disappointed that the increased car numbers, the 13,000 cars a 

week that we asked for, are not in the bill. We’re disappointed 



4984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

the increased fines, from 100,000 to $250,000 a day on the 

railways that we asked for, are not in the bill. And that we asked 

for those fines to be funnelled back to agriculture in some 

fashion, whether it be research or some function. That’s not in 

the bill, Mr. Speaker. We’re disappointed in those things. 

 

The Speaker: — You know, this is question and answer period 

and, when a question is asked, I would think the members 

asking would like to hear the answer. When the minister is 

answering, I would think that his own colleagues, including the 

Premier, would be interested in hearing the answers. So please, 

members, allow the questions and answers to be heard. 

 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

New Bridges for Saskatoon and Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

Friday the Finance minister was at the North Saskatoon 

Business Association luncheon and he was asked what his 

definition of commitment is. This business person said the 

Premier committed to a north bridge for Saskatoon three years 

ago, but that commitment has amounted to nothing. And now 

this government is once again committing to a north bridge for 

Saskatoon but it still has no dollars attached to that 

commitment. The Finance minister didn’t properly answer the 

question at the NSBA [North Saskatoon Business Association], 

so let’s see if he’ll answer it here today. 

 

To the minister: what is his definition of commitment? Where is 

the money? How much money will the province give, and what 

is the timeline? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for the opportunity to rise in 

this Assembly since last Wednesday after I delivered the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I made it clear in my budget speech, I made it 

clear in Saskatoon last Friday afternoon at the North Saskatoon 

Business Association where we have indicated that we will be 

an effective partner with the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, in 

fact I received the letter from the mayor of Saskatoon that very 

day to say thank you for being involved in our discussions. 

 

The commitment is this, Mr. Speaker, and it’s public 

knowledge. There are discussions going on between the city of 

Saskatoon, the municipal council, and the federal government. 

The federal government has indicated that there might be some 

support. I have indicated, the Premier has indicated that we’re 

prepared to be a partner in this arrangement if indeed the federal 

government is going to be an active player. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Fred Shero the late, great 

hockey coach of the Philadelphia Flyers was once asked what 

his definition of commitment was. And he said, the difference 

between contribution and commitment is like bacon and eggs. 

The chicken makes a contribution but the pig makes a 

commitment, is what he said. Mr. Speaker, we’re not even 

getting the chicken making any contributions today. So don’t 

talk to us about commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on to another bridge. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is 

left wondering what it’s going to take to get a real commitment 

from this government. Prince Albert is also asking for support 

for a second bridge. And all of northern Saskatchewan needs 

P.A. [Prince Albert] to have a second bridge because 80 per 

cent of us traveling the North goes through Prince Albert. 

 

To the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Highways or any 

minister out there that understands commitment: what will it 

take for this government to start paying attention to the needs of 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite brought up the Philadelphia Flyers, and I 

can tell you my commitment has been to the Toronto Maple 

Leafs. And I’ll tell you, that’s commitment. That’s 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, I have to inquire as to where the opposition sits 

on this project in Saskatoon. This is an application to P3 

Canada. There’s going to be the potential of a bridge being built 

— a commuter bridge in Saskatoon — with the federal 

government, the city of Saskatoon, and the province. We’ve 

indicated that if there are going to be funds needed for 2015-16, 

we’re going to be an active player with all of the other partners. 

Where are the NDP going to be on their commitment to that 

bridge? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real shame that the 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs from Prince Albert and 

Saskatchewan Rivers are so ineffective that they can’t even get 

Prince Albert onto this government’s radar, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

say it for them. Prince Albert needs a second bridge — loud and 

clear. 

 

The member from P.A. Northcote used to recognize that. She 

said in the last election, and I quote, “One thing that I won’t let 

drop off the table is we need a second bridge as we continue to 

grow. And I will push hard.” Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t 

seen her push hard at all for that bridge. And neither has the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, or the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, or the member from Batoche, or the 

member from Shellbrook, and the list goes on. They’ve all been 

very silent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: I realize that the P.A. and area 

MLAs are not strong voices, but why is this government still 

completely ignoring this very important need for Prince Albert 

and northern Saskatchewan? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, today’s going to be the 

vote on the budget, the vote where we have increased funding 

to Highways by $88 million, Highways and Infrastructure, Mr. 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4985 

Speaker. A huge amount of infrastructure is being built, 

infrastructure deficit that we inherited from the NDP, and we’re 

going to keep moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the two MLAs representing 

northern Saskatchewan are going to sit on the fact that we have 

put $2 million towards the renewal of the Victoria Hospital in 

Prince Albert. Where are they going to be on the fact that we’re 

moving forward by providing better health care in the North, 

right from Prince Albert all the way north? Are they going to 

vote to support that element of this very good budget, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always with a sense of pride that I take my place in this debate 

in this Chamber. And so I’m glad to have an opportunity to talk 

a bit about what this budget means to the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, the feedback that I get from them, and how 

it relates to different of the critic duties that I’ve been charged 

with, Mr. Speaker, and how I see that playing out. 

 

It’s been interesting watching the debate as it’s rolled out on the 

floor of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and indeed across the 

province in terms of the sell job that that government has 

engaged in right down to the last set of questions in this 

just-expired question period, Mr. Speaker, and the way that the 

word has gone forth. 

 

And it brings to mind, you know, listening to the sell job and 

listening to the speeches from certain of the members opposite 

brings to mind a few different sort of proverbs or adages, Mr. 

Speaker, one being, the best defence is a good offence. We see 

that in terms of the way that the finances are tightening up. 

Revenues are down. And they don’t have the . . . As you know, 

they’ve still got record revenues in the broader sort of scheme 

of things, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of when they came to 

power of, say, in 2007 and there were literally billions of dollars 

in terms of cash on hand, in terms of reserves, you know, there 

was a lot of latitude, a lot of room to manoeuvre in terms of 

what that government was blessed with out of the gates in 2007. 

 

And you know, in their more honest moments, Mr. Speaker, 

and this is from the Premier on down, we’ve heard 

acknowledgement of the situation that they inherited in 2007 

and in terms of the fiscal capacity that the province had at that 

time. I would add very briefly, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

time is short and I’ve got other things I want to get to, it 

certainly wasn’t the situation that Roy Romanow and the NDP 

government inherited in 1991 where there was a problem with 

the deficit deficit, where there was more money needed to be 

spent servicing the debt than on the entire Education budget. It 

certainly wasn’t that kind of situation that they inherited, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But as the years have gone on since 2007, you know, everybody 

needs a song sheet, and I get that, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

when they’ve got the caucus choir practice going over there, the 

song sheet is, they keep coming back to the line of 

infrastructure deficit. And that’s the way that they can get 

around saying, well you know, it’s all the NDP’s fault. And it’s 

one variation on the theme where they like to, you know, try to, 

you know, revise the history and say that the NDP wasn’t 

perfect. 

 

And you know, this just in, Mr. Speaker. The NDP government 

that I was proudly a member of, part of, Mr. Speaker, we 

weren’t perfect. There were mistakes made. But the record on 

balance was one of working for people, working for growth, 

and working for a better Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And again 

in terms of decisions that were made, there were mistakes made 

in certain circumstances. But when you stack it up alongside the 

kind of non-stop revisionist barrage that you get in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and it’s nowhere more apparent than in 

a speech like the budget speech, it’s sort of . . . You’d wonder, 

you know, and I think it’s, in the words of the member from 

Moose Jaw North, it’s like, what are they talking about, Mr. 

Speaker? So I guess, you know, the best defence is a good 

offence. They’re feeling sensitive about various of the decisions 

they’ve had to make. Things are tightening up a bit in terms of 

the finances, so they go on the offence, and it’s everybody 

else’s fault except for theirs, Mr. Speaker — not taking 

responsibility. 

 

In terms of the budgets, Mr. Speaker, there was certainly the 

good. There was certainly the bad. There was certainly the ugly 

in terms of the various parts of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the good things that we’re glad to see was the move to 

the summary financial statement. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

we registered that fairly clearly in the Throne Speech. But it’s 

funny how that government was dragged kicking and screaming 

to this position, Mr. Speaker, how they’ve put the black mark 

beside the good name of Saskatchewan in terms of having a 

budget actually fail an audit, first in the history of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And there have been some pretty interesting 

regimes throughout the history of this province, but first failed 

audit in the history of this province. 

 

And the lengths that they went to to try and circumvent and 

sabotage the work of the auditor, to dismiss the work of the 

auditor, the work that went on in the Public Accounts 

Committee, Mr. Speaker, and it was interesting that when it 

came time for a vote in the committee just earlier in this year on 

whether or not generally accepted accounting principles should 

apply to the budget, members opposite in the main voted 

against that. 

 

But there was one member over there, and I’m not sure if I 

should go too far down this road because, you know, I don’t 



4986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

think it will make him all that popular with his caucus 

colleagues. But in I think foreshadowing of things to come, 

there was one member over there that had the guts to say, you 

know, I can’t vote for this — I can’t stomach this anymore; the 

jig is up — and registered an abstention on the vote where all 

the other, you know, where that government used the majority 

to come in to the Public Accounts Committee and vote down 

endorsing generally accepted accounting principles. 

 

And you know, I can only imagine how the conversation played 

out in that caucus and the conversion ultimately to the position 

where we’ve got the summary financial statements for us. And 

again that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the process. 

But you know, it’s something we’ve been calling for. It’s 

something the government has finally moved on. It’s 

unfortunate that they had to fail an audit and to bring that kind 

of embarrassment to the province of Saskatchewan’s good 

name, Mr. Speaker, but at least we’ve accomplished that, and I 

want to thank those that played different roles in bringing that 

about. 

 

And the folks that, you know, rolled in to sing from the caucus 

song sheet, Mr. Speaker, or the Premier’s office . . . follow the 

Premier’s office marching orders, I don’t think it was them that 

got this job done. I think it was the auditor. I think it was the 

people of Saskatchewan calling for books you can trust. I think 

it was this opposition, you know, not letting this government off 

the hook in terms of that very important question of financial 

trust. And I think there were some members over there that 

played a role that showed that they had some spine to them, Mr. 

Speaker, and so I’m thankful for that. 

 

And I guess in terms of the process of the budget, we’re glad to 

see that, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes to again the substance 

of the budget questions, well last year, Mr. Speaker, and again 

we’ve heard different members get up and talk about, you 

know, yet another balanced budget, I think seventh consecutive 

balanced budget . . . And even now I think we have the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres saying yes, that’s great. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, last year when all was said and done, the auditor 

weighed in and said it wasn’t in fact a balanced budget. The $58 

million surplus that they were calling for was actually a $580 

million deficit. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just with a bit of salt that we’re 

listening to the members opposite go through their budget 

speeches here where they’re patting themselves on the back and 

the self-congratulation and all of that, you know. We’ll take the 

word of the auditor. So in terms of what happens with this 

budget on the substance, Mr. Speaker, and whether or not it’s 

balanced, the jury is indeed still out. 

 

To be sure, there were good things in this budget. There were 

some good things in terms of infrastructure, good things in 

terms of programming. There were some good things in 

Advanced Education, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got further questions 

on how those will work out but, you know, there were certainly 

some good things on the ledger. 

 

Alongside that though, Mr. Speaker, we know that with the 

funding extended to the institutions, that we see on our 

university campuses that tuition will continue to rise, further 

securing, I would imagine, Saskatchewan’s dubious distinction 

as having the second-highest level of tuition as reported by 

Statistics Canada in all of Canada, something that members 

opposite deny but Statistics Canada says otherwise. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, that means students are going to pay more. 

 

And then in terms of programs, they’re going to get less 

because we’ve seen programs being cut, programs up for 

review. And in terms of paying more and getting less, Mr. 

Speaker, I think students deserve better. And in terms of the 

staff and the faculty that are impacted by this and in terms of 

the reputations of our institutions, Mr. Speaker, we watch this 

with some obvious cause for concern. 

 

And we look particularly at the . . . Again there were some good 

pieces around Advanced Education capital infrastructure in this 

budget, but I note with interest that the University of Regina 

residence still goes wanting and I note that there was not even a 

mention of the important work that’s going on around the 

College Avenue Campus. And again, Mr. Speaker, I hope this 

isn’t something where they’re waiting for the big reveal come 

the eve of the election, but we’ll see how that works out. These 

are requests that are being made by the University of Regina 

that deserve serious consideration and serious support. 

 

We see the unfortunate circumstance with the First Nations 

University of Canada being forced to curtail enrolment with 

their Saskatoon Campus, Mr. Speaker. And again at a time 

where we should be making good on that huge potential there in 

terms of First Nations and Métis individuals in this province, 

it’s highly unfortunate to see something like that go on. 

 

In terms of health care, Mr. Speaker, again we see some . . . 

There’s some good pilots there. I know an individual that’s 

been very involved in the work around calling for hot spotting 

or trying to find a better way to work through those bottlenecks 

that arise, and particularly in ERs [emergency room]. And that 

individual is someone who’s on the streets, you know, working 

very hard, works with a big heart and a lot of care for the people 

that he comes into contact with. But his observation on this is, 

you know, he just hopes to goodness they don’t somehow find a 

way to screw this up. He’s hopeful but you know his jury’s still 

out in terms of the way that the support is brought to bear in 

terms of hot spotting. 

 

And you know there are other good pilots, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of, you know, around home care or seniors’ care, but in 

terms of that, the way that this was . . . Again I’d really 

compliment the work of Saskatchewan people having the guts 

to come forward and say that what’s happening in seniors’ care 

is not . . . Our seniors deserve better. And then the way that this 

government has responded, the big sort of launch in the fall of 

the urgent action fund and the commitment that the minister 

evinced towards it at that time, those are all again worthy of 

consideration but the proof is often in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in terms of the way that the anger and the commitment to 

action that was proclaimed by this government in the fall and 

the way we see that not being followed through on in terms of 

this budget, Mr. Speaker, and the way that the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix stated it very succinctly in this weekend’s editorial, 

stating “Our seniors deserve better,” again, Mr. Speaker, that 

speaks of the disconnect that exists between the way that this 

government can hype some things up or proclaim support or 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4987 

interest but then the follow-through tends to be something very 
different. So that’s one thing. 
 
[11:00] 
 
We see the continued sort of crisis going on in terms of 
emergency rooms. Again there are fine things going on. I was 
glad to see the work of the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
around bedlining. But I note, Mr. Speaker, I have a constituent 
that went in on Friday night at 8:30 and then finally saw a 
doctor at 4 in the morning — this is a woman of some advanced 
years — and finally got the treatment she needed for her 
mini-strokes that she was having. And the sort of circus that she 
reported going on in the emergency room waiting area. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the real people’s experience of the 
health care system alongside the sort of propaganda lines that 
we hear from that government on different things they like to 
congratulate themselves on, there’s a huge disconnect. And 
again we see, alongside these good pilots, we see further cuts in 
terms of the overall budgets for the health regions. And those 
will be made up by what is ubiquitous, or in an Orwellian turn, 
Mr. Speaker, voluntary management of vacancies and, you 
know, poorer service for people that need it most. 
 
And then alongside that, Mr. Speaker, we see this government 
having 40 million and counting when it comes to their pet lean 
project and funds for United States consultants, flying around 
Japanese senseis and the like. So again, Mr. Speaker, some 
good things, but the way this plays out on the ground is 
something else. 
 
Something I want to talk particularly about, Mr. Speaker, is that 
I was glad to see the planning dollars announced for Sacred 
Heart Community School. Again we get the loud roar from the 
members opposite. And you know, it’s a funny dynamic, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of . . . One of the speeches given earlier this 
week was from the member from Regina Coronation Park. And 
his sort of upshot was that, you know, the government wasn’t 
getting enough thanks for their budget so he was going to spend 
a lot of his remarks thanking them, you know, just to make sure 
that was done. 
 
And you sort of wonder about, you know, what’s the 
psychology of a government where they need to be thanked and 
applauded at every turn. But you know, so for the planning 
money, just to be very clear about this, I’m glad to see it in the 
budget. I’m glad to see it in the budget. The problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, the way this plays out in practice is, we’ll see where 
the follow-through goes. 
 
We also see the fact that this has been raised with the 
government over seven years, and that this has gone on and on 
and it’s finally come to a crisis point. And that’s where the 
community has finally gotten some action. And again, not so 
much action but planning dollars and, you know, hope for the 
future. And you know, that’s a good thing. But in that broader 
context of what is the immediate content of this budget and the 
record of this government alongside that, we’ll be watching this 
very closely. 
 
And I guess in terms of Sacred Heart, I want to say a really 
special thank you to Principal Starla Grebinski — 

award-winning Principal Starla Grebinski — and the teachers 
and staff and the volunteers that make that such a special school 
in our community, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank Father John 
Weckend of St. Cecilia’s parish and all the parishioners over in 
St. Cecilia’s parish which of course has subsumed what used to 
be the old Sacred Heart parish, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m 
thankful to Catholic schools’ community councils from across 
this city that weighed in on this, that said, this is important; this 
can’t go on. How is it that the kids at Sacred Heart can’t have a 
gym, let alone this refurbishment, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And the way that . . . Again, I want to thank the Regina 
Catholic School Board as well in terms of their determination in 
not forgetting this issue and continuing to raise it with this 
government. And again this is a government that says, well you 
know, where’s our big round of applause and where’s our 
undying thanks and all of that? 
 
And you know, in the lead up to last year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, I understand that the Chair of the Regina Catholic 
School Board met with that government and members opposite 
something like a half-dozen times, Mr. Speaker, a half-dozen 
times, and again only to come to the budget and to be very 
disappointed. Then of course the school got into crisis, and then 
we saw what happened there. So again we’re glad to see this in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of how this plays out, 
we’ll be watching it very, very closely. 
 
And you need look . . . Just one last thing on this topic of 
Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker. In terms of what happened with 
Scott Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, where it was announced in the 
2008 budget and the revitalization of Scott Collegiate serving as 
the anchor for the North Central Shared Facility. Well that was 
in 2008, Mr. Speaker. That was four Education ministers ago. 
And you can look, you know, you could sit over at Sacred Heart 
in the parking lot and look over at Scott Collegiate. And guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? They’ve yet to turn sod on that project that 
was announced in the budget of 2008. So you’ll forgive me if 
I’m less than, you know, fulsome in terms of blindly trusting 
whatever this government puts forward. Should it show up, I’ll 
be happy to support it then. Mr. Speaker, I was certainly 
supportive of seeing it in the 2008 budget, but the wait goes on. 
 
One other thing, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the disconnect that 
exists with this government. Again we hear about things being 
really great in the province in terms of different fronts, but we 
know that something else is going on. And it was just this week, 
Mr. Speaker, where we saw Advance Engineered Products 
issuing layoff notices in Regina and in Saskatoon, announcing 
that they’d need to terminate 78 workers here in Regina, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, another 49 workers in Saskatoon. So nearly 
130 families, Mr. Speaker, that are impacted by these layoffs. 
 
And of course this was a company that that government felt free 
to use for a photo op in October to brag themselves up. And 
when it comes time for the photo ops, you know, you can’t get 
them there fast enough, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes time 
for them to stand beside those workers and this corporation to 
see if there can’t be something better arrived at, we hear 
something very different in terms of the attention of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of cost of living questions, in terms of 



4988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

privatization issues that come to play in this budget, in terms of 

a wholly inadequate response to the education and employment 

task force report on First Nations and Métis people, in terms of, 

you know, proclaiming steady growth but seeing that steady 

growth in debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for many reasons, while 

there are certainly some good things in this budget, on the 

whole this budget is wanting and is not up to the mark, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that, I will be — just to make this very clear — I’ll be 

supporting the amendment, but I will not be supporting this 

budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased this 

morning to be able to enter into the debate that has been 

occurring over the last week or so on the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

and I look forward to making some comments on the budget. 

 

First of all though, I do want to say a few words of thanks to 

some important people, as this provides an opportunity to do 

some reflection and say a few words. I of course, Mr. Speaker, 

want to thank my family for all of their support. I know all of 

us, we wouldn’t be able to do what we do, wouldn’t be able to 

do our jobs without the support of our loved ones. 

 

I want to thank the people that I work with all the time, my 

fellow NDP MLAs, Mr. Speaker, for their friendship and their 

hard work in all that they do. Please know I’m very grateful for 

everything that you’re doing, and thank our staff as well who 

work hard, work long hours, and give of themselves in really 

significant ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to thank my constituents, the people of Saskatoon 

Massey Place, for the insight and the advice and the feedback 

that they provide to me and have been for the years that I’ve 

been elected and in the last year or so, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

certainly cared about my own constituency but had a focus on 

reaching out and being in the province as a whole. Mr. Speaker, 

I would absolutely thank the people of the province for the good 

conversations and the good visits that I’ve had over the last 

year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, looking at this budget, my thoughts went to 

one interaction that I saw not too long ago. And it was a woman 

speaking with some other individuals, and what she said was, 

the problem with this government is that they take the cake and 

we just get the crumbs. And that expression that she said, Mr. 

Speaker, stuck in my head because as we’ve looked at this 

budget, as we’ve seen the steps that this government has taken, 

I think it is a good description of the approach that this 

government has taken with the budget before us. 

 

And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, what we see are cuts and 

crumbs for Saskatchewan people. And we’ve been talking about 

this throughout the last week as many of the topics that we’ve 

covered in question period. I think of the questions just today 

that our deputy leader was raising about education in Saskatoon 

where we have the Public School Board hugely concerned 

about a reduction in funding, a request for 11 portables but only 

receiving two, Mr. Speaker — cuts of that nature. 

 

We see in health care, Mr. Speaker, this week we talked about 

home care. And we see examples of patients in our capital city 

who do not have access to the home care services that they 

need. Mr. Speaker, we see this government failing to prioritize 

the things that really matter to Saskatchewan people. And 

we’ve had a very strong focus on the need for better seniors’ 

care, on the need for better standards, on the need for better 

funding to address desperately needed staff, repairs, and 

equipment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we haven’t seen the meaningful action that Saskatchewan 

people need and Saskatchewan people expected in this budget 

to address the crisis that we have in seniors’ care. And 

unfortunately we’ve seen an obsession and a preoccupation, a 

tunnel vision on something else, Mr. Speaker. And that of 

course, when we look at health care, is this government’s lean 

project — their pet project. And we’ve had many exchanges in 

question period, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve seen this focus on 

lean at the expense of the basics that Saskatchewan people want 

and Saskatchewan people need in health care. 

 

We have this government saying no to moderate requests from 

health regions to have more care aids, to have better equipment. 

But we see them saying yes to very generous, lucrative 

contracts, and the most notable being to the one US [United 

States] consultant as it relates to lean, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s the context of the actions that we see by this 

government. Then we look at what Saskatchewan people are 

doing. And that, Mr. Speaker, is where we see the great 

examples of Saskatchewan people doing their part — on the 

business front, on the education front, contributing to 

communities through community-based organizations. Doing 

all the things that Saskatchewan people have been so great at 

doing over the course of the history of our province, the things 

that have made our province strong. And it’s because of those 

actions that the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker, the statistics 

that the province has, have been strong. Because Saskatchewan 

people are doing their part. Saskatchewan business leaders are 

doing their part. Saskatchewan workers are doing their part, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But unfortunately what we see in this budget is government not 

doing its part, and government dropping the ball. And again I’ll 

go back to the very recent examples that we see with respect to 

the budget for the Public School Division in Saskatoon and the 

reduction in funding that it will be receiving per student. So 

when government’s not living up to its role, when government’s 

dropping the ball, it’s Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that 

pay the price. It’s Saskatchewan people that have to pay more. 

 

Our House Leader, in his remarks just prior to mine, talked 

about students at our post-secondary institutions having to pay 

more but get less. We know families, Mr. Speaker, are paying 

more with respect to the utilities that they pay. With the cost of 

living going up, with housing expenses going up, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that this is putting a squeeze on families. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And then we think to the health care front. We think to the 

examples that we’ve covered in this House and the examples 

that many families experience on a daily basis, where families 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4989 

are having to make up the difference for the shortcomings in 

this government’s approach when it comes to health care, when 

it comes to seniors’ care. 

 

We think of the Phillips example, the Phillips family as one 

example, Mr. Speaker, where they had to use all their vacation 

time and then hire a private care provider to go into the hospital 

just to ensure that their mother was receiving help with the 

basics — help with getting to the bathroom, help with meals, 

ensuring that her needs were being met. 

 

So it’s with that perspective, Mr. Speaker, that we approach this 

budget document, knowing that the strength that we have in the 

province is because of the contributions of Saskatchewan 

people, but knowing that Saskatchewan people are being asked 

to pay more and more, are being asked to make up for the 

shortfalls that we see with this government’s approach, and 

being asked to make up for the poor choices that this 

government is making when it comes to their pet projects 

whether it’s in health, whether it’s in education. 

 

So as we approach this budget, Mr. Speaker, the lens that we 

had as an opposition was to ask ourselves, how does this budget 

translate the things that are going on in the province to actually 

making life better for Saskatchewan families? Actually 

speaking to, actually improving in a tangible way, the things 

that Saskatchewan families want to see action on, — and 

rightfully so — the areas where they deserve to have better 

services and better attention by this government? 

 

So we outlined a number of concerns that we had where we 

wanted to see some action by this government. We want to see 

this government end the cash cow contracts to the US 

consultant for the lean pet project, the $40 million-plus that we 

see being spent. We want to see that contract ended and have 

the dollars go into the front lines to provide more care aids, to 

provide more cleaners in our hospitals, to provide more care for 

our loved ones. 

 

We want to see this government actually recognize that we need 

to have better standards for seniors who are in care and have a 

plan on how to get there, and to take some good concrete steps 

in that direction. But instead what we saw, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Currently the Leader of the 

Opposition has entered into the budget debate. I think it would 

be respectful of members to, if they have conversations, to 

perhaps do them in a quieter fashion. I would . . . Or else take 

them outside. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — When we look at seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, it 

was this government that removed the minimum care standards 

that seniors could expect if they were in care facilities, Mr. 

Speaker. It was this government that slow-walked the public 

reporting, Mr. Speaker, with respect to inspections of private 

care homes. 

 

So we have concerns when it comes to the cash cow contracts 

that this government has engaged in and has taken on and been 

happy to write huge cheques for. We have concerns around the 

inaction, and we wanted to see better action when it comes to 

seniors’ care. 

 

And we also, Mr. Speaker, wanted to see improvements to 

education, improvements in the classroom, especially as it 

relates to the early years in elementary schools, in order to have 

class sizes that are reasonable for kids, for children, and 

reasonable for teachers and educators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wanted to see a common sense, a responsible 

approach when it comes to building schools in our province. 

We want to see this government clearly state the costs with their 

plan, the timelines with their plan, Mr. Speaker, and 

information on what the product would be. We want to see a 

responsible approach, and that’s what we were looking for in 

this budget. 

 

We wanted to see, Mr. Speaker, the focus on the right issues 

when it comes to education, instead of plowing millions of 

dollars into standardized testing. And again our Education 

critic, the member from Rosemont, did a fine job yesterday in 

highlighting the confusion that the government side has when it 

comes to standardized testing and the bizarre responses that we 

had from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We wanted to see those millions being poured into standardized 

testing to actually go into the classroom to provide more 

educational assistants, to provide a better learning environment 

for our kids. We wanted to see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, no 

increase to the education tax that the Premier mused about in 

order to fund bridges and overpasses. In every conversation I 

had, Mr. Speaker, with families, with municipal leaders, people 

identified this as a nonsensical approach, a wrong-headed 

approach, and we did not want to see an increase in education 

tax to fund those items in the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last component that we identified where we 

wanted to see clear and concrete action has to address the cost 

of living. And this is what families across the province are 

facing, whether it’s a young family starting out, or whether it’s 

seniors looking at costs of housing, looking at costs of basics, 

looking at increased health care costs, Mr. Speaker. We wanted 

to see good action on that. 

 

And a good budget should be listening to Saskatchewan people. 

A good budget should be recognizing the areas where 

Saskatchewan people want to see improvements. And then it 

should be bringing a plan forward to have those better care 

standards, to have those better classrooms, and to be making 

life more affordable for Saskatchewan families. 

 

But my concern, Mr. Speaker, in reading this budget, is that we 

don’t see those steps. In fact we see opposite steps. We see cuts, 

Mr. Speaker, and we see crumbs of action, crumbs of funding, 

when in fact the government eats the cake and cranks out 

self-congratulatory news releases. And the message that’s being 

given to families, Mr. Speaker, is that they need to brace 

themselves. They need to brace themselves for the things that 

they care about not being addressed, whether that’s a crowded 

classroom for their children, whether that’s the level of care that 

their loved one is receiving in a hospital or a care home, and 

whether that’s the dismissive approach that we see from this 

government when it comes to their choices around lean, around 

standardized testing. 

 

So what are many of these cuts? Well, Mr. Speaker, in health 



4990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

care, we actually see cuts of $51.9 million to be cut from health 

care. And the contrast, Mr. Speaker, that’s shocking to me, 

that’s concerning to me is their willingness to spend $40 million 

on one contract with a US consultant, pour millions and 

millions into the creation of another whole level of health 

bureaucracy through their kaizen promotion offices, Mr. 

Speaker, more than happy to shell out millions in that front, and 

then turn around to health regions and say, well actually, you 

need to cut $52 million from the budgets. Those are cross 

messages, Mr. Speaker, that do not sit well with Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

When the health regions put forward their urgent request to the 

minister to address the crisis that we have in seniors’ care, they 

put forward a moderate request because they knew that the pool 

of funding that was available was limited. It was highlighted in 

question period today, for example, that the Saskatoon Health 

Region identified the need for 450 care aids. They only asked 

for 38. They only got 19, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The health regions were forced by this government to scale 

back their moderate request, which would have made a step in 

the right direction to start addressing the problems that we have 

with care. But then at the same time, Mr. Speaker, what we had 

this government say to regions was, well we don’t have money 

for a special dementia unit in P.A. We don’t have money for 

some more care aids in Saskatoon. But you know what? We’ve 

got some money for another lean consultant, and if you could 

add that to your urgent request we would be more than happy to 

provide funding for that. To me, Mr. Speaker, those are 

misplaced priorities that speaks to this government’s desire to 

focus on a shiny pet project while they’re ignoring the basics 

that need to be addressed for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Home care, Mr. Speaker, we had some announcements around 

home care about things that would be offered in the future. 

Government focused on that, talking about it in the budget, but 

ignoring the present reality that people in Regina are facing for 

those that need home care. We received an email, Mr. Speaker, 

from someone within the region clearly stating that they weren’t 

accepting new home care clients and didn’t know when they 

would be able to do so. To me, Mr. Speaker, that shows a 

failure to address the urgent needs now, while they’re focused 

on projects such as lean and happy to pour millions of dollars 

into that. 

 

And while they do that, it means people are left in the hospital 

when they could be going to their homes if they had home care 

supports. It means many people out in the community, Mr. 

Speaker, who rely on home care services are having those 

services scaled back. And that in turn, Mr. Speaker, will 

inevitably cost the health care system more, but most 

importantly, it will cost people’s health. It will not do what we 

want to happen when it comes to people living healthy lives and 

improving their quality of life and their life situation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, this government still pouring millions of 

dollars into a misguided standardized testing approach. When 

our Ed critic yesterday, the member from Rosemont, asked the 

minister where they stand on standardized testing, I have not 

heard stranger responses for some time in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, because I could not, and I think many educators in the 

province, could not make sense of what the minister was saying 

with respect to where they stand and why they continue to pour 

millions of dollars into a computer system for standardized 

testing. 

 

When we look at our school facilities, we have the example 

from today in question period where the Saskatoon Public 

School Division asked for 11 portables, but they’re only getting 

two. We know, Mr. Speaker, that will mean the classes are 

more cramped, are more crowded, and our kids won’t have the 

learning environment that they need. 

 

We see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, this government plowing 

ahead with its P3 rent-a-school approach. We see a plan, Mr. 

Speaker, by this government that will cost more. We see a plan 

by this government that will take longer. And we see a plan by 

this government that will not guarantee we have the final 

product, we have the type of schools that we need to have good, 

strong communities, and have schools as the hub of our 

neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP, we brought forward a very reasonable, a very 

common sense piece of private members’ legislation, the P3 

accountability and transparency Act. We said if this government 

thinks their rent-a-school approach is the best approach to go 

with, well then they should prove it, Mr. Speaker. And they 

should do that by doing a number of things. 

 

One, they should state the full cost of the project, including the 

cost of credit, up front. To me, Mr. Speaker, that seems like a 

very reasonable suggestion. 

 

Two, Mr. Speaker, there should be a competitive bidding 

process in place so that it’s not simply one person, but we need 

to have at least three bids on a project. And it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, to have small- and medium-size contractors in the 

province have the realistic option of being competitive in the 

bidding process, Mr. Speaker. And when I hear from business 

owners who have been supplying trades work and construction 

work and building schools over the decades, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re concerned when they see a rent-a-school approach by 

this government that could force them out of the bidding 

process and force them out of having a realistic chance of 

securing the job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we called for this government, when it 

comes to its rent-a-school approach, that there needs to be an 

independent watchdog in place to ensure that everything stays 

above board and to provide the honest assessment whether or 

not Saskatchewan taxpayers are getting good value, whether or 

not Saskatchewan students are getting the best types of schools 

that they need and that they deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to cost of living, we see expenses 

going up for Saskatchewan families. We see the many utilities 

that Saskatchewan families are facing going up. We see a 

budget, Mr. Speaker, that provides less to municipalities which 

in turn will increase taxes at the municipal level for many 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Now there was one flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, that was a welcome 

one, and that was on the issue of education tax being increased 

and being used for roads and bridges. The government did 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4991 

flip-flop on that one from the initial suggestion that it was going 

to go down that path. So that was one of the must-haves that we 

identified as an opposition, and I’m glad they’ve taken that 

course of action. I’m concerned that it created some stress for 

Saskatchewan people while the option was being more than 

mused about by this government, but I’m pleased to see that 

flip-flop. 

 

On the environment, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had concerns with this 

government’s track record when it comes to their pattern of 

action related to throne speeches and to budgets. On a number 

of occasions we’ve seen the Premier travel down to the States 

and make the argument that we need to provide our trading 

partners . . . As an energy-producing province and a 

resource-based province when it comes to much of our 

economic activity, the argument has been made that we need to 

provide environmental elbow room to our trading partners. And 

I would agree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what’s important are the actions that are made by the 

government when they return from these trips and make these 

claims. And when we’ve seen these trips occur and talk about 

environmental elbow room, but then when we see the Premier 

come back, when we see the steps taken in the budget of the 

Environment, when we see a total cut to carbon-reducing green 

programs now at 83 per cent, when we see the watering down 

of standards and of targets, Mr. Speaker, that sends a very 

different message. It to me indicates that the walk is not living 

up to the talk. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, when we look at agriculture and we see 

an attention, Mr. Speaker, by this government that has been 

about providing the bear hugs, has been about providing the 

love to the federal Conservatives, has been about embracing the 

federal Ag minister, Gerry Ritz, on every and any opportunity 

possible, but then actually not bringing results for the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . .  

 

We have the absence of the grain transportation crisis being 

talked about in the budget, to me which is a glaring omission, 

Mr. Speaker. And after all of the hype that we’ve seen about the 

stance the government members are taking, what do we see 

when the federal legislation is tabled, Mr. Speaker? We see 

legislation that will not bring action for Saskatchewan 

producers, legislation that does not have penalties that are 

strong enough, legislation that does not address the need for 

better performance standards, Mr. Speaker, legislation that does 

not address the need for greater capacity when it comes to 

transportation for the grain transportation crisis that we have in 

the province.  

 

[11:30] 

 

And to me, Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough to use the kid gloves 

with the federal minister and to have the constant 

congratulatory messages given to the federal Ag minister and 

the federal Conservatives when this is not bringing results to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at northern Saskatchewan, again we 

see a neglect and an approach that is not addressing the needs in 

the northern communities, and the members from Athabasca 

and Cumberland have done a good job of describing the 

shortcomings in this budget when it comes to the North. And I 

would highlight when we see any sort of very small, positive 

step, Mr. Speaker, it’s because people in local communities in 

the North have mobilized. People in northern communities have 

gotten together, have applied pressure to this government, and 

have called for a better way forward. 

 

And so we see some initial dollars when it comes to some 

planning for a long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. But as the 

members from the North have highlighted, when we see untold 

millions being poured into pet projects like lean, when we see 

Japanese senseis being flown to the province with great dollars 

being spent . . . We don’t actually know because this 

government is unwilling to actually answer the written 

questions and say how much they are paying for senseis, how 

much they are paying for the on-site Japan kanban seminars, 

Mr. Speaker. But those are the dollars that need to be poured 

into good projects like better long-term care for people in the 

province, like people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, see a lack of action when it comes to the 

futures fund, the sovereign wealth fund, the long-term savings 

fund, Mr. Speaker. You know, when this was talked about and 

Peter MacKinnon, former president of the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] provided government with its report, the 

Premier said that this needs to be more than a PR [public 

relations] exercise. Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately that’s what 

the whole exercise has materialized and has turned into through 

this budget. We see the recommendations from Peter 

MacKinnon being received. We see the report being received. 

And we see it being put on the shelf, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that in this year the government will add 1.6 billion in 

debt to the budget alone, and overall the debt is up to $4 billion 

since ’09. 

 

One other highlight, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to identify 

as a positive step, but a much-too-late positive step, is the move 

to a summary budget focus. It was not sustainable and 

acceptable for this government to be sticking with that 

approach. When Saskatchewan is the first province in the 

history of the country to fail an audit on its central books, that is 

unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. And as the auditor clearly stated, it 

was because of the new scheme that this government 

developed, that this government implemented. So they had no 

choice in my view but to change. It was too late. 

 

What I hope to see, Mr. Speaker, is a change in the actions of 

Sask Party members when they’re dealing with the auditor 

when they’re in Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker. I would 

sincerely hope that we see a change of heart and a change of 

action that we have seen, which to date has been very 

disrespectful and has been a very undermining approach when it 

comes to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

So we’ll be watching this very closely to ensure that the 

independent officers of the legislature, most certainly including 

the Provincial Auditor, receives the respect, and that the words 

of these independent officers are listened to as they need to be. 

 

Good to see, Mr. Speaker, the funding for the manufacturing 

centre of excellence. That is a good approach as it supports the 

diversification of our economy, and I think that is a positive 



4992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

thing. 

 

But overall, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the content of this 

budget, it is one that focuses on providing cake for the 

government but only crumbs for the people of the province. 

And it’s one that carries on with cuts that are hurtful to 

Saskatchewan families as it relates to seniors’ care, as it relates 

to health care, as it relates to education. 

 

And the message being given to Saskatchewan people is that 

they need to brace themselves. They need to brace themselves 

for things in education getting worse. And they need to brace 

themselves for health care not being fixed as it needs to be, 

while at the same time, they need to have patience — they are 

told from this government — to put up with the misguided 

approaches of millions and millions into lean, millions and 

millions into standardized testing. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, as official opposition, we will be 

focusing on the things that matter to Saskatchewan families. 

Now that means we will be focusing on education. We’ll be 

focusing on health care. We’ll be focusing on seniors’ care. 

And we’ll be focusing on the increased cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan families are confronted with every 

month as they pay their bills. 

 

And with those comments on the budget, Mr. Speaker, I 

indicate that I will be supporting the amendment and I will not 

be supporting the government on the budget. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

an honour to be able to enter into another debate in this 

Assembly, and specifically a debate around the budget for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are few debates that are as important as this one, few 

moments in the political life of a province that are as important 

as the budget debate and the eventual support of the budget by 

this House and therefore, Mr. Speaker, the deployment of 

services, the provision of services for Saskatchewan people as a 

result. 

 

I want to once again thank my family for the opportunities I 

have to serve in this place while they’re busy between 

Saskatoon and Swift Current living their lives. I want to thank 

those who help in our constituency office. Nola Smith has done 

a great job as a constituency assistant. And I must also thank 

Everett Hindley. Though we don’t get along, we travel the 

province together and have for some time. And I’m grateful for 

his support, as I am for the support of colleagues in the family 

that we have on this side of the House, and those that then 

support us in the respective offices in this building, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Before I make some comments around the budget — and I want 

to make way for the Minister of Finance; he is the one who 

should be featured today and frankly congratulated today for the 

culmination of the debate and an excellent budget for the 

province — but before I get into the main part of my remarks I 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that none of the debate that 

we’ve had so far, no element of the debate, no item in the 

budget, is possible without revenue, obviously, to the treasury 

to perform the functions of government, to support what’s in the 

budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we depend to a great degree for that revenue 

on the health of the agricultural economy in this province. 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, here of late in the last few years we’ve 

seen the steady rise, the ascendancy of the importance of the 

agricultural sector, not just in terms of production, not just in 

terms of what farmers do and what ranchers do every single day 

but also, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the innovation economy 

that’s growing up around agriculture, even shortline 

manufacturing that we see, manufacturing exports increasing 

related as well to agriculture, maybe not in our province but in 

other parts of the world that need what our manufacturers are 

producing. 

 

The bottom line though, Mr. Speaker, is just quite simply this: 

without a strong and robust agricultural sector we simply 

couldn’t provide the public services we want to provide to the 

people of the province. We couldn’t shorten wait times for 

surgery as we are because we have additional money to invest 

in that project. We could not build new schools in the province. 

We could not provide programs for those who have intellectual 

disabilities. We could do none of these things, Mr. Speaker. We 

couldn’t hold taxes at a competitive level. We couldn’t build 

highways and make investments in infrastructure were it not for 

the economy, and the agriculture sector is an increasingly 

important part of our economy. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I was shocked when the Leader of the 

Opposition just now summed up the things that would be 

priorities for him going forward, reasons why he couldn’t 

support the budget. And I think he listed four or five things. I 

didn’t write them down, but I noted what he did not mention. 

Not a word in that list of priorities for the NDP about 

agriculture. Not a word of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I followed most of his speech. I think he spent about 30 

seconds, he spent about 30 seconds on . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . well the member for Lakeview wants to 

intervene in the debate. He’s saying I wasn’t listening. Well we 

were. I think the member for Estevan counted. There was about 

45 seconds in a 30-minute speech on agriculture. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s quiet on the other side of the House. It’s quiet. It’s 

a welcome quiet, Mr. Speaker, but it speaks volumes, that 

quietness does, about where this Leader of the Opposition has 

been on the agricultural file. 

 

And again this relates directly to the budget. We simply cannot 

do the things that are involved in this budget without an 

economy to support it. The number one issue, the number one 

economic issue in this province, bar none, this year — and I 

would argue one of the most significant economic issues this 

province has faced in the last number of years — is what’s 

happening with respect to grain transportation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it would be shocking if the Leader of the 

Opposition — after probably, I don’t know, 70 questions in 

question period — it would be shocking if he had only maybe 

raised the question of agriculture 9, 10, 11, 12 times out of the 

70. I think rural Saskatchewan would be disappointed in that, 

that the Leader of the Opposition, the gentleman that would like 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4993 

to be Premier of the province, has not deigned, has not tried to 

mention the transportation crisis in agriculture once in his 

questions, Mr. Speaker. Not once. 

 

It would have been, it would have been I think alarming had the 

number been 12, 13, 14. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is a 

disservice — and that is a mild way to put it — it is a disservice 

not just to rural Saskatchewan but to all of the people of this 

province that the party that would like to put itself off as the 

government-in-waiting, though there’s only nine of them today, 

that that party, that party would have its leader not once raise 

the issue on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would make this prediction as well: that as long as they are so 

out of touch with what Saskatchewan needs and wants for its 

leadership, they can expect their group not to grow beyond 

nine, frankly, in subsequent elections because the people of this 

province understand with clarity the importance of the economy 

as it relates to budget. They understand that. And they know 

that, yes, oil is important and mining is important and 

manufacturing is growing in importance as we see a diversified 

economy, and the innovation sector is important. But 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker, in a province that has 44 per cent of 

this nation’s arable acres, is vital. It is a vital cylinder in our 

increasingly diversified economic engine. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the good news is this, notwithstanding the 

fact the NDP have not raised the issue, the leader has not raised 

the issue . . . By the way, notwithstanding the fact that not even 

a letter has been sent to the Prime Minister or the Minister of 

Agriculture federally from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we know he’s happy to write to 

the Prime Minister. In fact in question period, I think it was just 

a few weeks ago, he stood in his place and he asked a question 

of the Minister of First Nations and Métis Affairs and Northern 

Saskatchewan on the issue, on the important issue of on-reserve 

fire suppression and firefighting. It’s an important issue. He 

noted, by the way, the Leader of the Opposition did, that he had 

taken the time to write a letter to the Prime Minister. Fair 

enough. That’s something he should do. We are also engaged in 

the issue, the minister meeting with Minister Valcourt for 

example and raising our concerns around this. 

 

So we know then that the NDP, the leader of the NDP is happy 

to write a letter on a federal matter. And so, Mr. Speaker, how 

shocking it is that the Minister of Agriculture and the Primer 

Minister’s office have noted there is not one correspondence, 

not one letter sent from the Leader of the Opposition, sent from 

the Agriculture critic across the way to deal with the grain 

commodity transportation issue to fight for Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

Anyway the good news is this, Mr. Speaker: as long as there are 

women and men on this side of the House that remember upon 

what strength this province was built in the first place, that 

remember that rural Saskatchewan is every bit as important as 

the urban parts of our province or northern parts of the 

province, as long as there are women and men of that calibre 

and that quality on this side of the House, the Government of 

Saskatchewan will fight for farmers in this province, with or 

without the help of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it turns out in politics that there’s a balance here in 

this place. In the legislature and in all arms of government, 

including on the opposition benches, there always needs to be a 

balance between talk and action. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes 

in government we don’t always get the balance right. 

Sometimes we do a little bit more talking and a little bit less 

acting than we should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s actually characterized some of 

the debate. And I followed some of the debate of members on 

this side of the House and members on the other side of the 

House. And I’ve noted actually that on this side of the House, 

our members have said, look, here’s the challenge that the 

province faces — positive challenges of growth — but here’s 

what they are and here’s what we’re prepared to do. Here are 

the actions in the Minister of Finance’s budget to actually deal 

with those challenges. There has been a lot of action on this side 

of the House represented in those speeches because that’s 

what’s in the budget. 

 

And there’s been a lot of talk from members opposite. And I 

was in opposition; frankly that’s what you do in opposition. 

You do a lot of talking because you’re not able to affect change 

because you’re sitting on the opposition side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, the member for 

Lakeview wants to intervene. Once again he’s talking, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to continue to act on this side of the 

House. 

 

But it’s been an important part of the budget debate where 

we’ve been able to compare, we’ve been able to compare the 

member for Lakeview’s talk versus actions on this side of the 

House. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s actually been really 

interesting is to compare the talk from the member for 

Lakeview and his NDP colleagues, even when they were in a 

position to act. It’s an interesting comparison, and this budget 

affords that comparison. It allows us to make that comparison 

with the bright light of the Chamber and all of the words in the 

budget. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I want the legislature to consider for 

example the long-standing issue of summary financial 

statements. And there was, Mr. Speaker, as you will know, in 

this Assembly and outside this Assembly, dating back to the 

1990s and even to 2002 — and I think the Minister of Finance 

has some highlighted documents he’ll share with us on this 

matter when he speaks to the debate — there was always 

though a lot of talk about summary financial statements.  

 

There was a lot of talk from the NDP when they were in office 

about summary financial statements. In fact I think in about — 

was it 2004? — they took an initial step to begin reporting both 

the GRF [General Revenue Fund] and the summary financial 

statements. What there continued though to be, Mr. Speaker, is 

talk — including from our side, to be fair, when we were in 

opposition — about the importance of moving to a more 

summary financial report to the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of budgeting. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the talk now has stopped, and there is action 

in this budget. I remember the Finance critic across the way 



4994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

railing against the government, exhorting the government, 

please move to summaries. And I heard in his words, frankly I 

thought I heard that if we were to take that step, if we were just 

to move to summaries, he would have to support a budget like 

that. I thought I sensed that in what he was saying because of 

the historic nature of that development. 

 

Never before in the history of the province — I think that’s an 

introduction to a sentence that the Finance critic across the way 

has used. He likes to talk about what’s never happened before 

in the province with respect to auditors. Never before in the 

history of the province has the auditor been able to come out on 

budget day and say this move to summaries is a better way to 

report to taxpayers. That’s never happened before because it’s 

never been done before, Mr. Speaker. We replaced talk — some 

of it on our side, to be fair — but we’ve replaced talk with 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a long time in this province, and I remember it 

sitting in opposition, there was talk about the education 

property tax. There was talk about the disproportional amount 

of education tax paid for again by rural Saskatchewan, 

principally by farmers. Mr. Speaker, an EPT [education 

property tax] featured prominently in the run-up to the budget 

obviously, and that’s why it’s germane to the budget debate 

today. I remember the leader of the government of the day, the 

NDP government, going to SARM at least once, maybe twice, 

going to the convention of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities and saying, we’re going to get it done, 

talking a lot about the importance of reducing education 

property tax. Just trust the NDP. We will get it done, he said. 

There was a lot of talk. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while the government talked, rural 

Saskatchewan revolted. Rural Saskatchewan had public 

meetings because they got tired of hearing talk from the 

government when they wanted action. Mr. Speaker, shortly 

after the 2007 election, after a report from the current Minister 

of Government Relations to the then minister of Education, the 

current Minister of Finance, historic action took place in terms 

of reducing education property tax in this province. 

 

There was a lot of talk in Saskatchewan in years previously 

about reducing income tax, especially for low- and 

middle-income people, Mr. Speaker, lots of talk about that. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m happy to report that as a result of the actions of 

this government — and there’s an element in this current 

budget that’s referenced; I’ll get to that in moment — as the 

result of the actions on this side, the talk has stopped, Mr. 

Speaker. And now the basic personal exemption for 

Saskatchewan people and the child tax credit has risen to the 

point where a family of four can earn more, tax free, in terms of 

provincial income tax than any other place in the country. The 

talk from their side has been replaced by action on this side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here’s something else. Here’s something else. Lots of 

people were saying on budget day, you know what, we support 

this. This budget is balanced. It moves to summaries. It makes 

infrastructure investments. And there are no tax increases, not 

to EPT or anything else, Mr. Speaker, not even the so-called sin 

taxes went up in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance pointed out to his 

colleagues at our own meeting just before budget night that 

actually there is a tax reduction in the budget. About $6 million, 

I think is the amount . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 6.5. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — $6.5 million. The Minister of Finance 

corrects me as he is wont to do. There’s a tax cut in this budget 

actually, Mr. Speaker. And do you know why? Because we 

replaced talk of indexing exemptions — and that just means 

that those basic exemptions from paying taxes ought to keep up 

with inflation — the talk about that from members opposite has 

been replaced by action on this side of the House. And so now 

we have indexed, for inflationary pressures, the basic 

exemption, thereby meaning the families of this province, those 

who pay personal income tax will pay $6.5 million less than 

they paid last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And more to the point, and I mentioned this on the social media 

that seems to be an important source of question period support 

for the opposition. I mentioned on Twitter yesterday that the 

number of people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

reinforced in this budget today, the number of people that have 

been dropped from the tax rolls completely — so these will be 

principally low-income people moving up into the 

middle-income bracket, strata, frankly — the number of people 

who no longer pay income tax to the province of Saskatchewan 

at all because we’ve increased the exemption, thereby reducing 

taxes, 114,000 Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was always talk in this province about 

cutting debt. And while there’s not an additional payment of 

debt represented in this current budget, certainly it’s referenced 

because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had this debate and discussion 

about when we start saving for the future. Do we pay off some 

of the debt? Some of it’s at 10 per cent, inherited from the 

previous administrations. Do we pay that all off and then begin 

to save for the future? And we’re going to have that debate. But 

it bears repeating, Mr. Speaker, that those folks on that side of 

the House may have talked about debt repayment. On this side 

of the House we paid off $3 billion in general, unsupported debt 

in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve reduced the debt of 

Saskatchewan by 44 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when I say unsupported debt, I mean the debt of general 

operations in government. Governments will borrow in two 

different ways. They’ll borrow in ways where you have a debt 

that’s supported, typically in a Crown corporation where you 

have companies, commercial entities that borrow just like any 

other commercial entity, and then on a regular basis pay back 

both the principal and the interest of that loan. It’s supported 

debt. 

 

And then you have, Mr. Speaker, I would call the bad debt. And 

that’s general government debt where there isn’t a regimen of 

paying the principal, where governments, especially those who 

simply want to talk about things, are happy just to pay the 

interest rate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been interesting to hear the Leader of the 

Opposition on this debate about when we start our futures fund, 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4995 

when do we start savings. He says, in a scrum, he says, well we 

should start saving money earlier because people pay a 

mortgage and they save. Except, Mr. Speaker, that belies a 

complete misunderstanding of what general operating debt is. 

It’s nothing like a mortgage. It’s more like a credit card where 

we’re just paying off the interest. And we on this side of the 

House said, we have to stop talking about this. We have to 

make some payments on the principal. We have to reduce the 

debt. And that’s what we’ve done by $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

We have to stop just talking about these things and start taking 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s a $16 billion deficit in 

infrastructure in the province. And we heard across the way a 

lot of talk about that, in fact. In fact we hear demands every day 

from the opposition that there should be an investment in 

infrastructure. And while they were in government, when they 

had a chance to do it, Mr. Speaker, of course they were talking 

about it and not acting. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report to the 

House, and it’s built on in this particular budget, that we’ve 

now spent more than $16 billion on infrastructure during the 

last six years, building those hospitals, building long-term care 

facilities, record budgets in Highways, partnerships with the 

municipalities in terms of infrastructure improvement. We’re 

acting on it, Mr. Speaker. We’ve stopped talking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a long time in the province of Saskatchewan, 

there was talk about better supports for those with disabilities. 

For a very long, long season there was a lot of talk, including 

from the previous administration that had the chance to do 

something for those who are most vulnerable in this province, 

for those who unequivocally and in an unqualified way need the 

support of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was talk about how as social democrats they 

cared about these vulnerable people. But, Mr. Speaker, when 

we inherited government, we found that it was only talk, it 

seemed. Because the minister of Social Services of the day, the 

current Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], brought forward to one of those early cabinet 

meetings a report that said this — and this was a stark report, 

Mr. Speaker, by any reasonable measure. The report said 440 

people with intellectual disabilities were on a wait-list. What 

were they waiting for, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What were they 

waiting for that government to provide, when they sat over 

here? They were waiting simply for the dignity of a home. And 

their families were waiting, Mr. Speaker, for some respite, some 

programming, because they were of course the main caregivers 

for these Saskatchewan residents, our people who had 

intellectual disabilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister of the day, followed by the 

current Social Services minister, has made it among the highest 

priorities of this government, if not the very top priority, to 

replace the talk and the platitudes from the social democrats 

with actions from this side of the House. And that list of 440 

people waiting has been eliminated. Now there are other 

families who have come on to the list, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

never going to get to that level. And as they come on, we are 

finding places for those people to live, for the dignity that they 

deserve. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this particular budget alone we see record 

investments for the disabled. Mr. Speaker, on this journey to 

improve support for disabled people in our province, the current 

minister had been meeting with the sector, and they made a 

simple request. They said, you know, we’re not really welfare 

recipients. We’re not really on social assistance because that 

would seem to indicate that there’s more that we could do, and 

we simply can’t do these things. And so we don’t want any 

money right now. But could you call it something else because 

we don’t find the dignity in what it’s called today. And the 

Minister of Social Services came back to cabinet and said, well 

why wouldn’t we do this? 

 

And so what was born on that occasion — again action on 

behalf of that sector instead of talk — was the Saskatchewan 

assured income for disabilities, Mr. Speaker, because it is an 

income source for them. And we’ve heard from so many 

recipients. I remember one in particular, and I don’t have the 

direct quote in front of me, but I remember her saying to the 

minister and to the government and to all who would listen, that 

she had family members that used to accuse her of being on 

welfare, and that hurt her. And then when we changed the 

program — without increasing the rates at all yet, just changing 

the name — she said she found dignity in that. She said they 

don’t say that anymore because I would work; I would do more 

if I could. But I can’t, and so this is income support. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we took it a step further, and we 

campaigned on not just changing the name, but increasing the 

support for those people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

increasing that income support. And one of the biggest 

spending items in this particular budget is increased support for 

the Saskatchewan assured income for the disabled. That’s 

action, Mr. Speaker, a lot more than the talk we used to receive 

from the governments previous to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite also like to talk a lot about the 

importance of engaging Aboriginal people in the economy. 

When we inherited government, we found just a lack of any 

real, functioning, credible programs that were delivering results. 

And it wasn’t necessarily . . . We shouldn’t blame the previous 

government for it. We really shouldn’t because governments 

across this dominion, across Canada, have found this to be very 

elusive. How do we find things that work so that we can better 

engage First Nations, and in our province, Métis people, in the 

economy? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we worked hard to make this a top priority. 

Before we go to Ireland to recruit people, before we even go to 

Calgary and get Saskatchewan people to come home, we must, 

in a labour shortage situation, first better engage First Nations 

people. If the Aboriginal employment gap is here and the rest of 

the province is at 4 per cent, that’s a challenge. That’s a 

problem, and we ought to deal with it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we set about making some historic 

changes in investment, in our approach to this issue, this gap in 

terms of Aboriginal employment and employment for others 

including, Mr. Speaker, what ended up being I think — the 

Minister of Advanced Education can correct me if I’m wrong 

— what ended up being a 48 per cent increase in funding to the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Lots of talk about the kind of programming we needed, the 



4996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

money that you needed to support programming, especially at 

an institution like SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies] that connects graduates with jobs and gets them 

involved in the economy. Lots of talk over there. A 48 per cent 

increase and more in the budget as well. And that’s why I 

believe those in administration at SIIT said after budget day, 

“This budget is a good budget.” They said it, Mr. Speaker, 

because it offered more action on that front and less talk than 

what they used to get, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of adult basic education and the wait-list 

we have in this province that we’re slowly reducing, that we’re 

eliminating, it’s been a long-standing issue that’s gotten a lot of 

talk again from . . . Not, by the way, in this debate — I haven’t 

noted it — but in the past certainly. Mr. Speaker, in our growth 

plan we highlighted a plan to eliminate the wait-list for adult 

basic education. And funding for ABE [adult basic education] is 

up 58 per cent and we’ve added 1,000 seats. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s nothing more fundamental than getting that adult basic 

education available not just to First Nations and Métis, but all 

who want it because that is the foundation for what’s next in 

terms of skill training and that’s how we’ll deal with the labour 

shortage in this province and better engage people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is action and not 

talk. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to education — and we’ve had a bit 

of debate even on it, even on it here today — I think it’s 

important to note that . . . And the Saskatoon school division 

came out today with some numbers about per-student funding 

being decreased. Mr. Speaker, since we took office, the 

per-student funding for that particular school division is up 33 

per cent while enrolment’s up 16 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, operational budgets for school divisions have 

increased. And once more what you’ve seen from this 

government . . . Again it’s unprecedented and about action and 

not talk. What you saw from this government, I think a year ago 

September, was us intervening mid-school-year — I don’t think 

it ever happened in the province — with additional dollars. And 

the former minister of Education led this additional dollars for 

growth pressures in not just Saskatoon, but some of the satellite 

communities there and some of it may even have flowed to 

Regina as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget we have $18 million for similar 

growth pressures, I believe, for similar growth pressures going 

forward. That’s for places like Saskatoon. That’s for places like 

Regina. It’s for places like Martensville and fast-growing 

communities around the major centres, Mr. Speaker. And 

moreover, if the best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour, we will have a minister who will sit down with all 

the school boards as we go through this year and fully 

determine the nature of these pressures and do something that 

those folks only ever talked about when they were government 

— provide in-year increases, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ve 

done in the past. And the minister will sit down with these 

groups and make sure that the provision of resources are there 

for Saskatchewan schools and teachers and the students, of 

course. 

 

And while we’re doing that on the operating side, Mr. Speaker, 

in an unprecedented way, this government will build new 

schools in Saskatchewan. And members opposite will oppose 

new schools in Saskatchewan because they don’t like the way 

they’re being built. The Leader of the Opposition opposes a 

school in his own constituency because he doesn’t like that it’ll 

be bundled with other schools, because he doesn’t like that it’ll 

be financed in the long term, doesn’t like the way it’s going to 

be financed. 

 

His Education critic, also the Finance critic at one point, 

demands more resources for education and then opposes new 

schools. He says . . . or maybe he doesn’t oppose them. Maybe 

I’m not being fair. Maybe the Education critic and the Leader of 

the Opposition support the schools that we’ve announced. 

Maybe they agree that we need one in Massey Place. Maybe 

they agree that all the schools we’ve outlined, both in the city 

and the country, are needed but maybe their position is, you 

can’t build them except but the old way. I think that is his 

position actually. I think that’s what he said, and I think that’s 

the Leader of the Opposition’s position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, do you know what the deficit in this 

province would be if we were to simply cash flow every school 

in the same way that the NDP did? It’s not possible unless you 

want to have a fiscal wreck on your hands, which we’re not 

prepared to allow to happen. Mr. Speaker, it’s a specious 

argument then for members opposite to say, build us a school in 

our community. Build one in . . . Build schools in Regina. Build 

one in the Leader of the Opposition’s constituency. But we 

won’t support it unless you build it the old-fashioned way. And 

by the way, they know, if they’re being honest with themselves, 

that the old-fashioned way would mean these schools would 

simply not get built for years and years and years when we 

know the pressure is today. 

 

I think I heard the member for Lakeview say it’s about choice. 

You bet it’s about choice. On this side of the House, it’s the 

identification of the fact that this province is growing. 

Enrolment is up and we’re going to use sound methods, proven 

methods to build schools, but we will choose to build those 

schools now when they’re needed, Mr. Speaker, and not make 

them wait for a lot more talk from the member for Lakeview or 

the Education critic or the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see another record investment in health care in 

the budget, and I just want to touch on it briefly before I give 

way to the Minister of Finance, because health care is important 

and it, I think, is a priority for the Leader of the Opposition as 

well. He’s asked a lot of questions on health care. Not on the 

grain transportation crisis, but a lot on health care, to be fair. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would just point out we have another 

record investment in health care, but in terms of action versus 

talk, here again we see an additional investment in the surgical 

wait times initiative. We were able to see a report out I think 

just earlier this week that demonstrated we are well on our way 

to providing surgeries within three months for Saskatchewan 

people. This is a remarkable process that’s under way. There’s 

two reasons why we’re able to do it. One is we have a growing 

economy and a broader tax base and so we’ve been able to 

make an additional investment in the surgical wait times 

initiative. 

 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4997 

Here’s the other reason we’re able to do it. We’re using private 

clinics, Mr. Speaker, and nobody has burst into flames so far. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the projects are moving forward. 

Surgeries are happening. And I’ve noted that the Leader of the 

Opposition opposes the use of private clinics, and that’s fair 

enough. I look forward to that debate and I look forward to the 

debate in the election campaign, because we’re going to have 

the Leader of the Opposition advocating for the same old 

ideological way of doing surgeries — and therefore he’ll be 

advocating for the same old longest wait-list in the country that 

we inherited from the NDP and from the member for Regina 

Lakeview when he was the Health minister. The longest 

wait-list in the country. That’s the NDP brand in health care. 

That’s the NDP legacy. And so when this government has 

developed and demonstrated success in reducing those wait 

times by adding more resources and using private clinics in the 

public system, they opposed that too. More talk. And action, 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after a lot of talk about long-term care in this 

province from when they were in government and when they’ve 

been sitting over on the opposition side, on the long-term care 

front, this side is actually building long-term care facilities and 

adding beds, Mr. Speaker — not just in the rural areas, but at a 

place like the Catholic Health Ministry, Amicus, the Catholic 

Health Ministry project in Saskatoon. But again, the Leader of 

the Opposition opposed that project, railed against that 

faith-based approach to long-term care facilities. 

 

By the way, that’s added dementia capacity in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. And we note the Leader of the Opposition stands up 

and says, we need more dementia capacity in Saskatoon and 

right across the province, but don’t partner with the faith-based 

community to get it done because we can’t support that unless 

it’s done the same old, tired, ineffective NDP ideological way. 

 

And by the way, if you take a look at how the seats are set up in 

this House, you will note that the people of the province have 

voted for action and not talk and ideology on that side of House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important thing we can do in a budget is 

ensure that it’s balanced. Arguably the long-term legacy of any 

particular budget is that it avoids borrowing for operations. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m proud to say that for the seventh time in the life of 

this government, the Finance minister — first Mr. Gantefoer 

and now the current member for Canora-Pelly — has stood in 

this place and delivered one of Canada’s only balanced budgets, 

Mr. Speaker. That means we’re not going to add to that 

unsupported debt where we’re not making principal payments 

and only trying to track the interest rates. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, if I may just close with this, I 

think that is the reason why the budget’s been well-received, 

that it’s got the fundamentals right. There’s infrastructure 

investments that are important. There is investments in health 

care and education, building on success there. There’s support 

for our most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. But it’s done in the 

framework of fiscal probity, responsibility. It’s a summary 

budget for the first time in the province’s history, and it is 

balanced. 

 

And it is why I believe, Mr. Speaker . . . That kind of budgeting 

is why I believe that we can look to the words of the NDP 

member for Athabasca, because the NDP member for 

Athabasca said more about this budget and previous budgets 

than anyone on this side of the House could say. Because in a 

clarion moment of just honesty to the Northern Pride paper in 

Meadow Lake on 17 September, 2013, it says, “The Athabasca 

NDP MLA said he is pleased with how things have been 

shaping up for the province financially under the reign of the 

current Saskatchewan Party government.” I don’t think there’s 

anyone more surprised to get that kind of endorsement from the 

NDP than that member’s old friend and Leafs fan, the member 

for Canora-Pelly and the Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to hear from the Minister of Finance 

and then we’re going to have a vote. And a couple of members 

have been asking for some very specific things over there. The 

member for Cumberland has been wanting a long-term care 

facility. It’s in the budget. It’s his chance to vote for that 

facility. The member for Regina Elphinstone has been working 

hard for Sacred Heart School, doing a good job of making the 

case. It’s in the budget, Mr. Speaker. Regina members have 

been advocating for Connaught. It’s also in the budget. The 

Leader of the Opposition wants a school in his area, in his 

constituency. It’s certainly related and involved in the 

budgeting for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Athabasca has said the finances 

for the province are good under the Saskatchewan Party. Here’s 

a chance for all of them to do something that I think we’ve only 

ever seen the member for Kindersley do, at least in the 

contemporary history of this government, where an opposition 

member actually had the courage of his conviction to stand up, 

as the member for Kindersley did when he was in opposition, 

and vote in favour of an NDP budget. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, what he had been doing is advocating for 

no PST [provincial sales tax] increase in the budget. He wasn’t 

asking the NDP government of the day to cut PST. He was just 

saying, don’t increase it because it hurts us on the west side. 

And he made a commitment. He said, if you will do that, 

notwithstanding other concerns I might have in the budget, I 

will support the budget because it’s the right thing to do. It’s the 

principled thing to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t just have one thing that had been 

asked for by members opposite. There is a grocery list from 

summary financials to specific schools to long-term care 

facilities. Now is the chance for the NDP on a principled basis 

to vote in favour of action instead of only ever talking about the 

challenges, talking about the issues they want to bring forward 

to the legislature. I’m personally looking forward to that. I think 

we’re all anxious to see how that works out. I think if there’s a 

few over there that are still thinking of voting against the 

budget, I’m confident the Minister of Finance is going to 

convince them as well. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to make way for him and I want to 

encourage members opposite to vote for a balanced budget that 

meets the interests and the desires that they have raised in this 

Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that I will be 

voting in favour of action instead of talk. I’ll be voting for the 

budget and against the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members, it is my duty pursuant to 



4998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

rule 31(7) to inform the Assembly that the Minister of Finance 

is about to exercise his right to close the debate, and afterwards 

all members will be precluded from speaking to this question. 

Therefore, if there are any members who wish to speak, let 

them do so now. 

 

Seeing none, I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed an honour to stand 

and close debate on my fourth budget. I’ve had the pleasure of 

being the Finance minister, and I want to thank the Premier for 

giving me that honour and working with the people of 

Saskatchewan to develop this budget. 

 

This has been a challenging budget because, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

indicate right off the beginning that the revenues of the 

province of Saskatchewan, on a consolidated financial basis last 

year, were $14.17 billion, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, this year’s 

revenue is $100 million less. So it was a challenge. And then 

the only way that you can meet challenges, Mr. Speaker, is to 

look at the whole picture. So that was a process that took a 

while. 

 

I want to also indicate at this time, Mr. Speaker, as I had an 

opportunity on budget day to thank my family, but today I want 

to especially extend my appreciation to my staff back in 

Canora-Pelly. Carol Sleeva, who is my constituency assistant, 

and Michele Wiwchar, who acts as a fill-in when we need a 

replacement, have done just a terrific job. So thank you to those 

individuals. But also thank you to my staff in my office here in 

the legislature in room 312. We have a terrific staff, Mr. 

Speaker, who have worked tirelessly for months to ensure that I 

understood all of the material that was coming from different 

ministries, that there were always concerns that were brought 

forward, and I want to extend my appreciation as well. 

 

I also want to say thank you to all of my caucus colleagues. 

This is the fifth day of budget resumption debate, and I’ve 

listened to, I think, every one. Parts of every one, some 

complete. The comments made by members on this side of the 

House. And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to 

spend a lot of time repeating all of the great things that are 

happening in different ministries, in different constituencies, 

and ensuring that we move forward, because they’ve done a 

terrific job. And I want to say thank you to all of my colleagues 

behind me. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to . . . I think first of all I want to 

clarify a couple of things for the people of Saskatchewan based 

on the present process that we’re following. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as the media reported, everyone knows that this is the first time 

in the province of Saskatchewan that we will have only a 

summary budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a long time we’ve had both, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had both, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had both. And you know, 

I think, I think it’s in order, Mr. Speaker, because not all of the 

members opposite were in this Assembly for as long as I have 

been. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to read a resolution, and this resolution 

reads this way: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to follow the 

recommendations of the Provincial Auditor and begin 

using summary financial statements in its budgets in order 

that all financial activity of the government be 

incorporated to provide the people of Saskatchewan with a 

much more accurate, honest, and transparent view of the 

state of the provincial government’s finances when the 

annual budget is presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a motion introduced on December the 

12th, 2002. Mr. Speaker, up to that point — and I had been in 

this legislature since 1995 — there was only a General Revenue 

Fund budget. There was no summary financial statements. 

There was no accounting under a summary basis. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we were advocating for that. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

tell you that this motion moved on December 12th, 2002, was 

moved by myself and seconded by the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that motion was introduced and the government of 

the day, the NDP, would not support that motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they introduced an amendment, many 

amendments, but I’m going to put one on the record, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s amendment (c) of that particular debate and it’s 

recorded in Hansard on Thursday, December 12th, 2002, and it 

says this: 

 

recognize that the Provincial Auditor’s office in its recent 

presentation to the Public Accounts Committee indicated 

that a modified form of summary financial budgeting 

would be appropriate for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that amendment passed. And what that is saying, 

Mr. Speaker, is I’ve listened to the member from Rosemont talk 

about how horrible this budget has been for years and years and 

years, and we’re not following. Mr. Speaker, this is the same 

NDP opposition that was the same NDP government that passed 

this resolution that says that the Provincial Auditor is supportive 

of amended summary financials. And, Mr. Speaker, since that 

motion was introduced, we saw the very next year minister 

Melenchuk stand in this Assembly, and this is a quote from the 

Leader-Post, and it says this: 

 

Melenchuk announced Friday that his government will 

move to what are called summary financial statements for 

2004-2005 budget — a complete spending plan . . . 

advocated by [the] Saskatchewan Party and the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

. . . “What you will get is a complete picture, as in all 

summary financial plans, a complete picture of all 

activities of government . . .” 

 

That’s reported in the Leader-Post, March 29th. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what happened after that budget? We had an 

election. And Mr. Melenchuk was not successful in returning. 

So the following year, in March of 2004, now the Finance 

minister, Harry Van Mulligen, introduces in this House on 

March 31st that the government is moving forward to summary 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4999 

financial statements. So, Mr. Speaker, this is not new. 

 

And you know, if people just listened to the member from 

Rosemont, they would think that none of this has been 

happening, ever. Well I can tell you that the auditor has 

reviewed the summary financial budgeting, which has been 

done, and it has received an unqualified opinion of the auditor 

every single year, Mr. Speaker, every single year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we recognized, we recognized — not the NDP 

—we recognized that there needed to be better clarity, that we 

have to ensure that the public, not only here in Saskatchewan 

but across the piece, Mr. Speaker, because there are bond rating 

agencies that come to Saskatchewan and look at our complete 

picture. And they do, Mr. Speaker. They looked at the complete 

picture of the province of Saskatchewan. They recognized that 

this province was moving forward, and that’s why we have a 

AAA rating today, Mr. Speaker. It’s not because we didn’t do 

away with the General Revenue Fund in its entirety and only 

focus on the summaries. It’s because we, over the last number 

of years, have been moving forward. With the support of the 

people of Saskatchewan, we’ve been moving forward and now 

we have 1,117,503 people in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

because of the policies of the former government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things. The Premier 

commented about advantages in Saskatchewan, and he talked 

about the personal income tax. We’ve had a bit of debate in this 

House about, well what have you done for us lately? And of 

course the change, the indexation of personal income tax this 

year continues on and, as the Premier mentioned, a $6.5 million 

reduction. But, Mr. Speaker, also you have to take into account 

what has been happening over the last year. 

 

I’m going to very quickly comment on one specific group of 

people in this province — seniors, seniors earning $25,000. In 

2007 if you were a senior earning $25,000, you paid provincial 

tax. In fact you paid $1,067 if you had an income of $25,000. 

For 2014, Mr. Speaker, with indexation and all of the changes 

we’ve made over the last six years, that person is going to pay 

zero. No provincial tax. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are distinct advantages for being a 

resident in the province of Saskatchewan. There are so many 

things in this budget that I would like to review, but I’m going 

to just spend a little bit of time talking about two of the 

elements that we introduced, and that’s support for 

infrastructure and that’s support for people. 

 

All of my colleagues have reviewed, and it doesn’t matter 

whether it’s the Minister of Health who’s talked about $5 

billion for health and the fact regional health authorities are 

going to receive $3.25 billion of that or the Cancer Agency 

that’s going to receive $155 million, and they’re going to 

continue moving forward; or whether you talk about the 

Minister of Education, who now school boards are going to 

receive $1.82 billion of investment from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I have to make this one comment 

because I listen to the opposition speeches as well. And I listen 

to some of the comments also thrown by members opposite. 

And I listened to the member of Lakeview just a few minutes 

ago. Waved this card. And he said, not a mention of agriculture 

on here. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, you know what the 

mill rate is for agriculture today? It’s 2.67 mills. And we made 

a decision, Mr. Speaker, as we were building this budget, to 

ensure that education property taxes remained the same as last 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of the NDP, under the 

leadership of that person who was in cabinet, there were tax 

revolts. There were people who were saying, enough is enough. 

You continue to download on us. Today, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

download on taxpayers. We keep the same tax commitment and 

in fact there is no education property tax in this budget. 

 

That member just a little while ago commented, I think it was a 

few years ago when we were talking about the tax credit, he 

said, the film employment tax credit, you should’ve kept it. You 

should have kept investing in that. And oh by the way, you can 

take it from agriculture or you can take it from municipal 

investment, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of comments that 

were made by members opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I listen to some of the members 

talk about the desire to meet the needs of the North, the member 

from Cumberland talking for years literally about the La Ronge 

long-term care facility. We’ve introduced that, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve introduced that. And we’re going to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many things in this budget that have 

met the challenges, and the Premier has very adequately 

summarized what we have introduced for some of the concerns 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. We’ve met those challenges. We’ve 

looked at growth, but most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we have 

looked at summary budgeting on the whole. And I know it will 

be a bit of a challenge for the media and everybody in the 

province to look at. How did the budget go from $11.5 billion 

to now $14 billion? Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 

all about the fact that now we’re doing it on a one summary 

budget and we have that commitment. Mr. Speaker, there are 

extra documents in this year’s budget. People who are going 

online or are receiving the package will note that there is still 

the core operational side. There’s still an Estimates document. 

Those are the ways that we have to appropriate the money to 

ensure that ministries have adequate dollars to continue with 

their programs and expenses throughout the year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I’m honoured to represent the 

government and be the Finance minister, and I’ve travelled 

through a few of the communities already to listen to what the 

response has been about the budget. And as the Premier said, 

you know, the people wanted a solid budget. They wanted to 

make sure that there was a commitment to steady growth. And, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think is so . . . It speaks for 

itself. And I’m going to talk a little about Advanced Education. 

I know the member, the minister’s already mentioned this, but I 

want to mention this again. In the budget you’re going to see 

$216 million for student support — that’s everything from the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, the SAGES 

[Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings] program, 

the funding of interest costs for student loans. But you know 

what’s very, very important in that spend as well is $82 million 

for the graduate retention program. 

 



5000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, when we introduced that program in 2008, 

students were leaving. There were no job opportunities. It had 

been already entrenched in them for years and years and years 

of NDP stagnation, declining student enrolments by 3,500 per 

year. There were no opportunities. People were leaving. So we 

as a government said, what do we need to do to encourage 

students to stay? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over 60,000 students who are no longer 

students — they’re now working in the province of 

Saskatchewan — are starting to now recoup the benefit of 

living in Saskatchewan. They’re now eligible to receive up to 

$20,000 of their tuition costs over a seven-year period. Sixty 

thousand have now made Saskatchewan home and I’m pleased 

to be able to put forward $82 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with highways and 

agriculture. But I won’t, Mr. Speaker, but I won’t because 

there’s been such a terrific job done by my colleagues. It’s on 

Hansard and I’m sure that people have had opportunity to look 

at it. 

 

But besides travelling to Weyburn and North Battleford and 

Saskatoon and Regina and tomorrow to Yorkton — I’m sure I’ll 

hear the same thing in Yorkton — I’ve heard very positive 

comments from the public. I’ve heard comments about the 

budget and how we’re moving forward. 

 

But I want to put on the record a few comments made by 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are leaders in this community. 

And that’s maybe a reason why the member from Rosemont, 

with this very first comment, is actually going to support this 

budget. I think he will, Mr. Speaker, because this is the 

quotation: “These are critical steps in eliminating confusion and 

helping legislators and the public better understand the 

government’s finances. Our office strongly supports these 

changes.” Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from Judy Ferguson, 

Acting Provincial Auditor, and it’s about moving towards 

summary, which is what he’s been advocating for. 

 

From the Canadian Taxpayers Federation: 

 

It’s great news that they didn’t take the easy way out and 

raise taxes. We’re glad to see that they continued to look 

at ways of making the government more efficient instead 

of just simply asking the taxpayers to pay more money. 

 

Kind of the NDP philosophy of the past. 

 

“The province has put forward a budget that, while dealing with 

demands for increased expenditures due to growth and the cost 

of living, has managed overall expectations across the board.” 

Steven McLellan, CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Debra Button, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] president: “The government’s 

investment in our communities will go a long way to helping us 

meet the demands of growth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Advocate for Children and Youth, Bob 

Pringle. This is what Mr. Pringle had to say: 

 

I’m encouraged with the direction government is taking in 

addressing the education and employment gaps for First 

Nations and Métis people, developing a mental health and 

addictions action plan, and adding more free kindergarten 

and child care spaces, positive parenting programs, and 

other services for families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been entered into Hansard by a number of 

my colleagues. Mr. Speaker, this is from Amy McNeil, 

executive director of SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres]. And her quote is this: “We are leading 

the country, if not North America and the world, in supports for 

people with disabilities, and it’s something the Saskatchewan 

Party should be very proud of.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with all the investments in capital, $2.9 billion 

in Crowns and other ministries — $2.9 billion — with all of the 

investments in the various ministries, whether that be Health or 

Highways or Education or Advanced Education or Agriculture 

or Social Services, Mr. Speaker, there are so many great things 

in this budget. People have told us about that. They have said 

that this is a budget for the future. It’s a budget that will mean 

that Saskatchewan is going to continue on that path of steady 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget, and I dare say the 

members opposite have no choice but to support this budget as 

well. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the amendment to the main motion moved by the member from 

Regina Rosemont and seconded by the member from Regina 

Lakeview: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 

offers only cuts and crumbs for Saskatchewan families, 

doesn’t address the needs and priorities of today, and 

fails to plan for the long term. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:31 until 12:32.] 

 



March 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5001 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those . . . [inaudible] . . . in favour 

of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion 

please stand. 

 

[Nays — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Draude Duncan Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Toth Doherty 

Norris Reiter McMillan 

Heppner Harrison Wyant 

Tell Weekes Elhard 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Makowsky 

Ottenbreit Campeau Wilson 

Marchuk Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Cox Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Phillips Docherty  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the 

amendment, 9; those opposed, 41. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 

 

The question now before the Assembly is the budget motion 

proposed by the Minister of Finance and seconded by the 

member from Rosthern-Shellbrook: 

 

That this Assembly approve in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 

please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: —I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:34 until 12:35.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion 

please rise. 

[Yeas — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Draude Duncan Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Toth Doherty 

Norris Reiter McMillan 

Heppner Harrison Wyant 

Tell Weekes Elhard 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Makowsky 

Ottenbreit Campeau Wilson 

Marchuk Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Cox Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Phillips Docherty  

 

The Deputy Speaker — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the budget 

motion, 41; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:37.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4977 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4978 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4978 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Appreciation for Retiring Director of Autism Resource Centre 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4978 

 Battlefords Citizen of the Year 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4978 

 Indian Head Reservist Commands Canadian Warship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4979 

 Unity Graduate Named Junior Citizen of the Year 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4979 

 Peacock Toilers Provincial Basketball Champions 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4979 

 Good News From the Forest Industry 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4980 

 Support for Agriculture 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4980 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4980 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4980 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4981 

 Funding for School Division 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4982 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4982 

 Federal Grain Transportation Legislation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4983 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4983 

 New Bridges for Saskatoon and Prince Albert 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4984 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4984 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4985 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4988 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4998 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 5001 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 5001 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


