
























































Hansard: April 09, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 9, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5119 
 April 9, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday on Tuesday, April the 8th, 2014 the 
Government House Leader raised a point of order about 
comments made by the Leader of the Opposition during 
question period. The Government House Leader stated that the 
Leader of the Opposition used the term fabrication or 
fabricated, which he stated was unparliamentary. He quoted 
from paragraph 489 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & 
Forms, 6th Edition, indicating that the term fabrication was 
unparliamentary as outlined in a debate in the House of 
Commons on January 27th, 1959 on page 385. 
 
In his response, the Opposition House Leader indicated that the 
questions asked were in accordance with the rules. After 
listening to the point of order, I did commit to carefully review 
the record. I have done this and am now prepared to rule on the 
matter. 
 
The debate in question can be found on page 5107 of Hansard. 
The Leader of the Opposition stated, and I quote, “. . . the 
details in the itinerary don’t match up with the documents that 
are provided in the FOI.” And the leader goes on further to 
state, “So either, Mr. Speaker, the itinerary is wrong, the notes 
are wrong, or one or both were fabricated by someone.” 
 
By rule 51 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, members are not permitted to make 
personal accusations against another member or others, except 
by way of a substantive motion. I find that the statement made 
by the Leader of the Opposition is not directed at a person or a 
member and, on this basis, I find that the point of order is not 
well taken. 
 
Before concluding, I would also like to remind members that it 
is not unparliamentary to criticize statements made by members 
as being contrary to the facts, and Speakers have always 
maintained that accuracy of statements made by members is a 
matter of debate. Members should choose words that are 
temperate, worthy of the place in which it is spoken, yet achieve 
politically effective criticisms of policies. 
 
Further, with regard to lists of words or expressions, in 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th Edition, at 
paragraph 491, states, “No language is, by virtue of any list, 
acceptable or unacceptable. A word which is parliamentary in 
one context may cause disorder in another context, and 
therefore be unparliamentary.” Speaker Kowalsky reaffirmed 
this in a ruling dated April the 12th, 2002. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Policing and 
Corrections. 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce 27 grade 4 students from W.S. Hawrylak School. 
They are seated in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
Accompanying them today is their teacher, Bonnie McMurtry; 
chaperones, Karen Sidhu, Karen Oblinski, and Carolyn Fluter. I 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 26 grade 5 and 6 students from Lakeview 
Elementary School who are sitting in the east gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Cindy Rice, and a chaperone, 
Peter Isaac. And I ask all members to welcome them to the 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I’m delighted to help 
welcome students, graduate students, from the 
Johnson-Shoyama program. It’s a joint program between the 
University of Saskatchewan and University of Regina. 
 
We have with us today Tyfanny Amy, Ana Maldonado. We 
have Ebrahim Hassanpour, Isabel Husid and her husband, 
Leonardo Husid. We have Mary Koropetska. As well we have 
Mohammad Mian, Sheryar Nasir, Kingsley Oriuwa, Darcy 
Overland, and Zixuan Zhao. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students represent the very best both from 
across Saskatchewan and around the world. They’re here doing 
their work in public policy so that no matter where their career 
takes them, they’re well prepared to help with public policy, 
locally and globally. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will ask all members of this Assembly to 
welcome these students from the Johnson-Shoyama program. 
They’re here for a dinner tonight, the Tansley Lecture with the 
Hon. John Manley. I’ll ask all members to welcome them to the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming these students 
from the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy 
here to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re a bright bunch of people, coming from all over the 
world and from right here in Saskatchewan to attend the public 
policy school. I should say as well, Mr. Speaker, that I know 
that the member from Meadow Lake, the Government House 
Leader, is a graduate of this school. The member from Regina 
Walsh Acres is currently a student in this program, as is myself 
and as the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, so we’re trying 
to see if some of those brains will rub off on the members here. 
 



5120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

But it’s good to see them. They’re here for the Tansley dinner 
as was recognized by the minister. And I’m also glad to report, 
Mr. Speaker, that one of my classmates is up there from public 
finance 802, and she’s finished her assignment for tonight so 
she can go to the dinner in good time. Anyway I join with the 
minister in welcoming all of these individuals to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce some special guests 
that are seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce four individuals, and I’d ask them to give a wave so 
that we can recognize who you are. First individual is Prabha 
Vaidyanathan, CEO [chief executive officer] of Certified 
General Accountants Association of Saskatchewan; Betty 
Hoffart, CEO of Certified Management Accountants of 
Saskatchewan; Shelley Thiel, CEO of The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan; and Regan Exner, member of the 
transitional steering committee, CPA [chartered professional 
accountant] Saskatchewan joint venture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals have been instrumental in the 
move to unify Saskatchewan’s three accounting professions — 
CA [chartered accountant], CMA [certified management 
accountant], and CGA [certified general accountant] — into a 
single governing body called CPA Saskatchewan. Later today, 
The Accounting Profession Act, the bedrock legislation of CPA 
Saskatchewan will receive third reading in the House. 
 
Please join me in welcoming these people to their legislature 
and in recognizing their efforts, along with the accounting 
profession as a whole, in bringing about this very successful 
merger. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
minister opposite and welcome these leaders within our 
accounting profession, leaders within our province, to their 
Assembly for a very special day for which they’ve been a big 
part of. I’d like to thank them for their leadership throughout 
this process, their engagement directly with the government, 
their engagement with the opposition to make sure that the 
changes were well understood, and their engagement in the 
democratic process with their members. 
 
It’s worthy to note that what our three bodies have 
accomplished by becoming one body is that they’re the first 
body in Canada to do so democratically. Of course Quebec 
made the shift first, but it was done through legislation, not 
democratically. And I want to say thank you to each and every 
one of these leaders from their respective designations for 
bringing together one body and, I believe, creating a 
tremendous opportunity for their members and accountants and 
businesses across Saskatchewan, not only for business in this 
province but also nationally and internationally. So I ask all 
members here in this Assembly to welcome these accounting 
leaders to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce somebody that has been introduced here before, a 
fellow from my home area, Mr. Aaron Nagy. Aaron’s, again, 
he’s been here a number of times. He’s very active in the 
community, a very well-known radio personality, very active 
actually in the Rhein Lions Club where he did a lot of work to 
help fundraise to cover some of the damages after that big 
windstorm in that area. So I’d ask all members to welcome 
Aaron to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join my colleague from Lakeview to recognize the Lakeview 
students that are here today and to especially recognize one 
young lady. Her name is Zoe Neiser. And Zoe may not know 
this, but I used to work with her mother — when she was about 
maybe that high, Mr. Speaker, or maybe even shorter — but I 
worked alongside of her mother, Vicky, for a number of years. 
And just to tell her that your mother was a very classy, gracious 
lady that worked very, very hard, and the fact that she taught 
me much as a minister. And I want to say to you that I wish you 
the very best in your future endeavours, and of the three girls, 
you are now my favourite because I haven’t met the other two. 
But I want to say first of all welcome to your Assembly. I wish 
you the very best, as I said earlier. And say hello to your mom 
and to your sisters as well. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the member from Yorkton in welcoming a special guest 
that’s in your gallery. So through you and to all members, 
welcome to Aaron Nagy. And of course, he’s a good friend of 
all working men and women in this province, particularly 
around the good work he did with Jimmy’s law. So I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Aaron to his Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite and the member from Yorkton in 
welcoming Aaron to the legislature. I remember well last year 
when we were going through the process of Jimmy’s law and 
recognizing issues of workplace safety, and he was a strong 
champion for that cause and was clearly somebody that was 
instrumental in the changes that were made that made late-night 
workplaces a safer . . . Certainly more work to be done, but I 
want to recognize and thank him for the work that he’s done 
and welcome him to the legislature today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
present a petition in support of education. And we know that 
education is one of the most vital services the government 
provides the citizens. And we know that this government has 
failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 
resources to prioritize delivery of educational excellence. And 



April 9, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5121 

we know that this government has failed to develop a real plan 
to close the Aboriginal education gap, to support English as an 
additional language students, support community schools and 
their communities and students. And we do know that we must 
build the best education system for today and for 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, that builds strong educational infrastructure to serve 
students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents and 
communities as it relates to the safety or the lack of safety on 
Dewdney Avenue because of the heavy-haul truck traffic. They 
call for the rerouting of that heavy-haul truck traffic, and they 
note that any further delays from that government is entirely 
unacceptable in addressing an issue and a problem created by 
that government. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many people of this good province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again we stand today to present petitions in reference to 
highway work needed throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 
petition on Highway 908, the highway that serves the 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to commit to repairing and 
upgrading Highway 908. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular 
page of the petition are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 
residents who have signed this from the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to our attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita in all of Canada and that Saskatchewan’s emissions 
have continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes and show no 
signs of decreasing, but slashing programs such as the Go 
Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficient 
program have set the province on a backwards course; and that 
since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced 
climate change funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per 
cent cut in the budget. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon, Maple Creek, and Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
 



5122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

97th Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ninety-seven 
years ago on this date the first wave of Canadian soldiers began 
their march through snow, barbed wire, and machine-gun fire to 
begin the assault which would capture Vimy Ridge. Into the 
battle went all four Canadian divisions, including four 
battalions recruited from Saskatchewan. Out of the battle arose 
a new nation, a Canada that would stand on its own capabilities 
internationally and take its place as a champion of freedom. 
 
The Canadian Corps, alongside their counterparts, captured 
more ground than any previous British offensive in the war, yet 
it came at a haunting cost — 3,598 would die among over 
10,000 Canadian casualties, including Private William 
Johnstone Milne, a farmer from Moose Jaw awarded the 
Victoria Cross after capturing two German guns. And in the 
words of his citation, having “undoubtedly saved the lives of 
many of his comrades.” 
 
Today the legacy of Private Milne and all soldiers of Vimy 
Ridge lives on in our Charter, in our Human Rights Code, and 
in every piece of legislation which sees debate in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sacrifice of our soldiers must never be 
forgotten. Let us celebrate their bequest by appreciating the 
freedoms they won and recommitting ourselves to peace and the 
rule of international law. I invite all members to join me in 
commemorating the battle of Vimy Ridge and all for which it 
stands. Lest we forget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member has 
noted, today marks the 97th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge. On this day each year, Canadians commemorate one of 
the most important military efforts in Canadian history. Indeed 
the battlefield of Vimy Ridge has been heralded as the 
birthplace in blood and fire of Canada as a nation. 
 
For us here today, it is hard to imagine the loss. The battle led 
to over 10,000 casualties, with 3,598 Canadian soldiers killed in 
action. The sacrifice, the determination, and the courage of 
Canadian troops as they put their lives on the line at Vimy 
Ridge cannot, must not be forgotten. We must remember those 
Canadian whose bravery contributed to the quality of life, to the 
democracy, to the freedom we enjoy today. 
 
This is part of our history that is too important to be overlooked, 
and I know we are all thankful for the efforts of the Vimy 
Foundation which has been at the heart of commemorative 
efforts. By educating the next generation, they have been 
fighting to ensure the preservation of the legacy and the 
importance of the Canadian record at Vimy Ridge and in the 
First World War. 
 
And as we turn our minds to the 100th anniversary of the 
beginning of the First World War, it is good to see the 
provincial government match the Saskatchewan War Memorial 
Foundation’s fundraising efforts to have 1,200 more 
Saskatchewan veterans properly recognized at the 
Saskatchewan War Memorial, allowing us to more fully pay 

and honour the immense debt of gratitude that is owed. 
 
On a day such as this we do well to remember the challenge 
from John McCrae to not break faith with those who have died. 
And especially on a day like today we must heed the call from 
McCrae that it is up to each generation to: 
 

Take up our quarrel with the foe: 
To you from failing hands we throw 
The torch; be yours to hold it high. 

 
Mr. Speaker, for those who paid that terrible price for our 
freedom, and for our Canada, at Vimy Ridge and beyond, we 
will hold that torch high. We will remember. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Day of Pink 
 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House to 
recognize today as Day of Pink, which is the international day 
against bullying. Our government is proud to team up with 
Canadian Red Cross to proclaim Day of Pink in Saskatchewan. 
More than 20,000 Saskatchewan residents will be wearing pink 
today to help raise awareness about the adverse effect of 
bullying so that we can all stand against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, around 250 Girl Guides from around Regina and 
in Regina will be marching to the legislative building tonight 
wearing pink to support the anti-bullying movement. Today we 
join the Girl Guides and many other groups across 
Saskatchewan to break the silence by standing up with the 
victims of bullying and by letting all bullies know that their 
actions will not be tolerated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in November 2013, our government released an 
action plan to address bullying and cyberbullying in schools, in 
communities, and online. Our 2014-2015 budget also allocated 
815,000 in funding to further support the recommendations of 
the action plan. Mr. Speaker, we believe that all children should 
have the safe, respectful environment to grow up in where 
bullying will not be tolerated. 
 
I ask all members to join me in supporting Day of Pink by 
wearing something pink today and standing up against bullying. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Red Cross Day of Pink is 
an opportunity for Canadians to rally together in solidarity with 
all those who face bullying, recognizing the resulting hurt and 
tragedy. We’re proud to see this issue represented in our 
legislature here today. It’s simply unacceptable that children are 
at risk of violence and abuse in their schools and communities. 
 
Today is a day to make a stand and refuse to allow this violence 
in our communities to continue. No form of abuse is acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker, and this campaign highlights that fact by rallying 
people of all ages to wear pink for the cause. We are proud to 
see how this campaign has taken hold in the province, involving 
over 20,000 youth from across the province last year. 



April 9, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5123 

For many this campaign provides much needed support, and the 
Red Cross has played a vital role in creating these supportive 
networks and working within communities year-round. Quite 
simply, we couldn’t be more thankful. 
 
Though many of us have done a part by wearing something 
pink, the goals undercutting this initiative run much deeper. 
Fighting bullying of all forms, including transphobia and 
homophobia, requires a firm commitment and actions every 
day. Though likely the most serious one affecting our youth, 
this type of abuse is unacceptable at work and in our 
communities. If we create intolerance for bullying in all 
spheres, it goes a long way to changing the culture and helps to 
create safe spaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to join with me in 
recognizing the importance of the Red Cross Day of Pink and to 
show solidarity by taking a stand against bullying and abuse 
every day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Final 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Carlton, but that’s okay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Sunday the Prince Albert AAA 
Mintos celebrated a dramatic 4-3 triumph over the Notre Dame 
Argos in the western regional midget AAA qualifying final 
game at the Art Hauser Centre. The win extended the team’s 
season as they are now off to Moose Jaw for the Telus Cup 
National Championship which is scheduled to begin on April 
21st. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was one of the best games played at the Art 
Hauser Centre this year by any team at any level. The Mintos 
came out and played their absolute best hockey for 60 minutes 
straight. Backed by a hometown crowd of 2,000 fans, P.A. 
[Prince Albert] got the game going early with a breakaway goal 
from Lance Yaremchuk. Early in the second, the Mintos upped 
their score again with Dakota Boutin scoring on an open net. 
 
Notre Dame’s Dillon Dube and Chance Longjohn got the Argos 
back on even terms before the end of the second period, setting 
the stage for a thrilling final 20 minutes. Both teams exchanged 
goals early in the third, but the Mintos came up on top with a 
game-winning goal from their captain, Teal Sobkowicz. It was a 
terrific game and one everyone in attendance is sure to 
remember for a long time. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t thank the parents, coaches, trainers, and 
other support staff who helped make it all possible, Mr. 
Speaker. And in closing, I’d like to congratulate the Prince 
Albert Mintos on their huge win and wish them all the very best 
at the Telus Cup in Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

Premier’s Commendation Award Winners 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. Yesterday the first 
Saskatchewan Premier’s Commendation Awards were 

presented to eight Saskatchewan citizens who have served their 
province or communities and often complete strangers. The 
recipients demonstrated extraordinary acts of bravery and 
dedicated public service putting their own well-being behind 
the lives and comfort of others. The order was created to 
acknowledge exemplary service or actions of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
The 2014 award recipients are, Luther High School in Regina 
for their heroic actions in the 2008 hostage incident; Constable 
Steve Enns of Estevan who saved four people from a house fire 
in 2012; Devin Knot and Brett Opikokew of Meadow Lake and 
Joshua Lasas of Flying Dust First Nation who together helped 
rescue a family of four from a submerged vehicle; Duane 
McKay of Regina for his work in the provincial flooding 
response in 2010 and ’11; Shelley Baldwin of Oxbow who has 
made more than 4,700 dresses for children in developing 
countries; and Dwight Siman, a constituent of mine here in 
Regina, who rescued a man from a burning vehicle last year. 
 
These citizens are heroes, Mr. Speaker, and we’re so fortunate 
to have them in our province. So I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in congratulating all eight recipients of the 
Premier’s Commendation Award, and thank them for all they 
have done to make Saskatchewan a better place for everyone. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Student Rally for Red Cross Day of Pink 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today I had the 
great opportunity to attend the student rally for Red Cross Day 
of Pink in Moose Jaw. 
 
This rally, which was hosted by RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] 
and K+S Potash, brought together over 400 students from both 
the Prairie South School Division and the Holy Trinity Catholic 
School Division to bring awareness about the impacts of 
bullying. 
 
Guest speakers Travis Price, co-founder of Pink Shirt Day, and 
Miranda Biletski, a Canadian wheelchair rugby player and RBC 
Olympian, spoke about their stories and personal experiences 
with bullying. This event also included several photo booths, 
with props for students to take their pictures and share their own 
anti-bullying messages. The student rally for Red Cross Day of 
Pink also took place in other areas of Saskatchewan, including 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the students are already doing their part 
to stand up against bullying. Vanier Collegiate has a 
Students4Action group which provides peer support to students 
who are victims of bullying, while also educating other schools 
about the impact of bullying. The Prairie South School Division 
is also participating in a new initiative called the Partners 
Against Violence “Be Someone” campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate these students 
on their efforts to eliminate bullying, and thank RBC and K+S 
for hosting the student rally for Red Cross Day of Pink. Thank 
you. 



5124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

[14:00] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Seniors’ and Long-Term Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — One year ago today, Carrie Klassen came to the 
legislature with significant concerns about seniors’ care. 
Carrie’s mom was in the Sunset facility, and at the time she had 
written to the Health minister about her concerns. His 
dismissive response was not acceptable to her, so she came to 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and helped put seniors’ care on the 
public agenda in a very big way. Carrie’s concerns included, 
Mr. Speaker, residents falling, being left unattended on toilets 
for hours, calls for help going largely unresponded to, and 
seniors not even receiving regular baths. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Carrie is back here today, one year later, 
because seniors’ care hasn’t improved in Saskatchewan. She’s 
seen a fair bit of talk from this government, Mr. Speaker, but 
not much action. And she’s seen this government, Mr. Speaker, 
continue to neglect the basics in seniors’ care. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the Premier: what does he have to say to Carrie 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly over the last year there has been a great deal of 
attention put to seniors’ care and long-term care, but as well as 
the entire continuum of care for seniors within Saskatchewan. 
Based on what took place a year ago and some of the feedback 
that we’d been receiving from individuals from across 
Saskatchewan, that’s what initiated a CEO tour of every single 
facility, all 156 facilities. That had not been done to this point. 
It resulted in a survey that family and resident councils could 
produce directly to the Minister of Health, which had not been 
put in place before. It also did include an in-year investment, an 
unprecedented investment into long-term care, of $10.04 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those dollars have been forwarded to the health regions. We 
are coming to the end of the reporting period which we’ve 
asked the health regions to report back. I can say to date we’ve 
had, through that experience, over 700 new pieces of equipment 
that were not in place in long-term care. And what we’ve said is 
that after that investment is received and completed, that we 
would evaluate it after that point. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, at the root of Carrie’s concerns is 
this government’s removal of minimum quality of care 
standards, its refusal to ensure appropriate staffing levels, and 
its failure to actually address the basics when it comes to 
seniors’ care. And Carrie is not alone, Mr. Speaker. Lynne 
Seabourne is back here today as well. She came to the 
legislature last May with concerns about her husband Adrian’s 
care. 
 
Carrie and Lynne are frustrated because they’ve seen so little 

real action from this government — a fair bit of talk, but not 
much action. Even after the CEO tour that the minister brags 
about, Mr. Speaker, when all the facilities put forward their 
urgent requests, this government rejected $8.5 million in urgent 
requests. So it’s no wonder why Carrie and Lynne are back here 
at the legislature today because this government, this 
government is still not taking seniors’ care seriously. My 
question to the Premier: what will it take for him to take it 
seriously and actually fix the basics in seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly we do take this issue very seriously. That’s why we 
announced a series of initiatives focused specifically on 
long-term care. As I mentioned before, the 10.04 million, I can 
tell members of the House that for instance, Regina 
Qu’Appelle, of those dollars, received $2.2 million. They are in 
the process of implementing what those dollars would be used 
to pay for. Some of that is on equipment, and particularly 
around food because one of the challenges, with particularly 
Sunset, was some concerns around food preparation and food, 
the different choices. And so that is rolling out now. And we’ll 
see the results of that and the effect that it has had on residents. 
 
But I think more importantly the training that’s going to be 
provided to the staff, knowing that we have increased staff in 
long-term care by 750 full-time equivalents in the last seven 
years, but they do need additional training. So Regina 
Qu’Appelle specifically received dollars to provide training for 
gentle persuasion approaches, as well as purposeful rounding. 
That’s being implemented and I think we’ll see some positive 
benefits from that as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Don Gunderson joined us earlier 
on this week because he had concerns about his wife’s care here 
in Regina, and to the minister’s credit he met with Don 
yesterday. But Don was not satisfied, Mr. Speaker, with what 
the minister had to say. Like Carrie and Lynne, Don wants this 
government to stop making excuses and to re-establish 
minimum care standards. He thinks this government’s excuse 
that it can’t have minimum care standards because it wants to 
deliver individualized care is complete nonsense. 
 
First of all, minimum care standards don’t preclude 
individualized care. But even more importantly, right now this 
government is not delivering individualized care. Not even 
close. My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: when will this 
government, when will they stop making excuses? When will 
they re-establish proper minimum care standards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to put on the record, as I have in the past, 
that we do in fact have minimum care standards within the 
long-term care system. It’s a 193-page document that outlines 
clearly the roles and responsibilities of the long-term care 
facilities around the personalized care that residents should be 
able to expect, Mr. Speaker. Certainly that is the case. 
 



April 9, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5125 

What we do not have, what we have removed, went back to the 
1950s which identified the hours of care or, in some cases, the 
20 minutes per day of care that some residents would receive. 
 
We think that this is a more appropriate way to provide care to 
those residents. We also think that — and I’m pleased that my 
colleagues had agreed — that we do need some additional 
dollars. That’s why $10 million was identified in mid-year last 
year, why we’ve also included $3.7 million in ongoing funding 
that will provide for staff in some cases and, as well, nearly $4 
million in equipment in this new budget that will go directly 
into long-term care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government removed from 
the regulations the baseline, the minimum care that families and 
residents could expect, Mr. Speaker. They go on about 
individualized care but if we listen to the families that are 
coming forward, individualized care is not occurring. 
 
What the Premier and the Health minister need to realize, Mr. 
Speaker, is that these are not isolated incidents. These represent 
many families who are struggling and whose loved ones do not 
have the quality of care that they deserve. And the 
government’s inaction over the last year is unacceptable. 
Individualized care is not happening. The basic needs are not 
being met. 
 
We keep hearing, Mr. Speaker, about short-staffing that 
sometimes means three workers are looking after 80 residents. 
That’s absolutely appalling, Mr. Speaker. That’s why people 
like Carrie, Lynne, and Don are passionate advocates for their 
loved ones and the many other seniors who are not receiving the 
care that they deserve here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
seniors, Mr. Speaker, deserve so much better. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is his government stubbornly 
dismissing the need for minimum care standards when it comes 
to seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I do want to . . . As I’ve said before in the past in this 
Chamber and outside the Chamber, we do have minimum care 
standards. I would refer the Leader of the Opposition to the 
Program Guidelines for Special-care Homes, 193-page 
document that is readily available on our website where it says, 
and I quote, “The standards set out within this manual are 
considered minimum standards, and must be adhered to.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have done over the last nearly seven 
years as government, we have increased, I think significantly, 
the level of employment, the level of care workers within 
long-term care, 750 full-time equivalents, knowing that the 
number of residents hasn’t changed much in that period, still 
roughly 8,700 residents. We know, Mr. Speaker, in some cases, 
particularly with those that have been diagnosed with dementia 
and other types of dementia-related diseases, that we do need 
some additional training like the gentle persuasion. We think 
that that will be helpful for those residents and for those staff 
members. And Regina is also implementing purposeful 

rounding hours. That will also be, I think, a benefit. But the 
dollars have just been invested and it’s going to take some . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there used to be two-hour 
guarantee per resident per day of care. This government, Mr. 
Speaker, removed that. We know the member from Melfort, 
Mr. Speaker, said 10 minutes of care was good. So we have a 
little bit of understanding how members on that side, Mr. 
Speaker, think the quality of care that seniors can expect, what 
level that should be at. What’s especially frustrating for people 
like Carrie, like Lynne, and like Don, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
government is more focused on its shiny pet projects as 
opposed to actually fixing the basics in seniors’ care. 
 
This government hasn’t met a fat cheque that they’re willing to 
sign . . . that they’re not willing to sign for lean, Mr. Speaker: 
$40 million going to one US [United States] consultant; $17 
million last year for kaizen promotion offices; $3,500 a day, 
Mr. Speaker, for Japanese senseis; and untold millions for 
health care workers to take training, Mr. Speaker, where they 
learn Japanese words and where they learn how to fold paper 
airplanes. This is where the priorities lie with members opposite 
as opposed to actually fixing the basics. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will his government admit 
that there’s a crisis, focus on the basics, and take real action as 
opposed to being focused on their shiny lean pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, had he read . . . First of 
all, the Leader of the Opposition, had he read the member from 
Melfort’s reply to the budget would have known that the 
member was referring to his own parents’ experience. It wasn’t 
an across-the-board type of characterization of what is 
happening everywhere in long-term care. It was specific to his 
own parents’ situation, and it was an egregious 
mischaracterization by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
On the second point, in terms of the two hours that the members 
opposite are speaking about and the Leader of the Opposition is 
speaking about, Mr. Speaker, the ministry did have the ability to 
conduct inspections to see whether or not those standards were 
being adhered to by the regional health authorities and 
individual long-term care facilities. However, Mr. Speaker, the 
ability for those inspections to be authorized by the Ministry of 
Health, that legislation was repealed in 2002 under the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — The minister should read the remarks, the full 
speech from the member of Melfort, and clearly will see that 
he’s talking about what seniors should be able to expect here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Carrie Klassen knows especially how ridiculous this 
government’s fascination is with its lean pet project. Carrie was 
actually invited to attend the engagement session for family 



5126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

members of people in long-term care back in December. She 
says the so-called engagement session, run by John Black and 
Associates, by the way, was more about promoting lean than it 
was about actually listening to people and actually listening to 
front-line health care workers and listening to families. So this 
government, Mr. Speaker, does not have a focus on the basics. 
And even when it’s supposedly engaging with patients, with 
family members, Mr. Speaker, it’s far more concerned with 
promoting its lean pet project than actually taking the steps that 
are required to give seniors in this province the dignity and the 
care that they deserve. 
 
My question is to the Premier: how on earth is this approach 
acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear to the 
Leader of the Opposition. If he had not read the member from 
Melfort . . . And I think it in all fairness to the member from 
Melfort, this is what he said: 
 

Mom and dad moved into a care home. I believe seven 
years ago they moved into a care home. And if somebody 
had told them at that time that they were going to spend 
two hours a day looking after mom and dad, I know how it 
would have gone. It would have gone five minutes of how 
are you doing this morning, Mary, Wes? How are you 
doing? And it would have been five minutes at night, the 
same thing. It would have been an hour and 50 minutes of 
mom saying, get away from me. I don’t need it. Stay away. 
You know, because you have a two-hour minimum. Now 
unfortunately, Mom needs more help and she gets it, well 
over two hours a day. 

 
That’s what the member from Melfort was saying. He was 
speaking specifically about his own parents, and I think that 
was an egregious mischaracterization by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Highway No. 123 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government keeps ignoring northern . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government keeps ignoring northern roads. Two days ago, 
students and staff from Cumberland House School were on 
Highway 123 and they were stuck because, according to the 
vice-principal, and I quote, “The road was in horrid condition. 
It’s about 18 inches of mud.” 
 
My colleague, the member from Cumberland, has stood in this 
Assembly repeatedly to demand that this government properly 
repair and maintain Highway 123 to Cumberland House. But 
this government has failed to get the job done. 
 

So once again to the Highways minister: why won’t this 
government take the problem on Highway 123 and fix it and 
take the whole issue of safety seriously, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 
aware of the issue on 123 and the recent issue around the school 
bus. Mr. Speaker, if you look back on last year on 123, we put a 
little over $2 million in. That road going into Cumberland 
House has a lot of water on each side. There are lower parts. 
We were able to elevate that grade, Mr. Speaker, $2 million last 
year. 
 
The work didn’t get completed. There’ll be $1 million going in 
this year, Mr. Speaker. In fact where the bus was stuck was 
right where the construction needs to start. The contractor was 
up there as of Monday, Mr. Speaker. The road has been fixed 
up. There’s more work to be done. There needs to be grade 
elevations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s unfortunate that that incident happened, but having said 
that, Mr. Speaker, this government has acted on 123. We’ve put 
at least $3 million into that road after this year as well as 
continual maintenance from the people from Cumberland 
House, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are acting on northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the vice-principal says 
the roads are now worse than ever, worse than ever. And he 
says, “Nobody in their right mind in Saskatchewan would drive 
on that highway.” And, Mr. Speaker, I would rather take the 
vice-principal’s words on the condition of that highway any day 
of the week over the minister’s rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. People 
are tired of this and they’re angry because this is not only a 
major safety concern, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also a problem for 
ambulances that need to respond to emergencies in that 
particular community. 
 
So once again to the Highways minister: why won’t this 
government take the problem on Highway 123 seriously and do 
something substantial to fix the problem once and for all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the opportunity of spending a little over a day in 
Cumberland House and meeting with the mayor and council of 
Cumberland House, also the band council for the Cumberland 
House Cree Nation. I drove 123. We went on a long drive down 
123, Mr. Speaker. We knew that there is more work to be done 
and that they are very appreciative of the work that we had 
done. And there is more work to be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a letter that we received 
on February 14th: 
 



April 9, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5127 

On behalf of the Northern Village Council and the citizens 
of Cumberland House, we hereby express our deepest 
appreciation for the work that you have been doing to 
maintain highway 123 and the shortcut to The Pas, 
Manitoba this winter season. We applaud your hard work 
and dedication and that has kept this community safe 
during travels on these highways. 

 
Signed by the mayor, Valerie Deschambeault, Mr. Speaker. We 
do take these issues seriously. That’s why we put money into 
this road. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to make matters worse for the 
students stuck in 18 inches of mud on Highway 123 — 18 
inches of mud — they had no cell service in that area, so 
students were forced to use a piece of cardboard and some 
lipstick to make a sign to signal for help. That’s what’s 
happening to the students on the road to Cumberland House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s the oldest community in Western Canada, a very proud 
community, and all these people want, all the people of 
Cumberland House want are safe and dependable roads to travel 
on, for their children to travel on, Mr. Speaker. But this 
government keeps failing to get the job done. So once again to 
the minister: when will your government finally make Highway 
123 a real priority and make a substantial commitment to that 
highway? When will he do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered the 
question regarding 123. I’ve met with the council and the Cree 
Nation, Mr. Speaker. We’ve invested money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we do have to do though is look at an 
overall record of spending in the North under this government 
over our past four years . . . seven years, I should say, compared 
to the seven years previous when that member had a short stay 
as the Highways minister. Mr. Speaker, spending is up 
approximately $60 million, comparing their seven years to our 
seven years. That’s an increase of 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in 
northern Saskatchewan. So we have worked hard to address 
those issues. Yes, there is more to do. I certainly saw that when 
I was on the tour. 
 
But I find it really interesting, Mr. Speaker. I spent Monday 
evening in committee for three and a half hours, Mr. Speaker, 
and that member opposite, the Highways critic, Mr. Speaker, 
after three and a half hours didn’t ask one question on a 
highway south of the northern authority, Mr. Speaker. 
Absolutely shameful. It shows the absolute lack of respect for 
rural Saskatchewan when they don’t even have one highway in 
southern Saskatchewan they have a concern about. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Travel Expenses 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked a lot of questions 

over the last week over the actions and the expenses of the 
Minister of Social Services and the Deputy Premier, but we 
haven’t received many answers. And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
we saw the Premier rummaging through decades-old files and 
slinging unfounded accusations. Now I don’t know, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier bothered to pick up the phone and talk 
to the former premier, former legislator, and former government 
officials before he threw around the accusations. But I’ve 
contacted them, and they say the Premier’s claims are 
inaccurate and that they paid any personal aspects in cash 
upfront. 
 
But the fact, Mr. Speaker, we have had to push so hard to get 
any answers on the actions of the Minister of Social Services 
and the Deputy Premier, combined with the Premier’s 
ridiculous antics yesterday, Mr. Speaker, underscores the need 
for an independent review of ministerial expenses and the 
cabinet secretary’s expenses. My question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker: will he commit to an independent review today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
that Mr. Cline has indicated that he paid back his June tour 
through Paris by himself. But what remains outstanding, Mr. 
Speaker, is the outstanding bill for $1,900 for a car service 
while these gentlemen were in Paris for five meetings over the 
course of three days. That remains outstanding. That has been 
covered by the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would ask the member opposite why a car service in 
London was completely unacceptable but a car service for the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] in Paris is completely acceptable. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t agree that the car service was 
acceptable for our members, and that’s why it has been returned 
to the taxpayers of this province. And that is exactly why, Mr. 
Speaker, we are implementing an open and accountable process 
for listing government travel, purpose of the trip, the value of 
the trip, the cost of the trip, and staff members’ costs that go 
along with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if they have a new-found belief in 
being open and accountable and transparent, then there should 
be no problem with committing to an independent review of 
ministerial expenses and that of the cabinet secretary. I’m 
pleased that we will see some changes in reporting, Mr. 
Speaker, in October, but that’s not good enough. We’ve been 
asking questions on this for a week, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
received very few answers. And as the truth, Mr. Speaker, has 
slowly trickled out, it’s only after many questions, after much 
digging, and after much pushing. 
 
We know about two significant expense problems with the 
current ministers, both occurred in just one month, last June. 
And the Premier wants us to believe, Mr. Speaker, that he’s 
reviewed the last seven years of his ministers’ expenses and 
there’s nothing else to see. He wants us to believe that the only 
problems that occurred were two incidents back in June. Well 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, have a tough time believing 
that. So to the Premier: will he commit to an independent 
review today? 



5128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Premier 
was very clear when the people of this province gave us the 
honour of forming government in 2007 that when mistakes 
happened . . . And, Mr. Speaker, mistakes will happen. We’re 
people. Mistakes will happen. But when those mistakes happen, 
we will acknowledge those mistakes and take steps to make 
sure that those mistakes don’t happen in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s exactly what our government has done. 
There were incorrect expenses that were paid for by the 
taxpayers of this province and those have been repaid. That is 
the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would point out to the member opposite, if he wants to 
worry about somebody’s attitude, in 1997, and I quote from The 
StarPhoenix article and it says, “Economic development 
minister Dwain Lingenfelter says there is no need to force 
cabinet ministers to prepare a report outlining the costs and 
benefits of any trips they take overseas.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same old NDP attitude that we saw for 
years. There’s a reason why the NDP are sitting over there with 
nine members, Mr. Speaker, because this is their attitude when 
it comes to taxpayers’ money in our province, and I would 
commit, Mr. Speaker, that it is still their attitude considering 
they’re defending a car service in Paris. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — 1997, Mr. Speaker: what a sad commentary 
that this Premier, that this Premier would give the 
Saskatchewan legislature our very own Paul Calandra, Mr. 
Speaker, as they try to deflect. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, a lot more than simply the unnecessary 
limo expenses. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Social Services spent $19,000 on a trip that even self-described 
conservative commentators are saying looks like a personal trip 
that was made up, Mr. Speaker, going with a family member 
and a friend with a little bit of work sprinkled in, in order to 
give the bill to taxpayers. And we haven’t received proper 
answers on that, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people deserve 
better answers about the minister’s trip to Ghana. They deserve 
better answers, Mr. Speaker, on knowing how their tax dollars 
were used. 
 
The independent review, Mr. Speaker, should at least cover the 
current ministers because we have two very glaring examples of 
problems going back into June. But, Mr. Speaker, it can go back 
to 1991. Mr. Speaker, if the Premier wants it to go back to 
1982, that is fine. My question to the Premier: will he agree to 
an independent review of ministers’ expenses today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I have 
stated already this afternoon, we recognize that mistakes were 
made, that there were incorrect expenses that were billed to the 
taxpayers of this province. We acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, 
and we have repaid those. And we are taking further steps when 
it comes to openness and accountability to make sure that the 
taxpayers of this province know on a biannual basis what the 

cost of a trip was, what the value of a trip was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not apologize for international travel that 
this government takes. We have travelled the world selling 
Saskatchewan’s story, and we have seen the benefits of that 
travel, Mr. Speaker. We have increased investment. We have 
more people coming here all the time. We have professionals 
coming to our province every single year, Mr. Speaker. Our 
population is through the roof compared to what we would ever, 
have ever expected under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these trips have value. And while the NDP can 
have the sad, old NDP attitude and not want to celebrate our 
success, Mr. Speaker, that will not be our attitude on this side of 
the House. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Western Livestock Price Insurance Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 
was joined by representatives of the Saskatchewan livestock 
industry to make an important announcement about livestock 
price insurance in the province. 
 
The livestock industry is a vital part of our agriculture industry 
and our economy, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’ve made 
livestock producers a priority for our government. It’s also is a 
key part of our Saskatchewan plan for growth. 
 
Livestock producers have been faced with challenges over the 
past few years. They have seen ups and downs in the markets 
due to circumstances far beyond their control. Mr. Speaker. For 
years I’ve been hearing from livestock producers about the risks 
and challenges of marketing cattle and hogs, and I’ve 
experienced the same thing myself. 
 
After listening to producers, we collaborated with the federal 
government and the four Western provinces to create a Western 
Canada model for livestock price insurance. This past January I 
joined Western Canadian provincial agriculture ministers and 
the federal agriculture minister to announce Western livestock 
price insurance would be available this spring for cattle and hog 
producers in Western Canada. Since that time we’ve been 
working to get the program up and running for Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Today I was pleased to announce Saskatchewan hog and cattle 
producers can now apply for insurance and purchase policies 
through the Western livestock price insurance program. This is 
the first time a program like this has been available to producers 
in Saskatchewan. The program insures producers against an 
unexpected drop in price over a defined period of time and is 
market driven. Producers can purchase price insurance options 
for their calves, fed cattle, feeder cattle, and hogs. In 
Saskatchewan the program will be delivered through 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
To access the program, producers can contact their local crop 
insurance office. Livestock price insurance is a cost-effective 
option for Saskatchewan producers and we encourage producers 



April 9, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5129 

to learn more about this new business risk management tool. 
This program will help to grow our industry and attract new, 
young producers to it. It will also create a level playing field for 
all producers in Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
significant initiative for our industry and will benefit the cattle 
and hog producers for years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to thank the minister for providing his comments in 
advance. I also would like to commend the Western prairie 
provinces for putting together this livestock price insurance 
program. It’s certainly something that we’ve been calling for. 
And given the risks that the livestock producers have been 
going through in the last, many years, Mr. Speaker, it’s this type 
of business risk management tool that’s appropriate. And it’s 
something that we are pleased to see the Western prairie 
provinces co-operating on and certainly working hard with the 
federal level of government to ensure that producers have 
access to this type of risk management tool at their fingertips. 
 
So certainly we want to see anything that can help producers 
move forward and have sort of that level playing field that the 
minister referred to to help them when they’re making their 
business decisions and to grow their own, produce their herds, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So by and large, we’re pleased to see this program being 
introduced finally for the producers, and we look forward to 
them being able to access this important tool. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
112, The Accounting Profession Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive Committee of the Whole. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee this afternoon, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — We should have waited for orders of the day. 
Sorry. Orders of the day. Why is the Leader of the Opposition 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to seek 
leave under rule 61 to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. I’ve already outlined the issue in question period with 
regard to concerns related to the travel expenses of current 
cabinet ministers and their delegations. 
 
This Assembly should request that the Provincial Auditor 
undertake an investigation. We should allow the Auditor to 
determine the parameters . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Under rule 51, a member is to request leave 
by giving a very short introduction — very short — without 
debating points of what the motion is, and the context, the text 
of the motion. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Investigation of Travel Expenses 
 
Mr. Broten: — We should allow the auditor to do an 
investigation, to make recommendations on necessary changes, 
and to allow proper public reporting. If there is unanimous 
consent to do so, I’d be prepared to move a motion to that 
effect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Orders of the day. I 



5130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2014 

recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5119 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5119 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5119 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5119 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5119 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5120 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5120 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5121 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5121 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5121 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5121 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 97th Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5122 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5122 
 Day of Pink 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5122 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5122 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Final 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5123 
 Premier’s Commendation Award Winners 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5123 
 Student Rally for Red Cross Day of Pink 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5123 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Seniors’ and Long-Term Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5124 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5124 
 Highway No. 123 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5126 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5126 
 Travel Expenses 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5127 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5127 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Western Livestock Price Insurance Program 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5128 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5129 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5129 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5129 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Investigation of Travel Expenses 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5129 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


