




















































Hansard: April 17, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, APRIL 17, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5203 

 April 17, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 

extended introduction this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

colleagues. Earlier this week we presented Saskatchewan’s 

Volunteer Medal to nine very deserving citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan. Today I’d like to introduce another 

outstanding volunteer from our province, a global volunteer, 

Mr. Speaker. With us in the west gallery is Andrew Wahba. 

We’ll get Andrew to give us a wave, please . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . In the Speaker’s gallery, thank you. 

 

And he is joined today by his mom. Susan is here and his 

girlfriend, Monica Pukas. He’s also joined by his good friend, 

originally from Estevan as well and currently the deputy 

minister for Intergovernmental Affairs for the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Wes Jickling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Andrew is a former treasury board analyst with 

the province of Saskatchewan, and we all know how much fun 

that job is, to scrutinize the expenditures of government to make 

sure that the province remains on track. Well he’s taken some 

time from that kind of work, Mr. Speaker, to do a little bit of 

travelling and a lot of volunteer and community work. 

 

One of the places, Mr. Speaker, he’s travelled to is Ladakh in 

the Himalayas, in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. 

Ladakh is a long way obviously from the province of 

Saskatchewan, but it has at least one thing in common with the 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s a bit of a hotbed for hockey in 

India. In Ladakh, Mr. Speaker, they claim to be home to many 

of the players on India’s men’s national hockey team. 

 

Unfortunately though, there’s not enough equipment to go 

around to make sure that all who are interested can participate 

fully. So Andrew decided to do something about that from right 

here in Saskatchewan. Last year he launched a project called 

Hockey in the Himalayas through the True Travellers Society, 

an organization that he set up to connect people with volunteer 

opportunities around the world. 

 

Andrew put out a call for donations on social media. He 

organized a fundraiser at O’Hanlon’s Pub right here in the 

capital city. And as they usually do, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan responded. Andrew collected 28 

bags of new equipment and more than 100 sticks. The 

equipment has been delivered, and today there are a lot of 

happy kids in Ladakh playing hockey with new skates and 

sticks from the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we just wanted to bring him into his Assembly today to say 

thank you for his public service, but even more importantly, 

thank you for this wonderful act of generosity to bring hockey 

equipment to the Himalayas and to support Canada’s support in 

that distant land to support those kids who want to play. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 

Andrew, but also to welcome him here today to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Premier in welcoming and congratulating Andrew 

Wahba here today. And the Premier . . . It’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. About a million years ago I had the opportunity of 

serving as a roommate with Andrew at a French language 

bursary in Trois-Rivières. So I don’t know if the Premier’s 

interested in any French language tips that Andrew might be 

able to bring along, but certainly he’s got that stick in the bag as 

well. 

 

It’s really good to see Andrew here today in his Legislative 

Assembly, joined by his mother and Monica, girlfriend. The 

Wahba family is a pretty amazing bunch. And in terms of what 

they not just have given to the province in terms of Andrew’s 

mother and father, the great service that they gave to the 

province in many ways, but certainly throughout Estevan lo 

those many years, but the way that that next generation is 

carrying it on. And certainly Andrew, the work that he does in 

the province and the world as one of those True Travellers and 

the latest iteration being the Hockey in the Himalayas, it’s an 

amazing thing. 

 

And it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, because there’s an 

individual with a great mind, great heart, and putting that to use 

not just for people here in Saskatchewan but right around the 

world. So it’s a real pleasure to join with the Premier in 

welcoming and congratulating Andrew Wahba here today in the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure and honour to introduce an outstanding Saskatchewan 

citizen, and someone who has been very dedicated to this 

province over the past half a decade. He’s led a truly 

exceptional life. Dr. James E. Christopher. Could you give us a 

wave? There. Excellent. 

 

Dr. Christopher was born in Philadelphia. At a young age, he 

moved to Jamaica where he did his primary and high school, 

returning back to the United States to find work after high 

school. He worked as a farm labourer before he joined the US 

[United States] military. He served in Europe in the post-war 

occupation. 



5204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

When he was discharged from the armed forces, Mr. Speaker, 

he started working in the manufacturing industry and taking 

night classes towards his goal of geology. He ultimately 

graduated from Columbia University with a degree in geology, 

went on to Ohio State where he got his Ph.D. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when he graduated from Ohio State in 1959, he looked north 

and accepted a job here in Saskatchewan. He said when he 

crossed the border, he was coming through Estevan that was 

having a bit of a oil boom in 1959, and that was a fairly good 

sign for a geologist moving north. 

 

He said that Regina had 90,000 people when he moved here, 

and Ohio State had a football stadium that held 85,000 people, 

so it was a bit of a change for him and his wife, Dora, and their 

one son. 

 

Through his time in Saskatchewan with the geological survey, 

Dr. Christopher published several landmark studies that have 

aided the understanding and development of several of our 

prolific oil fields here in Saskatchewan. These landmark 

studies, Mr. Speaker, monographs in 1961 on the Devonian and 

Mississipian transition beds, in 1964 on the middle Jurassic 

rocks of Western Saskatchewan, in 1974 the upper Jurassic and 

lower crustaceous of Western Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I didn’t recognize a lot of the titles here but they 

reflect very much on the oil pools that we are developing today 

on the Bakken, on the gas fields in Western Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and the prosperity that our oil industry has today is 

very much thanks to the work that was done here, and these 

reports are still the basis of what we’re finding today. 

 

He was honoured in 1989 as a member of the Saskatchewan 

oilmen’s hall of fame and he retired in 1987, Mr. Speaker. That, 

Mr. Speaker, would be a very impressive career. But as Mr. 

Harvey would say, the rest of the story is, following his 

retirement he continued to serve our province. He continues to 

go to work every day, still to this day providing more research 

to the geological record here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, he received in 2011 the R.J.W. Douglas Medal for 

geology and, Mr. Speaker, is recognized as a mentor in the 

geological world and will continue to serve our province. So if 

all members would help me welcome and thank this great 

Saskatchewan citizen and welcome him to his legislature here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind members, if they wish 

to give extended introductions, please ask for leave or, better 

yet, do it as a member’s statement. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the minister opposite and welcome Dr. Christopher to his 

Assembly. What a remarkable life that was just recounted to all 

of us here in this Assembly. And the service and experiences of 

Dr. Christopher seem to be incredibly rich, and certainly your 

contributions to our province have been incredibly rich. Your 

continued service is important. Thank you so much for your life 

of service, your continued service. It’s a pleasure to welcome 

you to your Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce, I guess on the last day of her legislative internship 

program working with myself, would be Ms. Kaytlyn Criddle. 

Kaytlyn, from my perspective, it’s been an absolute pleasure 

working with Kaytlyn. She’s come to this service with a 

remarkable amount of experience from an international 

perspective, from an educational perspective, with many 

sporting accomplishments to date, and continues to have many 

of those accomplishments as well. 

 

What I’ve observed and what I’ve witnessed first-hand working 

with Kaytlyn is that she’s an incredibly intelligent person, 

someone who’s committed and caring. Someone who’s in fact 

an independent and critical thinker, both within our province 

and the world around her. Someone who’s an incredibly hard 

worker, someone with a great sense of humour, and someone I 

know that will have remarkable accomplishments ahead of her. 

And I just hope that Saskatchewan is blessed to have her service 

in different ways moving forward. 

 

I can say that the time working with Kaytlyn, she’s had 

experiences from writing and researching to being out with 

community events and to school community groups. She 

actually played in the caucus hockey game, Mr. Speaker, and 

has been involved as a coach in the Rosemont Outdoor Hockey 

League, involved in meetings in formal ways with 

Saskatchewan stakeholders in various areas. 

 

What I’d like to say to the entire Assembly is it’s been a 

pleasure working with Ms. Criddle, and certainly I wish her 

well moving forward. And I ask all members to thank her for 

her service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce some constituents that are in your 

gallery. I’ll just ask them to give a little wave when I call their 

names. With them up there is Rhonda and Jim Cooper from the 

town of Watrous. With them also is Gwen Deneiko from the 

town of Watrous and Jaz Lin Deneiko. 

 

Now with the four people up there is Salome Glaser. She’s an 

exchange student from Switzerland and she’s staying with 

Coopers, a grade 11 student that is going to Watrous High 

School. She’s going to be spending a year here, and the Coopers 

have been taking her all over Saskatchewan, showing her the 

sights of this beautiful province. And I know that she’s been 

enjoying them, and I hope she enjoys what she sees today in her 

first day at the Legislative Assembly here. So to you and 

through you and to all the members, I want to welcome those 

people, those members and constituents to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature 50 students from Sheldon Williams Collegiate. 

These students are in social studies 10, social studies 30, and 

indigenous studies 30. They’re sitting in the east gallery, and 

they’re accompanied by their teachers, Jennie Davies, Delaine 

Anderson, Al Neufeld, and Kayla Bilokury. And I ask all 

members to welcome them to the Assembly. Thank you. 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5205 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the House, it gives me great pleasure 

again to introduce my legislative intern, Dustan Hlady, on his 

last day working with me, which I’m kind of sad about. 

 

It’s always an interesting journey. This has been my third year 

to have a legislative intern. And you always start wondering 

exactly how it’s going to work out, and it’s been such a positive 

experience every year. And working with Dustan has been no 

exception to that rule. 

 

He is thoughtful and insightful and an incredibly hard worker. 

The one thing that I really appreciated about him, at the very 

beginning of our relationship I asked him, what is it that you 

would like to do or take from this? And what he offered me on 

that first day was, well what can I do to help you in your work? 

Which is very appreciated as a member of a nine-member 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Dustan and I had an opportunity . . . Or some of the things that 

he did for me: he did a great piece of research on home care, he 

wrote member statements, he helped me prep for estimates, he 

accompanied me on meetings. And I lament that we only had 

one opportunity to spend some . . . just one occasion in 

Saskatoon where he joined me at the Westside community 

clinic which is in my colleague from Saskatoon Centre’s riding 

but serves mine as well. And I’m glad we got to see that and to 

have lunch at the Park Cafe. 

 

So with that I’d ask all members to welcome Dustan to the 

legislature and give him a hand for his contribution to this 

sitting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join the Premier in welcoming the Wahbas to the 

Legislative Assembly today. The Wahbas have always been 

very well respected within the city of Estevan and it’s an 

absolute pleasure to have them here today as well as Wes 

Jickling, a very well-renowned family in Estevan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 

laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the 

Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 

health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 

for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we 

know that the privatization of health care laundry will put 

patient care at risk as health regions lose direct control over 

health care laundry services. And we know that the 

privatization of health care laundry will mean that fair-wage 

jobs will be replaced with poverty wages, and public 

accountability would be lost. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in 

the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. 

 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayers’ dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 

over laundry and thereby will have significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 

outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue and the need to reroute 

heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. They note that 

any further delays by that government is entirely unacceptable 

in addressing a problem, a challenge, an issue created by that 

government. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action, as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of city centre, to ensure the safety 

and well-being of communities, families, residents, and 

users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m very pleased to stand in my place today to present a 

petition on homes in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

as we all know, this government callously cut the program of 

the rental purchase option program and really affected many 

working families. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



5206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 

Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 

for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from all throughout Saskatchewan and this particular page, Mr. 

Speaker, are people that are primarily from Beauval, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And this 

is a petition that’s opposed to government cuts to the harness 

racing industry. The undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 

in 2012 the government stubbornly cut the grants for Yorkton’s 

harness racing industry, the government’s failed to properly 

listen or consult with the residents of Yorkton, and whereas this 

government’s cuts towards harness racing will continue to 

negatively impact breeders, trainers, and other employees, as 

well as destructively impact the economic spinoffs of the 

harness racing industry. And in the prayer that reads as follows, 

the petitioners: 

 

Respectively request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan may be pleased to call on the government to 

immediately reinstate the grant funding for harness racing 

in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Yorkton 

and Ebenezer, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Messages of Hope 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, for many Saskatchewan people 

this is a time to celebrate faith, hope, and renewal. Jews are in 

the midst of observing the festival of Passover, recalling the 

story of their exodus from slavery in Egypt. The story of 

Passover is one of overcoming oppression through faith and 

through courage. It’s an inspiring story of hope that has been 

shared for thousands of years. 

 

At the same time, Christians will celebrate Easter and recall the 

story of Jesus’ life, his incredible sacrifice, and his resurrection. 

It’s the story of the power of grace and redemption and 

reconciliation, a story of hope triumphing over despair and love 

conquering all. 

 

Passover of course holds special meaning for Jews and Easter 

for Christians. But I’m sure everyone can identify with 

elements of each of these stories for they remind us that out of 

defeat can come victory and out of darkness can come light. 

 

So to all Jews observing the festival of Passover and to all 

Christians celebrating Easter, I wish a very meaningful and 

joyful celebration. And to all Saskatchewan people, I wish a 

great long weekend filled with family and friends and focused 

on all the things that matter most to all of us. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Easter Greetings 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Easter 

weekend is upon us and, although many see it as a commercial 

holiday, Christians worldwide recognize the celebration as the 

defining events of Christianity. Tomorrow is Good Friday, the 

day we remember when Jesus the Christ was crucified. On that 

day about 2,000 years ago, as he freely gave his life, the earth 

quaked, the sky went black, the curtain in the temple tore. Upon 

these events, as Jesus hung on that cross, even a Roman officer 

said, truly this was the Son of God. 

 

Christians believe that in this ultimate act of love, Jesus took 

the sin of all mankind on himself and our salvation is now a free 

gift because of his actions and the cross. John 15:13 says, 

“Greater love has no man than he lay down his life for his 

friends.” 

 

But that’s not the end of the story. Jesus stated to the religious 

leaders of the time, tear down this temple and I will raise it up 

in three days — a comment that in part led to his death. But he 

didn’t mean the actual temple in Jerusalem. He was speaking of 

his own body that he was willing to sacrifice for mankind. 

 

This Sunday is Easter and we celebrate the resurrection of the 

Saviour, Jesus Christ. He did what he said and was raised from 

death on the third day. Many of his followers saw him that day; 

however, over the next 40 days, over 500 people including 

political, religious, military, and community leaders are 

documented to have seen and interacted with Jesus alive before 

his ascension into heaven. It’s the good news, the most amazing 

event in history, Mr. Speaker. May everyone have a blessed and 

happy Easter. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

New Arena Opens at Southend 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the community of Southend 

has always been passionate about the game of hockey. Adults 

and kids have been coming together on the south shore of 

Reindeer Lake to play shinny for generations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the community will no longer have to play 

outside. At the opening it was announced that the new rink 

would be named Henry Cook Memorial Arena after a dedicated 

community member who devoted his time to maintaining the 

old rink. The dedication of parents and local volunteers has 

always been a cornerstone in Southend, and I can’t wait to see a 

lot more great hockey talent coming out of the woodwork. 

 

On March 21st the community held a great ceremony at the 

Reindeer Lake School gymnasium, where we were treated to a 

traditional fish fry. I would like to acknowledge the leadership 

of Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, especially Southend 

councillors Simon Jobb, Kevin Morin, who were instrumental 

in developing the arena. The community worked alongside the 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5207 

builders of Norseman Structures to develop the project. 

 

Many past coaches and leaders attended the event, including 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-chief 

Simon Bird who calls Southend his home. PAGC [Prince Albert 

Grand Council] Grand Chief Ron Michel was also in attendance 

and donated 15,000 to the rink fund on behalf of the Prince 

Albert Grand Council. There was no funds allocated from the 

province or federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the people of Southend 

for the efforts to provide a safe place for our youth to play 

hockey and for those who supported the community to making 

this rink possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the House today to acknowledge that our province has 

proclaimed April 13th to 19th as Emergency 

Telecommunicators Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan joins the rest of Canada to commend the work 

being done by all of our emergency telecommunicators. The 

people of the province depend on the dedication and expertise 

of these professionals and they represent the first point of 

contact when a citizen dials 911, and are often the first people 

we turn to in a time of crisis. 

 

Our emergency dispatchers from police, fire, and emergency 

medical services are a critical lifeline to aid and assist for all our 

residents. They are that calm and reassuring voice on the other 

end of the line when we are at our most vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night I attended the 12th annual 

Telecommunicator of the Year awards banquet on behalf of the 

Minister of Government Relations. And I would like to extend 

our congratulations to this year’s honourees. 

 

Saskatchewan is a great place to be and a safe place to be 

because of the dedication of all emergency telecommunicators 

and emergency services personnel in the province. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask that all members join me in thanking all of our emergency 

telecommunicators for the work that they do each and every 

day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it was a night of 

achievement recognition in Moose Jaw as the business 

community celebrated its 13th annual Business Excellence 

Awards last night in Moose Jaw. 

 

Hundreds of business entrepreneurs, employees, friends, and 

family enjoyed a gallant evening showcasing business 

achievement. Mr. Speaker, it was intriguing to see the dozens of 

new entrepreneurs, expanded business ventures and 

innovations, heritage, culture, utilization of green practices, and 

pioneer award nominees as a testimony of the healthy business 

climate in our friendly city. 

 

In all, 45 businesses were nominated in 12 categories, including 

the Business Leader of the Year awarded to Greg Simpson of 

Simpson Seeds for three generations of production and world 

marketing of agricultural products. 

 

The Business of the Year is selected from all nominees and the 

award went to the Grant Hall for its restoration of an abandoned 

building on Main Street, reviving this landmark to a stunning 

hotel-restaurant complex of elegance and glamour and historical 

design, respecting the environment and the technical upgrades 

like geothermal heating. 

 

The Business Excellence Awards reflect the positive attitude of 

a progressive city in our growing province, Mr. Speaker. 

Congratulations to the nominees, the winners, and all the 

businesses for their leadership and accomplishment in making 

Moose Jaw a city of business pride. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Contract Extension for Rider Quarterback 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, more and more people are 

choosing our province as the best place to work, live, and play. 

In that light I’d like to take this opportunity to extend 

congratulations to Darian Durant who has chosen to make 

Saskatchewan his home for the foreseeable future. Yesterday 

the Riders announced a multi-year extension that will keep 

Darian Durant in Rider green for years to come. 

 

Darian has emerged as one of the CFL’s [Canadian Football 

League] biggest stars at the most important position on the 

field. In six seasons as a starter, he has led the team to three 

Grey Cups, and of course last year the Riders won it all. 

 

Over the last several seasons he has lived here full-time so he 

could become more involved in our community, and of course 

also prepare for the upcoming seasons. The Riders have also 

recently locked up key personnel, general manager Brendan 

Taman, and head coach Corey Chamblin. 

 

Like our province, it wasn’t that long ago — and I remember 

those days — that the Roughriders had great difficulty in 

attracting free agents and retaining their key players. Now our 

province is attracting and keeping people here, and the 

Roughriders are the flagship franchise of the league and the one 

that everybody wants to play for. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder Darian fits in so well in 

Saskatchewan. Yesterday he made it clear his priority wasn’t 

about himself, but about stability and what was best for the 

team as a whole. Those are values you can find right across this 

province. As the Roughriders get ready for training camp, I ask 

all members to join me in wishing Darian and the team all the 

best in the upcoming season. Thank you. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



5208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

Support for Culture, Sport, and Recreation 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s taken 

a while but the people of Saskatchewan may have finally gotten 

a glimpse of NDP [New Democratic Party] common sense 

policy. On Tuesday, April 15th, the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana expressed her reservations regarding the funding of 

volunteer-run groups. She said, and I quote: 

 

I guess the other thing for me is it’s always been a concern 

that the lottery dollars go to culture, sport, and rec. And 

why not have the lottery dollars go to the Ministry of 

Agriculture and have the culture, sport, and rec be 

supported by taxpayers’ dollars rather than gambling 

dollars? 

 

Mr. Speaker, sport, culture, and recreation is one of the most 

powerful tools this province has to improve quality of life of 

our children and families. Mr. Speaker, for the year ending 

March 31st, 2013, approximately $53.3 million was available to 

distribute to sport, culture, and recreation organizations. 

Approximately 1,200 organizations are directly funded and 

these in turn support more than 1,200 local community 

organizations. 

 

To the Leader of the Opposition: where is the common sense in 

stripping volunteer-run organizations of over $53 million? Will 

he stand in this House and clarify his party’s new position on 

scrapping a lottery program that supports culture, sport, and rec 

and has served this province well since 1974? 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provision of Hospital Services 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Nawal Sharma, a 

highly respected internal medicine specialist in Saskatoon, has 

this to say: 

 

Most physicians and nurses think the standard of acute 

care in Saskatoon hospitals has steadily declined in recent 

years. This isn’t for the lack of effort by doctors, nurses, 

and other care providers, but because of the lack of space 

and resources. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with Dr. Sharma or 

does he stubbornly dismiss these concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatoon City Hospital is, certainly it’s not closed for acute 

care services that are provided. In fact, in the last year that we 

have a full year of records, there were more than 5,000 

in-patients that had service provided at Saskatoon City Hospital. 

The day surgery and the main operating room provided for over 

7,000 patients to be provided surgery for, as well as the 

emergency room, which the members opposite will know is not 

open 24 hours a day. It’s only open for part time of the day, but 

it did provide services for 5,000, more than 5,000 patients. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we think that this hospital is an 

important hospital for the city of Saskatoon and for the people 

that it serves from Saskatoon and the area, but we do know that 

services are spread out through all three hospitals in Saskatoon. 

And I think that they provide a great service to the people of 

Saskatoon and central and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Sharma says it’s very difficult 

to get sick patients admitted to hospitals now, and there’s 

tremendous pressure to discharge those patients as soon as 

possible. He says, Mr. Speaker, terms like overcapacity alert, 

bed crisis, and hallway beds are now incredibly common. 

 

Yet what does this government prioritize, Mr. Speaker? Where 

do they spend their attention? Where do they spend their 

dollars? We see untold millions of dollars being spent on their 

shiny lean pet project: $40 million, Mr. Speaker, going to one 

US consultant; $17 million each and every year for kaizen 

promotion offices; $3,500 each and every day for Japanese 

senseis who are brought here to the province, Mr. Speaker; and 

untold millions of dollars to train senior administrators in lean 

programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s where this government has its priorities. My question to 

the Premier: why is this government not focused on the issues 

of overcapacity, of alerts, of hallway beds, Mr. Speaker? Why 

are they so obsessively focused on their lean pet project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would just point out to the 

hon. member opposite and all members of the House, the record 

of the government since 2007 as an indication of where our 

priorities rest, Mr. Speaker. Soon after the 2007 election, we 

immediately set out to build a new partnership with health care 

providers. We immediately set out to keep a promise of hiring, 

making sure there were 800 more nurses in the province. That’s 

pretty much the basics in health care. In fact, there are now 

1,000 more nurses practising. We set out to recruit more 

doctors, Mr. Speaker, now 300 more doctors practising in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We set out to focus on the basics of training both nurses and 

doctors to a greater extent in the province, adding to residency 

positions so that we can retain them. We set out to focus on 

surgical wait times we had inherited from the NDP, the longest 

in Canada at the time, and now, Mr. Speaker, a new surgical 

wait times report out, indicating that wait times are lower. 

 

There will always be work to be done in health care, which is 

40 per cent of the provincial budget and the largest element of 

the Government of Saskatchewan’s activities. It’s at the top of 

the priority list. And, Mr. Speaker, the evidence, the evidence is 

the record of the government in terms of investments we’ve 

made in capital, in new health care positions, health care worker 

positions, more doctors, more nurses, surgical wait times 

initiative. And instead of closing beds as the NDP did, whether 

it was the Plains or a long-term care facility, beds are now being 

opened in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5209 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again, we see the dismissive 

approach by this government when legitimate concerns are 

raised by well-respected individuals here in the province. One 

of the main concerns that Dr. Sharma points to is the fact that 

Saskatoon City Hospital is not used for the purpose for which it 

was built. This is a concern that’s shared by many people in 

Saskatoon and folks throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, 

especially, especially ever since this government closed City 

Hospital for acute care in 2008. Mr. Speaker, this concern, this 

very serious concern, is highlighted by a coroner’s inquest jury 

of just a few months ago. 

 

To the Premier: is he familiar with the recommendations made 

by the coroner’s jury in the inquest into the death of Stanley 

Robillard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have asked of our health 

regions, and the health regions actually have asked this of the 

health care facilities, that they focus on certain elements of the 

health care spectrum. Sometimes that would be the surgical side 

of things; sometimes it would be acute care. 

 

We know that one of the challenges at City Hospital frankly, 

under the New Democratic Party when they were in office, was 

the fact that there were so many people in long-term care beds 

— and there are still too many in the province, by the way — 

but so many in long-term care beds in acute facilities like City 

Hospital. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, early on in our government’s history we 

sought to work with the Catholic Health Ministry and build a 

new long-term care facility to alleviate some of, some of those 

pressures, Mr. Speaker. And who opposed that project — 

Amicus — who opposed that new long-term care facility 

because it was with a faith-based partner, I think is the reason? 

The NDP did. The NDP did . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well, well they opposed it. They can explain why they opposed 

it, but they did. They opposed the Amicus project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to be done in health care. 

That’s why this government continues to provide record 

funding in health care budgets year after year, and why we will 

continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, investing in capital facilities 

and in people providing health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government that closed 

City Hospital for acute care in 2008, Mr. Speaker. My question, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, which he did not address in any 

way, was this: is he familiar, is he familiar with the 

recommendations made by the coroner’s jury in the inquest into 

the death of Stanley Robillard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government has worked 

hard with respect to the improvements that have been required 

in health care, whether they were part of a certain report that 

was presented to the province or just part of the public record, a 

record that was inherited from 16 years of New Democratic 

government where we did suffer under the longest wait-lists in 

the country; where we were understaffed in terms of nurses in 

the province of Saskatchewan; where the doctor shortage was 

going unaddressed, and the doctor shortage exists to this day, 

Mr. Speaker; where the training seats at the university for health 

care professionals, doctors, and nurses were consistently 

underfunded to what we needed in the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the report referenced by the 

Leader of the Opposition or the public record or health care 

workers providing advice to government, we’ve taken all of 

these things very seriously and presented to the province of 

Saskatchewan, not just talk about these issues but action, with a 

recognition that more will need to be done. And we’ll continue 

to work on these things, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to see 

record health care budgets that focus on new facilities, fixing 

facilities we currently have, and ensuring that we’re investing in 

health care human resources for LPNs [licensed practical 

nurse], for nurses, for nurse practitioners, and for doctors in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my specific question was about 

the report into the inquest of the death of Stanley Robillard. The 

coroner’s jury heard how our emergency system failed Stanley 

Robillard. And he died, Mr. Speaker, as a result. The coroner’s 

jury made 13 recommendations to avoid a similar death in the 

future. One of those recommendations, Mr. Speaker, is that 

services available at Saskatoon City Hospital be increased. And 

that’s something that Dr. Sharma and other health care 

providers are also calling for, Mr. Speaker. And it’s something 

that Saskatchewan people and residents of Saskatoon are most 

certainly calling for and have been for some time. 

 

To the Premier: is this government listening, listening to the 

recommendations from the inquest, from the people of the 

province, or is it dismissing these concerns about City Hospital 

being underutilized and health care getting worse? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly, as I’ve indicated before, there is a variety of services 

that are provided by each of the hospitals within Saskatoon, as 

it would be with any other community. Certainly we do know 

that for example Saskatoon City Hospital is open for emergency 

room services for part of the day. It also does provide for 

in-patient care. It provides for ambulatory procedures. It 

provides for day surgeries. 

 

We do know that we do need to improve when it comes to 

emergency department waits. In fact Royal University Hospital, 

employing some lean methodology in some of the work around 

improving our record when it comes to waits in the emergency 

rooms, RUH for example was able to reduce the number of 

patients to zero who left without being treated. Previously to 

that, approximately 12 patients per day left the emergency room 

because they waited too long and didn’t want to wait that long, 

and RUH reduced that down to zero. We need to maintain that 

record. But we have indicated that we are looking at the 

emergency department waits as the next initiative for the entire 



5210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

health care system, by 2017 to reduce that to zero waits. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, City Hospital is not being used 

for the purpose for which it was built. It’s this government in 

2008, Mr. Speaker, that closed City Hospital for acute care. 

Well-respected physicians are saying, Mr. Speaker, that health 

care is getting worse. In our province’s largest city, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to see this government to start properly 

utilizing Saskatoon City Hospital. 

 

The coroner’s jury found that this government needs to fix our 

emergency system, and part of the answer to that is to increase 

the hours of the emergency room at Saskatoon City Hospital. 

But instead of focusing on those basics, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

ensuring that we have enough spots for acute care, instead of 

ensuring that an emergency room was open when people need 

it, this government is obsessively focused on its lean project. 

That’s where their energy is placed. That’s where millions and 

millions of dollars are going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: why won’t this government listen 

to physicians? Why won’t this government listen to reports 

from inquests? Why won’t this government listen to the people 

in Saskatoon in this province who demand so much better? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

With respect to fully utilizing the facilities that we do have in 

this province and based on the records of the members opposite, 

I don’t think we’ll take many lessons from them when it comes 

to using health care facilities, based on their record of closing 

facilities, including the third hospital in the city of Regina, the 

Plains hospital. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are investing $4 million, as the member 

will know, in an initiative in this budget year to reduce 

emergency department waits to zero by 2017. It is an ambitious 

goal. It’s been one that’s been recognized though by some of 

the leading health commentators like André Picard in The 

Globe and Mail as an example of what health systems need to 

be doing into the future. 

 

We’ve also undertaken 30 regional improvement initiatives 

across emergency rooms, knowing that this is an issue that 

patients and family members and providers have told us about, 

that this is something that we need to focus on. So for example, 

a 58 per cent reduction in times that cardiac patients wait at 

RUH for services in the emergency room, a 58 per cent 

reduction; and a 90 per cent reduction in the amount of time 

that EMTs [emergency medical technician] spend just in the 

hand-off of their patients that allows them to get the patients 

quicker service and allows the EMT to get back out to other 

patients that do need them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday this government 

received a scathing letter from the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association. The letter retracts the SSBA’s [Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association] initial reaction to the government’s 

budget, which was initially a positive reaction. They did so 

because when they dug into the details, they became 

increasingly concerned with the actual impacts on students, 

classrooms, and local school divisions. 

 

My question is for the Premier: does he agree with the concerns 

of the elected school board leaders across Saskatchewan, or is 

he going to stubbornly dismiss them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we received the letter 

earlier this morning. I have asked my officials to arrange for a 

meeting with the SSBA to identify specifically where problems 

are. 

 

I can advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that since 2007, we’ve 

increased operating funding to school divisions by over 26 per 

cent. We’ve increased capital spending by 268 per cent. We’ve 

increased the number of child care spaces by 53 per cent. We’ve 

increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs by 104 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, the total budget for this ministry is $1.88 billion. 

We’ve already built and completed 20 schools, Mr. Speaker, 

and we have plans for another 20. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we have more work to do. We’re 

going to continue to do that work and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll meet 

with the school divisions to identify where problems and issues 

are. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, stubborn dismissal from 

that Premier and that government is all we’re seeing once again 

here today. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association expresses 

significant concern about “the lean initiative clawback” of that 

government. To the Premier: what exactly is the lean initiative 

clawback, and why is that government imposing it upon school 

boards all across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that we always 

will have more work to do, and we’re going to continue to do 

that work. But two things that we’re never going to apologize 

for, one is for consultation; the other one is for looking for 

efficiencies. Mr. Speaker, our budget is nearly $2 billion, and 

there is no reason why we should not look for efficiencies in 

that sector. We’ve had great successes so far. 

 

The Prairie Valley School Division around Regina reduces 

students’ wait times for speech language pathologists by half. 

Students’ occupational therapist wait times in the division 

dropped from seven weeks from a high of 18 weeks. In Regina 

Public, a lean project has now made hiring new staff more 

efficient; it has reduced application processing time by 75 per 

cent. The Light of Christ School Division used lean to improve 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5211 

student attendance and improve transitions from elementary to 

high school. 

 

We are going to continue with that type of efficiency, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to look for it and we will work with the 

school divisions to achieve those savings. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association is clear that the main 

concern the school divisions have is with regard to the 

government’s lean initiative clawback. That’s what they call it. 

 

So our elected school board trustees and all Saskatchewan 

people certainly deserve better answers than what we’re hearing 

here today from that minister. So again, to the Premier: what is 

this lean initiative clawback and why is that government 

neglecting the basics in classrooms all across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will look for savings in 

group tendering, buying in bulk, software contracts, 

open-source use of textbooks. Mr. Speaker, at the ministry 

level, we have reduced the amount of time it took to get a 

contract . . . [inaudible] . . . for a grant payment. The wait time 

for contract completion has gone from 20 to 40 days to eight 

days. It has saved $200,000. 

 

The teacher certification process, we’ve reviewed the 

certification process to streamline the process, saving $100,000. 

Turnaround time for Saskatchewan graduates, three days from 

four weeks; turnaround time for non-Saskatchewan graduates, 

two weeks from six weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason we’re doing those things is not simply 

to save money. We want to be efficient. But the reason we’re 

doing that, Mr. Speaker, is so that we can commit more 

resources to the front lines and more resources to the classroom. 

And we’ll take no lessons from a group of people that chose to 

demonstrate efficiency by closing 176 schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the impact of this 

government’s lean initiative clawback is significant and it’s a 

hard hit on classrooms across Saskatchewan. For some of the 

smaller boards, this government has peeled back around 

$100,000, ranging to hundreds of thousands of dollars for many 

others. 

 

For the large boards in Regina and Saskatoon, the clawback, the 

reduction, the cut is almost a million for each of them, Mr. 

Speaker. It just isn’t fair and it defies common sense that this 

government is forcing cuts on our schools, in our classrooms, at 

a time that they’re already under-resourced and strained because 

of that government’s actions. 

 

My question to the Premier: how on earth is this acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give the 

member some examples of where we’ve committed funding to. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from people over there 

that have chosen to ship students out of province, ship them out 

of province by the hundreds of thousands. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatoon Public since we formed government, enrolment up 

15.9 per cent, operating funding up 33.2; Saskatoon Catholic, 

enrolment up 12.2, operating funding up 32.7; Prairie Spirit, 

enrolment up 16.9 per cent, operating up 25.9; Regina Public, 

enrolment up 5.7, operating up 30.8 per cent; Regina Catholic, 

enrolment up 7.5 per cent, operating up 26.8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have continued to make large investments in 

our school division. We have more work to do, and we’ll 

continue to work with the school divisions to try and provide 

them with the most effective, best funding we can. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the school boards in this 

province said they had no forewarning of this clawback, the 

lean introduction, lean clawback, before it was introduced. They 

were taken by complete surprise. No communication from that 

government. Instead of huddling away in secret, this 

government should be working with their education partners. 

But that’s not what’s happening. Here’s what the SSBA 

president, Janet Foord’s letter says, “Lack of communication 

diminishes the trust relationship the education partners have 

worked so hard to build with the ministry.” 

 

To the Premier: why can’t the government treat boards with the 

decency and respect they deserve as partners in education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have ongoing meetings 

and dialogue with the Saskatchewan School Boards Association 

and with the individual school divisions. We will continue to 

have those dialogues. We will deal with and we will identify 

specific problems and we will work our way through those 

problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members opposite, the 

people over there that closed schools, 176 schools, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve built 40 schools versus 176 that they’ve closed. Mr. 

Speaker, with regard to capital, we have record investment in 

capital, over $700 million on school projects big and small: 43 

major capital projects, 22 brand new schools in this budget, 25 

major renovations and additions, 9 joint-use schools. Mr. 

Speaker, there is an additional $96.2 million in this budget 

which provides for four new projects, seven ongoing projects 

such as Langenburg and Gravelbourg, 29 relocatables, a 23 per 

cent increase in preventative maintenance funding. 

 

I appreciate the needs and strains that are on with our school 

boards. We will meet with the school boards. We’ll identify 

issues. We will work our way through those things. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing we’re not going to do, and that’s 

take lessons from the people over there that have the most 

hideous record . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 



5212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, school boards are also 

frustrated that the new funding formula hasn’t been completed, 

meaning that they can’t make long-term plans for improved 

student outcomes. That’s their words. 

 

But they’re especially frustrated about this lean initiative 

clawback of that government that was foisted upon them 

without warning, without consultation. The government, that 

government, has spent already $1.2 million on lean consultants 

in education alone, instead of fixing the basics like 

overcrowded classrooms, repairing the schools that need to be 

repaired, or making sure that students have the one-on-one 

supports and attention that they deserve. And now this 

government has forced the lean initiative clawback on to 

classrooms and on to schools. 

 

To the Premier: when will he stop this nonsense? When will he 

start listening to school boards? When will he start focusing on 

what matters in classrooms across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to be surprised 

that the members across have the ability to stand up and ask 

questions. Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Centre rises 

in the House almost every day asking for there to be a sector 

plan, a strategic plan. Our sector partners began work on a plan 

long before he asked for it. Now there is a sector plan, a 

strategic plan. It was created, Mr. Speaker, by using lean 

methodology. 

 

Last Thursday the member for Regina Rosemont said, what we 

do know is where they’ve been working and looking at reviews 

under lean process, they haven’t taken into account any of the 

stuff that really matters in education. Well, Mr. Speaker, is he 

saying to the trustees of the 28 school boards, to the SSBA, to 

LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents], to the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] that the sector plan is not significant, doesn’t work? 

No, that is something that was built by and for the sector. They 

have produced it themselves, Mr. Speaker. We accept it. We 

will continue to work our way through it, and we’re not taking 

lessons from those people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see someone here in 

this Assembly as minister who won’t take responsibility for his 

file. We see it with someone who doesn’t understand his 

standardized testing agenda and the cost for students. We see it 

here when he’s unwilling to listen and work with school boards. 

And he pretends to hold up his plan as something that suggests 

that he’s finally learned and willing to work with school boards. 

 

Yet he received a letter yesterday that takes him to task for 

failing to listen with vital educational partners in this province. 

That minister, to get up in this Assembly and to pretend 

somehow that his record in education is a good one, is an 

embarrassment for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

The lean initiative clawback that was foisted upon school 

divisions will have consequences for all schools, all students 

across Saskatchewan. And my question to the Minister of 

Education: why didn’t he have the integrity and decency to be 

clear with school boards before the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

wants to talks about integrity and decency in how you treat the 

school division. They’re the folks that gave zero after zero to 

the school division. Mr. Speaker, the members on this House, 

we’ve responded to the needs of the school divisions in our 

province by increasing operating funding by over 26 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are now more teachers in our classrooms 

than ever. We have, since forming government, increased 

regular teachers by 566; student support teachers, 159 more; 

psychologists up 37 per cent; speech language pathologists up 

26 per cent; social workers up 12 per cent. And when it comes 

to helping immigrant students this year, the number of English 

as an additional language teachers is up nearly 17 per cent. 

They always talk about educational assistants — 2007 there was 

3,546, now 3,601. There are more EAs [educational assistants] 

and more professional supports in the classrooms today than 

there was ever was under the NDP. We will take no lessons 

from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to caution the member for Regina 

Rosemont to carefully choose his words and not to attempt to 

bring members into disrepute. 

 

As well, next week is a week off. And I think it’s probably 

appropriate, as members are getting very testy in here, including 

the Speaker. So when you return to your constituencies, please, 

Saturday morning, step outside on your front step and take a 

deep breath and enjoy the fresh air, and come back with a better 

attitude, including the Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 123, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 123, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5213 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 124, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 

2013 (No. 2). This is a bilingual bill without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 124, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 

2013 (No. 2) and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

[11:00] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill and 

that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential 

Amendment) Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 127, The 

Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Does the member for Sutherland have 

something to say? The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 127, The 

Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



5214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

participate in the 75-minute debate once again. At the end of 

my remarks, I’ll be moving a debate that will condemn this 

government for pouring untold millions of dollars into its 

wasteful and misguided lean pet project, for ignoring serious 

concerns from front-line workers, and for plowing ahead with 

its plans to impose lean on our hospitals, seniors’ care facilities, 

home care programs, and schools. So I will be moving that at 

the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this is yet again — and we’ve had this discussion over the 

course of the session here, Mr. Speaker — this is a debate about 

priorities. It’s about investing in front-line health care workers, 

those who actually provide the services to the people of 

Saskatchewan, or investing in untold millions of dollars to have 

a high-priced American consultant to look at our watch and tell 

us what time it is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a debate about providing the best possible care for our 

citizens in long-term care, most of whom are seniors, not all of 

them, but most of them who are seniors who built this province, 

or do we spend our money on a $40 million-plus contract with 

John Black and Associates? Do we spend our money on $17 

million a year on kaizen promotion offices? Do we spend our 

money on $3,500-a-day senseis who also need to fly here to the 

tune of approximately $2,000 for a flight, or is this about again 

making sure that seniors in long-term care have what they 

need? We have had this ongoing discussion, again this is a 

debate about priorities. 

 

We can take ourselves back about a year ago when Carrie 

Klassen came to the legislature and started talking about some 

of the concerns that she’d been hearing in long-term care or her 

experiences where her mother was, Mr. Speaker. This 

government initially stubbornly dismissed Carrie Klassen’s 

concerns and many other people who’d come forward to talk 

about their concerns around staffing issues in our long-term 

care facilities, Mr. Speaker. There were story after story of 

individuals who are not getting the care that they needed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this government, in fact after being pressed, initially saying, 

nothing to see here. There’s no problem in our long-term care 

facilities. Our seniors are being well looked after. And in fact 

after being pressed and pressed here in this House and by 

others, Mr. Speaker, the government agreed to do a CEO [chief 

executive officer] tour. So they sent their CEOs out to 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, to see if there was in fact 

a problem. 

 

Part of the problem with that tour though, Mr. Speaker, even the 

way in which they conducted it identified some glaring 

problems. But you know, you talk to special care aides or 

people on the front lines who said they didn’t have an 

opportunity to talk to the CEO. I’ve talked to residents who’ve 

said they didn’t have an opportunity to have input into that. So a 

whole piece of work was missing around . . . further what was 

going on in our long-term care homes. 

 

But what did we find in those long-term care homes, Mr. 

Speaker? I think it’s important to put on the record once again 

some of the issues. Again when we’re talking about priorities, 

do we spend on front-line health care, Mr. Speaker, or do we 

spend untold millions on a contract with an American 

consultant and millions of dollars to bring a Japanese sensei 

here to have our health care administrators taking 35 per cent of 

their day — our well-paid health care administrators taking 35 

per cent of their time — to learn how to do lean, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So I just want to talk a little bit about what’s going on in some 

of our seniors’ care homes. I think it’s important to put it on the 

record here. And I have quite a long list. 

 

At Central Parkland Lodge in Lanigan, one of the issues that 

came out, Mr. Speaker, in that CEO tour, a staff member 

commented that they sometimes struggled with priorities. For 

example, when feeding one resident and another rings to be 

toileted, they don’t know if they should interrupt the meal 

which in turn gets cold for that resident or if they should go 

toilet the person who may soil themselves. The reality, again, 

staffing levels were the main issue. 

 

In Stensrud Lodge in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

comments that came out, they can hear people crying for help in 

the evening because of staffing shortages: 1 to 25 care aid ratio 

on evenings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as someone who has parents who are aging, in their early 

80s, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in here, I’m very happy that 

they’re still at home and are still going strong. But this is 

something that is front and centre for me as some of their 

contemporaries are not faring quite as well as my parents, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Sherbrooke Community Centre, which works on the Eden 

philosophy, Mr. Speaker, Sherbrooke is the sought-after 

long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan and I 

might say the province, Mr. Speaker. It is a place where you 

want your loved ones to go. And in fact, at Sherbrooke they say 

the main issue is staffing levels, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Spruce Manor Special Care Home in Dalmeny: staffing levels 

are inadequate to meet the needs of the residents due to the 

increased level of acuity. And another comment that came out 

of Spruce Manor, Mr. Speaker, was they think that the care 

their loved one is getting is very good, however there isn’t 

enough because the staff are way too busy. 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5215 

Mr. Speaker, I can go on here with . . . Again, we talk about 

priorities: $40 million-plus and the ticker continues to rise, Mr. 

Speaker, or money on front-line health care workers. We’ve 

got, at the Goodwill Manor in Duck Lake, residents notice staff 

shortages and often have to wait up to 30 minutes after they 

ring their call bell. Continent residents have soiled themselves 

because of it. Saskatoon Extendicare, sometimes they need to 

get up at 6:30 a.m., even though breakfast isn’t until 8 a.m.  

 

Oliver Lodge in Saskatoon, there were a few different issues 

identified here, Mr. Speaker. Residents notice staff shortages 

and often have to wait up to 30 minutes after they ring their call 

bell. Continent residents have soiled themselves. Thirty, 40, 50, 

60, 90 minutes go by, waiting to go the bathroom. Very great 

loss of dignity when you have to just go to the bathroom in your 

pad. 

 

One woman, this, Mr. Speaker, absolutely breaks my heart: 

“My husband was taught when he was a child not to pee his 

pants and now they are telling him to just go in his pants. He 

tries to go to the bathroom by himself, but they tell him he is at 

risk of falling.”  

 

Parkridge, Mr. Speaker: residents don’t get their teeth cleaned 

regularly. Shaving is rushed, causing neck rashes. Only one 

bath per week. Walking program is neglected, and there is a 

lack of physio. They have a really nice pool, but staff don’t 

have the time to do therapy in it with residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here again at Parkridge . . . And Parkridge, I might note, 

Mr. Speaker, is the only facility in Saskatoon owned by the 

health region. All the other facilities are affiliates, Mr. Speaker. 

So Parkridge, the reality is, gets the highest, they get the most 

difficult cases, Mr. Speaker, that affiliates can turn down. At 

Parkridge, and I understand where this is coming from, if 

you’re understaffed and you have the highest level of need, Mr. 

Speaker, for your residents and you don’t have the proper staff, 

it’s incredibly demoralizing, Mr. Speaker. And at Parkridge 

Centre, at Parkridge Centre, morale of some staff is very low 

because of the shortage which affects residents. So when you 

have staff, Mr. Speaker, whose morale is falling, it does in fact 

have an impact on residents. 

 

Porteous Lodge in Saskatoon need more people to answer 

buzzers. Average wait is 40 minutes. Someone actually timed it. 

So this goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. There are many, 

many issues around lack of staffing. We’ve heard that in our 

long-term care facilities. And I’ve mentioned some of those. 

Those priorities we’ve heard here in this House. 

 

We’ve brought forward the issue of Ron Caron who has been 

living in the Dubé Centre. And he does now have a placement 

at Parkridge. Ron Caron suffers from dementia. He’s 65 years 

old and has some very serious issues with dementia. And he 

didn’t make it onto the long-term care list initially, Mr. Speaker, 

because he has such high needs. So instead he was living in a 

mental health centre, the Dubé mental health centre in 

Saskatoon, which is an acute psychiatric in-patient facility, Mr. 

Speaker — not the place for a senior with dementia. And it was 

after pushing here that this man has finally been offered 

long-term care and one-on-one support in Parkridge. 

 

But he is not alone, Mr. Speaker. I hear over and over again that 

many people, the more challenging and complex cases, don’t 

make it onto the list, Mr. Speaker. Because when they’re being 

assessed, the assessors know that there’s no place with some of 

these complex and challenging needs to go. So we have people 

languishing in facilities that are not homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again this is a debate, this is a debate, Mr. Speaker, about 

priorities. Forty million-plus, other untold millions being spent 

on a lean pet project versus our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

had stories in the House. Darren and Kerrie Anderson came 

forward and talked a little bit about their experience, about 

Kerrie who needed regular pain medication and was getting it 

once every three or four hours if she was lucky because of a 

shortage of staff, Mr. Speaker. This is a woman who, if her pain 

got out of control, it was very hard to get back on top of it. 

 

We heard, Mr. Speaker, around infrastructure. We talked today 

a little bit about City Hospital being underutilized. RUH has 

some serious challenges. At RUH, Mr. Speaker, in one of the 

rooms, they were using a urine sample bottle as a call bell. A 

urine sample bottle with something shaky in it, Mr. Speaker, 

giving that to a patient, saying, shake that, shake that sample 

container if you need help, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this again is a debate about priorities. Do we spend it on 

lean, which is what this government has chosen to do, or do we 

spend it on much needed repairs and on, most importantly, 

front-line staff who provide the services to our citizens, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

I had an occasion to talk to . . . The other thing the Andersons 

brought forward is the disgusting state of the Royal University 

Hospital. They talked about . . . And they are not the only ones. 

We had people here in the fall, a former nurse talking about the 

conditions, the cleanliness, or the lack thereof at Royal 

University Hospital, Mr. Speaker, because of a lack of cleaning 

staff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the occasion on Friday to be at St. Paul’s Hospital and 

was chatting with a nurse there, and she had said the same thing 

is going on at St. Paul’s Hospital. She’s been at that hospital for 

many years, since the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, and has said 

cleanliness is at an absolute low, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a debate about making sure people have 

the basic needs, young people have the basic needs to live their 

fullest potential, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So this government started out with lean in health care, and now 

as we’ve heard today and in the past few weeks, the movement 

to lean in education, Mr. Speaker. Last week we had some 

occupational therapists here. Three school divisions in the last 

year have cut their occupational therapists. And what do 

occupational therapists do, Mr. Speaker? They help individuals 

with their daily functions, Mr. Speaker, kids who have fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder and autism spectrum disorder. 

 

I had an opportunity to chat with a mother whose son is on the 

autism spectrum, Mr. Speaker, and had the benefit of 

occupational therapy this last year. One of the issues with 

autism, there can be sensory issues. And this individual boy had 



5216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

trouble putting on clothing, irritation with fabrics and tags, 

those kinds of things. And it was a huge struggle for this 

mother. The occupational therapist helped work with the family 

and give them some tools to help this little boy. And their 

occupational therapy services were cut, Mr. Speaker. And this 

mother has seen her son progress with the services that were 

once provided, and now has regressed. And it was a difficult 

conversation to have with a mother who just wants the best for 

her child and is not getting it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that this legislature can be a bit of a bubble, and 

sometimes we wonder if we bring forward . . . I’ve never had 

the opportunity to be in government, but in opposition I know 

how it works. I know that we hear from people, and we are 

expressing the concerns that we bring forward. We bring 

forward the concerns that we hear from people, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not us saying these things. We are the voice of people with 

whom we’ve had conversations and discussions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the reality is sometimes it’s important to step back and 

check in, and I like to do that on a regular basis. Last week I 

had the opportunity to speak to a nurse, a doc, a physiotherapist, 

and a pharmacist, all who’ve worked in the Saskatoon Health 

Region for decades combined, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve 

reflected the concerns that we heard today from Dr. Sharma that 

health care in this province is in fact is getting worse, Mr. 

Speaker. We see a decline of services in terms of staffing, Mr. 

Speaker. We have difficulty with infrastructure, shortage of 

spaces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is we bring forward concerns that we hear from 

people, Mr. Speaker, and people are telling us that this 

government’s lean pet project is failing, Mr. Speaker, people 

who take great pride in their work but see huge struggles under 

this particular government’s approach with their lean pet 

project. 

 

Again this is about priorities. Do we invest in the services for 

our people, Mr. Speaker, making sure they’ve got front-line 

services and making sure that the infrastructure works so people 

aren’t using urine sample bottles for call bells, Mr. Speaker? 

Instead of spending . . . But this government has chosen to 

spend 40 million-plus on an American consultant. 

 

So I would like to move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns this government for pouring 

untold millions of dollars into its wasteful and misguided 

lean pet project, for ignoring serious concerns from 

front-line workers, and for plowing ahead with its plans to 

impose lean on our hospitals, senior care facilities, home 

care programs, and schools. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale: 

 

That this Assembly condemns this government for pouring 

untold millions of dollars into its wasteful and misguided 

lean pet project, for ignoring serious concerns from 

front-line workers, and for plowing ahead with its plans to 

impose lean on our hospitals, senior care facilities, home 

care programs, and schools. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to join the debate today. It’s very similar to the one we had two 

weeks ago that the opposition brought across. My remarks 

today will focus around efficiencies and better care, and that’s 

what the lean system’s all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I saw an article recently, and I think it’s no secret to the 

members on both sides that there is questions about long-term 

sustainability, the physical capacity of the taxpayers of Canada 

to continue to pay for the system we have in place. Certainly 

with the population, demographics are getting older. The people 

in our country are getting older. Diagnostics tests are becoming 

more expensive and many procedures are becoming more 

expensive. 

 

So I found this article from the Canadian Institute of Actuaries. 

And I don’t believe it’s a think tank, a partisan think tank. It just 

looks strictly at the numbers, and the title of it was Canada’s 

Current Health Care System is Not Sustainable; Action Needed 

to Maintain the System’s Survival. So I’ll quote into the record 

here what this article said. It’s from late 2013, “Actuarial 

Research Shows Just How Fast Action is Needed,” and it 

continues: 

 

. . . analysis of the Canadian health care system concludes 

that, at current growth rates, costs will eventually be at 

levels such that the provinces and territories will be 

required to spend the major part of their budgets on health 

care — at the expense of other programs such as 

education, social welfare and infrastructure. Using the 

current Canada Health Transfer (CHT), health care 

expenditures will equal 97 per cent of total revenues 

available to provinces and territories at the end of 25 

years, compared to 44 per cent in 2012. 

 

And it continues: 

 

Proposed changes to the CHT, effective April 2014, will 

exacerbate the problem. Canada’s current health care 

system is not sustainable over a 25-year horizon unless 

significant actions are taken, including changes which 

substantially reduce the increase in the costs of health 

care, boosting GDP growth and raising taxes/fees or 

investing in preventative approaches. 

 

I think the people of the province have done a great job of 

helping to grow the GDP [gross domestic product] of the 

province. We’ve seen great news there for the last number of 

years — a growing province, a growth economy. Certainly 

that’s helping, but that’s not enough. So it states, and I think it’s 

generally assumed, that increases in health care spending of 8, 

9, 10 per cent year over year likely in the long term aren’t 

sustainable. 

 

So I know, I believe Ontario and Quebec already, they spend 50 

per cent or just over, of GDP on health services. And here in the 

West, it’s closer to 40 per cent across the board. So certainly I 

think you have to be smarter with money, Mr. Speaker. We 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5217 

have to be . . . The idea, I believe anyway, that they just spend 

more, spend more per capita, write the cheque, put the blindfold 

on, and everything will just simply take care of itself, I hope 

those days are over. 

 

And I know our friends across the way, they have a bit of a 

checkered past when it comes to dealing or thinking about 

efficiencies. And I look to the tree booklet here, Mr. Speaker, 

the tree booklet written by the current Leader of the Opposition 

for the last provincial election, and on page 12 and 13 they talk, 

he talks about building efficient health system, address the 

rising costs of prescription drugs. 

 

So those are things that . . . But then at the same time, he 

believes in those at that time, but during the last election 

campaign we saw a $5 billion spending spree, certainly a lot of 

that on health, Mr. Speaker, with the orange credit card. And 

that would have been a big, again one of those big increases we 

talk about year over year over year. And we could do that. In 

the short term we could do that. We could use the orange credit 

card and, you know, increase spending exponentially. But 

how’s that going to look in 10 years, 15 years, 20 years? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . And also most recently there was an article 

in the editorial of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on Thursday, 

March 6, and it again . . . Well here’s what it said in regard to 

the Urgent Issues Action Fund. I quote: 

 

For Mr. Broten to say that the government should have 

forked over $18.5 million in order to meet every request 

made by the regions suggests that he’s simply trying to 

pander to public sentiment in a sensitive area. Either that, 

or he demonstrates a reckless approach to spending public 

money that raises questions about how the NDP would run 

the province if he’s given the reins. 

 

So in the tree booklet he says we’ve got to find efficiencies. But 

later, earlier this year, he says fork over the cash; sign a blank 

cheque. So we’re not sure where they stand there. 

 

But talking about the lean process, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. 

The NDP have had sort of two rounds in their past. In their 16 

years of government they had two rounds of lean. The first one, 

it was not the current edition of lean, it was an acronym that I 

believe was thought at the time . . . I don’t know if it was 

officially used, but lean meant leave everything annihilated 

now. There was massive cuts, Mr. Speaker, throughout the ’90s 

and even the early 2000: 1,200 long-term care beds cut, 19 

long-term care facilities cut, 52 hospitals cut, the Plains Health 

Centre cut, thousands and thousands of health care workers cut 

or laid off, Mr. Speaker — nurses, doctors, chiropractors, 

pharmacists, all sorts of health care workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I’m out on the doorsteps, Mr. Speaker, talking to 

people around my constituency, yes, when we’re talking about 

health care everybody asks, why did you close the Plains? Why 

was the Plains closed? It was basically a new facility on the 

outskirts of town. People from all over southern Saskatchewan 

knew where it was, could find it easily. It was right on the 

outskirts of town. All single rooms. Mr. Speaker, it was a 

wonderful facility for our province. The NDP cut that too. That 

was their version of lean: cut everything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Back in the early days of the previous NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, in the year 1992 . . . I know the member earlier talked 

about the staffing levels, the staffing levels in health facilities, 

Mr. Speaker. Well in ’92 there was 141 graduates at the 

Wascana Campus of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now can anyone guess how many people were hired from out 

of 141? Was it 100? No. Seventy-five? Fifty? No, Mr. Speaker. 

There was four people hired by that NDP government out of 

141 potential nurses that graduated from that program, Mr. 

Speaker. So you wonder what . . . There’s basically a generation 

lost of nurses at that time. And those weren’t four permanent 

full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. They were temporary workers, so 

they had no chance of . . . Well they had little chance of 

supporting their family, paying off student loans, etc., to make a 

career. 

 

Now this was great news for Alberta. This was good news for 

Texas, Saudi Arabia. A lot of those nurses went there, Mr. 

Speaker. So what ended up happening? The taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan helped those other jurisdictions find nurses. And 

that’s what was happening and certainly part of the greater more 

out-migration. 

 

What happened then, as those nurses were being cut? Within 

the units in the hospitals themselves, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

thing called bumping where more senior nurses could bump 

other nurses out of a job because there was cuts happening. So 

what would happen on a unit? One of your co-workers, one of 

your friends, somebody you’ve worked with for a long time, 

they’d just get bumped. And you could do that to your friend. 

So that’s what was happening under the NDP policy decision 

that took place, Mr. Speaker. And of course all that, all the 

bumping, all the cuts, all the no hiring, led to the 1999 strike. 

 

Of course we all remember those days, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

nurses are certainly the most dedicated professionals out there. 

They care so much about their patients. So for them to go on a 

strike after they were legislated back to work, by the way, by 

the NDP after six hours — after six hours — imagine how up 

against it, you know, how disrespected they felt at that time, 

Mr. Speaker, for them to not be able to look after their patients. 

It must have been a really, really tough time for the nursing 

profession at that time for them to walk out under those 

circumstances. They were very tough days back then, and we all 

remember them well. 

 

And the second iteration of lean, Mr. Speaker, was in 2005. The 

member from Lakeview, he was the Health minister. He 

brought it in in Five Hills. He used approximately the same 

amount of percentage of funds, Mr. Speaker, and that was 

working well. Now the NDP didn’t decide to continue . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Next member. I recognize 

the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 

75-minute debate and on the motion that . . . my motion. And I 

guess, you know, when you look at the lean and you look at the 

lean process and some of the challenges, and my colleague 

before me, the member from Riversdale made it very clear why 

the lean is failing and why this government is taking taxpayers’ 



5218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

dollars. 

 

Now let me get into it. And I’ll talk about what needs to 

happen, what needs to be done for Saskatchewan residents, 

what they want, what they deserve. It’s their tax dollars. But let 

me talk about some of the challenges that we’re hearing. 

 

You know, you look at our seniors, those men and women, 

those seniors who earned the respect, their family members who 

think highly of them, who love them and want the best of care 

for them. We look at what’s going on in this province with 

seniors’ care, and I want to talk about the challenges. And 

we’ve raised the concerns, whether it’s been petitions for 

northern Saskatchewan supporting the health regions, 

supporting the communities, supporting families who have been 

saying that their loved ones deserve better in the communities 

of northern Saskatchewan and in the rest of the province where 

there’s areas. 

 

[11:30] 

 

But I represent the Cumberland constituents. I want to talk a 

little bit about it because, Mr. Speaker, that’s important. And 

I’ll talk about the millions that this government is wasting of 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. I’ll talk about that. I’ll talk 

about that clearly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we see is such a need, critical shortage 

of space for long-term care beds in the North in the health 

region. Clearly, clearly the people of the Cumberland 

constituency, the people of the North that are in the health 

region, the health region clearly wanted to see more beds 

because of the Croft report of 2009 that came out publicly in 

2010 that identified a code red critical shortage of beds for 

seniors’ long-term care in the health region in the North, 

clearly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we waited to see, would this government 

respond? Yes, with petitions. And I want to thank the people 

back home who raised a concern, whether it was the good work 

that was done by the leadership, by community members, by 

seniors who signed the petition, who raised their concerns over 

their loved ones saying, I don’t want my grandparent, I don’t 

want my mushom, my kohkom, my mom or dad, I don’t want 

our loved ones leaving the North where they’re used to the 

culture, where they’re used to the language, where they can be 

with their family, Mr. Speaker. You know, we talk about that, 

the government. It’s a start. Five hundred thousand for planning 

is a start, but there’s so much to do. And people were expecting 

and I was expecting an announcement of a facility. 

 

But they’ll do the good work with the money, the health region 

and I know the volunteers that are going to work hard to do the 

plan. And they’ll do the tough work, Mr. Speaker. They’ll get 

the job done because they’ll do their part. This government 

needs to do their part and give them a facility once and for all 

— not just planning, commit to a facility. And that is something 

I know we will be working hard on with the health region, the 

leaders in the community, residents, with our seniors. 

 

And I think of some of the challenges that the seniors have had 

and the experiences. It’s been terrible. When you take a loved 

one and you take them hours away where their family cannot 

travel to see them, that facility could have been built with the 

money that they’ve wasted, of taxpayers’ money, money of 

northern Saskatchewan residents, of southern, of this province 

who have worked hard. Seniors have done their part. They have 

paid their taxes, paid their dues. 

 

And what does this government do? It’s focused on lean, a 

process that isn’t working. It’s failing miserably. But you know 

what? The government stubbornly will not listen to front-line 

workers. They won’t listen to families. They just push ahead. 

They push ahead: lean, lean, lean. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the frustration out there within the 

workers and seeing how they talk about being bullied and being 

scared. You know what? Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we see some of 

the challenge. And I know we’ve had family members coming 

here and, Mr. Speaker, those family members have shared their 

concerns, their frustration. 

 

And you know, it’s about safety. And I talk about the nurses 

and the front-line workers talking about safety of our patients, 

safety of our loved ones. And what this government does, it 

says, oh yes, yes, yes. No, we’re doing such a great job on the 

lean. This lean, everyone’s buying into it. Well news flash, Mr. 

Speaker: this government is failing the residents of this 

province when it comes to the lean, wasting taxpayers’ dollars 

where they could go to so many different areas in the health . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

And talking about front-line workers, we could have more 

front-line workers with the millions, millions that they’re 

paying to a US consultant, with the millions of dollars that 

they’re opening up certain offices with the lean to make sure 

our health regions are complying, and pushing ahead on that. 

And it doesn’t matter who raises it with them. They are so 

stubborn. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about patients, whether 

they’re pressing a call button because they’re expecting 

someone to come, the front-line workers are doing their part 

again. The resources are not being provided to them to make 

sure that our seniors are getting the service and I guess the 

needs that they’re looking for and have come to expect. They 

have done their part. And when a family presses a call button 

because of an emergency in a patient’s room and nobody 

responds to it because they’re busy, they’re tied up because they 

don’t have . . . And when you find out later why, because 

they’re rushing around because they are so overworked. 

 

So when we talk about the money that the government’s 

wasting, and I tell you, tax dollars, wasting on the lean process, 

use those millions of dollars of taxpayers’ dollars to cover off 

the shortfalls, to give the support to the front-line workers to 

make sure facilities are there for our seniors, to make sure, to 

make sure that our loved ones — our loved ones, our loved ones 

— are getting what they deserve and what they need, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now we’ve seen a lot of the challenges and frustrations from 

family members who have come to this Legislative Assembly 

with their concerns. And what have they got from this 

government? Nothing. This government just kind of ignores 

them, doesn’t listen to the concerns, whether it’s the front-line 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5219 

workers’ families who are raising real concerns about safety, 

about patient safety. Do they not understand? 

 

You know, we have our own family members — myself — 

who is frustrated watching what’s going on when our loved 

ones are in a health care system. You know, and I think about a 

family and good friends of mine. They were in a health facility 

in Saskatoon. And my good friend’s wife said to me, Doyle, 

we’ve been here 30 days. I know they talk about the cuts, the 

cuts, and they’re realizing these rooms are filthy. They just 

don’t have enough staff to cover them. So that individual was 

making sure that her husband’s room was clean, and that 

shouldn’t be happening. 

 

But we’ve got money, millions to waste on the lean 

everywhere. It seems like every ministry is getting involved, 

and they’re pushing it. And we could be using those dollars, 

clearly, those dollars to take care of the needs of Saskatchewan 

residents. They expect proper health care. They expect proper 

care for our loved ones. And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you know, that is not happening because this 

government’s got its idea, and the Premier and his government 

has an idea. They’re so focused on this US consultant, spending 

millions and millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

And I think at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes, 

there’s going to be the voters. And it’s going to come down to 

voting. People will look, people will look at that, and people 

will look at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there might be some 

leaning going on on the other side. The members may see . . . 

The taxpayers may show them about leaning some of those 

members because of not listening to the safety. 

 

Very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very clear, the needs are out 

there. They are being identified. And government can’t . . . 

We’ve raised them. Our leader has got up in this House day 

after day, raising the concerns of Saskatchewan families, 

whether it’s a mother, a father, whether it’s of a grandparent, a 

parent. Our leader has raised those concerns very clear. And 

you know, I talk about that. 

 

When you raise those concerns and a government ignores them 

and does not even pay attention and mocks things and then talks 

about all the members over here, and you’re down to . . . 

[inaudible] . . . When you mock, there might be a little bit of 

leaning going on on that side of the House, that the taxpayers 

will say enough is enough. You’re not wasting. 

 

And people are paying attention. Everywhere I go, people are 

talking about it, and they are very concerned about it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They want some action, and they do not want 

their tax dollars . . . They’re hard-working. People work hard, 

and they are doing their part for this province, and they want 

their government to do their part. This government is failing 

them miserably, miserably, with taking money that individuals 

and families have worked hard to provide for this government 

in the coffers. And they waste it. Their priorities are truly not on 

Saskatchewan citizens. It’s on their priority with their 

consultant, with their lean process. They’ve bought into this, 

and it’s doing . . . [inaudible]. 

 

At this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I’m going to be 

supporting my colleague in her motion forward to get . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize from 

the opposite side of this House that there is some 

disgruntleness, but I can only say that this has been told at least 

a dozen times in this very House by our Premier, by our Health 

minister, that lean has saved already more than it’s cost. It’s 

saved more than it’s cost. For some reason they just don’t get it 

over there. 

 

And there’s so much to talk about when we start talking about 

the lean process and the advantage of it, the health care that 

goes into it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about saving 

money, although that’s a big part of it, but it’s better health care 

for the people of this province. 

 

And it’s always hard to know where to start out but, you know, 

where I feel like starting out from is to apologize for this 

motion that we’re debating today. You know it’s a blatant 

motion of irresponsibility and ignorance in my opinion, their 

narrow-minded statement of little thought and little 

consideration. It’s a negative suggestion from negative thinking 

and no thought of improvement for future growth and future 

health care needs, an understanding of a process, and the 

betterment for the people of this province in health care and 

other initiatives that we’re . . . [inaudible] . . . they’re implying, 

with the lean principles. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it’s not hard to understand, coming 

from the limited mindset of non-progressive people who choose 

to merely exist rather than think of progression and growth and 

expansion and good living, those who would rather tear down 

this province, those who would rather do it with ignorance and 

no sense of advancement rather than build and prosper and 

fulfill. 

 

Now we have not needed to look far to the record of those of 

little thought and no planning. Their government’s priorities 

when they were in government was not to build. It was not to 

grow. It was to close 52 hospitals. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the doctors left this province. 

The nurses left because they had to go to different jurisdictions 

to do their chosen careers. When we look at the record of the 

NDP, they lost over 1,160 health care workers in the last four, 

five years of their government, including 173 doctors, including 

a loss of 455 nurses, 155 pharmacists. Pharmacists leaving this 

province, that’s even further removed from the health care 

providers, but they chose to leave because of the actions of the 

former NDP government. 

 

That government promised to cut surgical wait-lists by 30 per 

cent back in 1999. What happened? Well the wait-lists actually 

increased by 61 per cent. Like I said, they eliminated 52 

hospitals. They eliminated 19 long-term care facilities. They 

eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds. They didn’t even look 

after seniors. They did not increase the seniors’ income plan for 

16 years. Mr. Speaker, when we look at their record, we can see 

that their whole idea of cutting health costs was simply closing 

facilities. 

 

So what happens? Well we lose doctors. We lose professionals. 



5220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

And the length of stay in hospitals, the length of waiting lists 

increased. And that was their record. So no wonder they don’t 

want to look at something that’s more achievable, something 

that’s . . . And I hate to use the cliché of thinking out of the box, 

but that’s what this is all about. It’s about ways of doing better 

things more efficiently. That’s what the lean principle is all 

about. And they just don’t follow it. They just don’t understand 

it, and they don’t want to understand it. 

 

You know, when we look at the record of our government, the 

blood and plasma products, the lean improvement projects, a 

saving of $35 million. That’s just since 2010, $35 million. And 

they’re worrying about $4 million for a learning process? The 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region mental health and addiction 

clinic reduced the number of cancellation appointments from 42 

per cent to zero. The Regina health . . . also the cancellations of 

MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] went from 12 to 1 per 

week, allowing to do 650 more scans each year. 

 

The Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible] . . . control laboratory cut 

turnaround times for tests, resulting to 40 hours, from 40 hours 

to 12 hours. The emergency room of the Royal University 

Hospital in Saskatoon reduced the number of patients leaving 

without being treated by 66 per cent. 

 

Those are just some of the initiatives this government has 

brought, and it’s all to do with the lean process. Time spent by 

ambulance staffers waiting in ERs [emergency room] was 

reduced by 90 per cent — think of the cost savings there, Mr. 

Speaker — which resulted in a 67 per cent increase in 

productivity for ambulance staff. 

 

100 per cent of the patients receiving care in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle in-patient mental health unit are now connected to 

an appropriate community service before they leave the unit. 

Previously only 79 per cent were. The Royal University 

Hospital in Saskatoon reduced the time patients spent waiting 

for X-rays from one hour to only 22 minutes. Those are just 

some of the savings received. 

 

[11:45] 

 

In Moose Jaw, the operational efficiencies of $85 million to 

$160 million over 20 years will be obtained in the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital replacement by using the lean principles. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if I could, I’d like to spend a little bit of time 

talking about the new hospital in Moose Jaw. 

 

It is the first lean design probably in the country, at least in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there was great thought going into 

this hospital. In fact, just to go back a little bit, in 2007, two 

cabinet ministers that were with the NDP on this side couldn’t 

even get an addition to the Moose Jaw Hospital, which was 

requested and needed for years. We’re building it. 

 

And this lean design for this new hospital, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 

thought, a lot of care has gone into this. They’ve spent a whole 

year in a warehouse setting up the lean design — how patients 

would come in, how they’d be handled, where the supplies are 

— and working toward a system that is different. Again the 

cliché of thinking out of the box so that patients would spend 

less time waiting, more time being treated and moved on. And 

from the efficiencies of the medical profession as well were 

outstanding, as this design showed that they didn’t have to run 

from one end to the other for products. The products would 

actually come to the patient, reducing the amount of hours that 

a patient would be there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just I do believe it was two weeks ago, I 

happened to be in the hospital as it is now as they’re 

implementing more of the lean processes. You no longer have 

to come into the hospital and take a ticket and sit down, wait for 

your number to come, get some answers. All I needed was a 

blood test. When I got to the front desk, she said, well you just 

go right back to the lab. Thereby even 20 minutes on me. Is that 

a big time? Well it is for me, but when you take that for the 

hundreds of people that go into that hospital every week, that’s 

a fair savings in time and efficiencies that we’ve seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just earlier this week the Health Foundation had 

an announcement for a new campaign for the Moose Jaw 

Health Foundation. During the foundation we happened, myself 

along with the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, were sitting 

at a table with the head of communications, and I put the 

question to him quite point-blankly: what is lean doing there? 

And I said, I don’t want any fancy answers; I just want to know 

the truth. What is your impression of lean? And he said — he 

called me Mr. Michelson — but he said, there is no way we 

could have brought this system together with the savings and 

the implementation of better quality service more efficiently if 

we didn’t have the lean principles that were brought in from 

other jurisdictions. It’s something we couldn’t have thought by 

ourselves. And I thought that was very important to hear and 

very important to impress on what this government is doing, 

what lean is doing. 

 

So when we come to a motion that is put before this Assembly 

today, I think it’s rather disgusting that we should have to have 

this debated here when lean makes so much sense. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity. I will not be supporting 

that motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker 

in this debate, I find it somewhat unusual for caucus members 

to be speaking and carrying on conversations and heckling their 

own members. If they would like to do that, I guess that’s their 

choice, but when a member from the other side is speaking, I 

would ask that members on the opposite side at least tone down 

their conversation so that I have an opportunity to hear what 

that member is saying. I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter the debate here today on a really important issue, and it’s 

a motion that’s been put forward by the member from 

Riversdale here today, and that motion is: 

 

That this Assembly condemns this government for pouring 

untold millions of dollars into its wasteful and misguided 

lean pet project, for ignoring serious concerns from 

front-line health workers, for plowing ahead with its plans 

to impose lean on our hospitals, senior care facilities, 

home care programs, and schools. 

 

That’s the motion put forward by the member of Riversdale and 

it’s one that I speak strongly in support of. It’s a huge concern 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5221 

when we see what’s going on in front-line health care and 

seniors’ care in our province right now, and the misguided 

priorities of this government who would rather shovel money 

over the border to an American contractor — ten and tens of 

millions of dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you can imagine — 

at a time where we have all the needs that we have here in our 

own province. Wasteful spending, Mr. Speaker, and the lack of 

ability for government to realize that they’ve been had in this 

contract and that they’re bleeding dollars that really are needed 

on the front lines of education and front lines of health care. 

 

We’ve heard about the costs, and the costs are huge. We’ve 

heard tens of millions of dollars in the contract. One contract, if 

you can imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was at least $40 million 

alone. I understand that there’s a cost of up to $17 million a 

year for something called lean kaizen offices across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And it just speaks to the misguided 

priorities of this government, that they’d pump all that kind of 

money into these lean kaizen offices which aren’t making the 

improvements that they should in health care, instead of to the 

services that people depend on, like emergency services in our 

emergency rooms here in Regina, and the emergency services 

right across the province, or the critical needs in seniors’ care 

where quite simply the dignity just isn’t being provided to those 

who deserve it, the seniors of the province. No action to 

meaningfully address those critical issues. 

 

We see the shortage and pressures of being able to access a 

family doctor for so many. No real action to ensure proper 

succession of family doctors here in Regina, as an example. Yet 

they have untold millions of dollars to set up these kaizen 

offices all across the province, Mr. Speaker, to allow this lean 

takeover of medicare, Mr. Speaker, to allow now the rampant 

takeover of lean in education, Mr. Speaker, with millions of 

dollars being funnelled outside of the province and away from 

the priorities that really matter to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see it in education now as well, where we see the lean 

obsession of this Premier, the lean obsession of this Premier 

now starting to enter into education, run rampant within 

education. 

 

We know just at the very initial start here, that it’s at least $1.2 

million that they’ve spent and dedicated towards lean 

contractors in education at a time where they’re forcing cuts and 

have forced cuts in many classrooms across Saskatchewan. And 

when they’ve been failing to get the job done for the students of 

Saskatchewan, and applying a model with this obsession of the 

Premier towards this lean kaizen model, that just doesn’t fit 

well into areas like education, applying this simplistic, 

assembly-line model to something as human and something as 

real, something as dynamic as young people and students, Mr. 

Speaker. It just doesn’t make sense. 

 

And you know, when I look at this assembly-line model that 

they’ve imported from the States and from Japan, from different 

factories, and, Mr. Speaker, and applied it to our medicare 

system and now to our education system, you know, I remind 

members opposite that when we’re dealing with the children of 

our province, when we are dealing with students in 

Saskatchewan, we’re dealing with education, we have one 

chance to get it right. 

 

And unlike, you know, what happens when actual cars for 

example come off a production line, in education we don’t have 

the chance to recall students 5 or 10 or 15 years down the road. 

We have one chance to get it right, and it doesn’t make sense to 

be applying a simplistic, assembly-line model to education and 

to health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s disappointing to see the government simply laugh off or 

heckle or something that’s wasting tens of millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s also disappointing to see a government 

not be accountable to Saskatchewan people, not be transparent 

to Saskatchewan people, fail to stand up and provide answers to 

Saskatchewan people, and something that they really deserve. 

 

We know that when we say there’s untold millions, Mr. 

Speaker, we know the $40 million to the American contractor, 

where we’ve heard many say that the Premier has been fleeced 

on this deal, Mr. Speaker. We know where there’s the $17 

million, I believe annually, for the lean kaizen offices, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that they’ve actually been flying in . . . And 

I know many just can’t get their heads around this and I 

certainly can’t figure that out, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 

$3,500 a day being paid for Japanese senseis, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, I don’t know. This is the province, these are the 

people of the province that have invented and built medicare, 

Mr. Speaker, and for the government now to be shipping out the 

dollars, to be outsourcing that system, and to be causing issues 

in those systems just doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In education we see that approach now as a big concern. We see 

it with this simplistic standardized testing agenda of 

government, where it’s clear government doesn’t understand 

what standardized tests are even all about, Mr. Speaker, where 

they are foisting upon Saskatchewan people, and wasting 

millions of dollars to do so, an outdated, old-fashioned testing 

agenda regime that just doesn’t meet the needs of students or 

the realities of classrooms today. 

 

And I note that the University of Saskatchewan has weighed in 

on this one, and this is their education foundations faculty at the 

University of Saskatchewan. They’ve written a letter to the 

Minister of Education that we believe should be listened to, the 

same sort of position that’s already been taken by the 

University of Regina Education faculty. And I quote from that 

letter, “We would like you to take a firm stance and reject these 

plans entirely.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the call from the University of 

Saskatchewan. It’s past time that that Education minister and 

that that government, for one, learn what a standardized test is; 

secondly, why they’re bad for Saskatchewan; and then reject the 

misguided agenda that they’re on. 

 

We know there’s needs in classrooms all across Saskatchewan. 

We know that in so many circumstances they’re 

under-resourced, overcrowded. We know that the students have 

been stripped of the one-on-one attention that they so deserve, 

that they need, Mr. Speaker. We know the government’s failing 

to get the job done in repairing and building the schools that we 

need, Mr. Speaker. There are so many places for this 

government to be stepping up in a meaningful way. Where they 

should be stepping up in a meaningful way for education, 

they’re just failing to do so. 



5222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

I’ll quote just a couple of other pieces from that letter from the 

University of Saskatchewan, of why standardized tests aren’t 

the right way to go. I quote: “Standardized assessments have 

not been demonstrated to improve teaching or learning in any 

significant manner.” That’s Hout & Elliott from 2011. 

 

“Standardized tests diverts teaching time and monetary 

resources away from student supports, teachable moments, and 

direct teacher-student contact time.” That’s Kohn of 2011, 

2000; and Sahlberg of 2011. 

 

They go on to say that “standardized tests that are used in some 

jurisdictions are considered to be racializing projects,” Mr. 

Speaker. Burris, 2014. 

 

It’s clear that standardized tests are culturally insensitive. It’s 

clear that they’re unfair to students that are learning English for 

the first time, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t make any sense at a 

diverse time in our province, a time where we have a growing 

population and many new Canadians, to be bringing forward an 

outdated system like this to the students of Saskatchewan 

instead of addressing what matters. 

 

I’d like to address as well the lean efficiency clawback that we 

addressed here today that the school boards are now bracing 

themselves for. It’s been foisted upon them. Again this 

government has failed to listen to key educational partners, the 

school boards of this province, and they’re ripping dollars back 

from students, ripping dollars back from school divisions. And 

the school divisions themselves have called this the lean 

efficiency clawback, something that’s going to come as a big 

consequence to students if not addressed by the minister 

opposite. 

 

And it also again highlights the lack of respect of that 

government to work with their educational partners, the 

teachers, and in this case the school boards, Mr. Speaker, the 

failure to communicate with them, to work together. This 

should have been no surprise to the government, and the 

consequences of this poor decision should have been 

understood to government by those on the front lines, by those 

that know local needs best long before it was foisted upon 

school divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I strongly support the motion. I stand opposed to 

the wasteful agenda of this government, their obsession with 

lean. And we call for those dollars to be diverted to where they 

matter in the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to once again stand in this House and take part in a debate, a 

debate that is so critical to the future of this province moving 

forward. And not just health care, but other mechanisms as 

well, other ministries as well in this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I want to start off by just talking about the last speaker from the 

opposition who said that, you know, we have one chance to get 

it right. The member from Regina Rosemont, it’s interesting 

that he would say that because I think he fails to recognize in 

2005 there was, in fact, a lean initiative under the NDP. And in 

fact it was a pilot project in the Five Hills Health Region, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And at the end of that pilot project, there is a 

quotation here: 

 

The region has successfully pioneered the adoption of lean 

across all aspects of the health care enterprise. As a result 

of this success experienced in the Five Hills Health 

Region, the province is in a position to implement lean 

throughout the health care sector. 

 

[12:00] 

 

That’s from 2005, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a government at 

the time who would, by all appearances, be in favour of lean at 

that time. Now to be granted, lean may have changed its 

terminology and the methodology in how it actually instructs its 

leadership candidates to implement lean across a government 

kind of a wide spectrum. But you know, when we look at that 

start and the government back in 2005 was in support of lean, 

now we’re hearing from the opposite side that members are 

opposed to lean because they’re saying . . . and I believe the 

motion talks about the pouring of untold millions into lean 

projects. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The question will 

have to be raised, what was the cost of lean at that time as a 

percentage of the budget for that particular health region? I’m 

sure at the time it was one of those things that the government 

thought it was money well spent. Because you know what? 

There’s an analogy. There’s a bit of a saying out there. It takes 

money to save money in some cases. You have to put dollars in. 

You have to train staff. You should always be asking yourself, 

how do we make things better? How can we improve something 

that’s already in place? Not just to be complacent, and not just 

to look at complacency and say that that’s the status quo, 

because it’s not on. 

 

You know, when we talk about complacency in the health care 

system specifically, there’s a quote here from a nurse from 

March 24th, 2014 that says, and I want to say this here, quote it, 

and go on the records: 

 

Lean is about no longer tolerating complacency. It gives 

us the tools that help us create a system to deliver safer, 

better quality care. As a nurse I fully support the 

implementation of lean in Saskatchewan health care.  

 

That’s from Amy Strudwick, a registered psychiatric nurse with 

14 years of front-line experience in acute care in RQHR 

[Regina-Qu’Appelle Health Region]. So right there we hear 

from a front-life staff member who sees that lean is busting 

down the walls of complacency. 

 

Now there are other accounts of how lean is being looked at 

across the sector from doctors and other nurses as well, as well 

as from administrators across the province. I’ll get into those if 

I have time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But clearly we hear that to be complacent within the health care 

system — and I would argue across any other ministry — 

makes us as a government fail the people of this province who 

pay their tax dollars to see a government and a province thrive 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5223 

and stay alive. 

 

And on that measure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would we not 

check out different avenues, different ideas? Why not bring in 

something from a manufacturing sector, a private sector 

company, a corporation? See if we in fact could implement it 

into a government operation to see if it in fact can do one major 

thing, save taxpayers’ dollars which can be reinvested in other 

measures to advance the life and well-being of those people 

who are paying taxes in this province, and people who want to 

move to this province. Because we see, they see economic 

development and prosperity like no other time before, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s also funny that I . . . interesting, not so much 

funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That would be rude to say that. But 

interesting that the member from Cumberland rose in the House 

today to speak in favour of the NDP motion, which I will never 

support and cannot support that motion. But you know what, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that he talks about the need for 

long-term care facilities and a facility in La Ronge. And you 

know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he asked for it for many 

years. And to his credit he is making his voice of the people up 

north heard. And you know what? The Minister of Health and 

the officials listened to that and brought it forward, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I’m not sure why, but we all know that he voted 

against the budget which incorporates substantial funding for a 

long-term care facility in La Ronge. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that I believe, I 

believe that when we look at what’s happening in our health 

care systems now, our new facility development, lean is a part 

of that. It’s incorporated in the actual talk and the design and 

the overall embracing of the fundamentals of lean to make any 

new facility run better, service the patients better, and help the 

staff ensure that we have the best operations possible, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And on that point, to that point, the member from Cumberland 

should be very much aware that when the process is engaged in 

La Ronge that — because I saw what happened in Prince Albert 

with the first lean exercise developed in the new, rolling out of 

the new hospital plan for Prince Albert — is that they will 

engage patients, family members, front-line staff, 

administration staff, and people who also have a stakeholder 

interest in that particular design and that particular field, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So this will not be a government ministry, 

top-down design or a directive or a dictatorship at all. 

 

The lean concept will engage those people who’ll be using the 

facility, are using it now, working there now, to ensure it’s the 

best design, the best flow, the best management of dollars going 

forward. And it’ll address the needs coming in the future as 

well, not just a cookie cutter . . . drop down a design platform 

and within a minute it’s filled. This design function of lean will 

help to ensure that the long-term care facility will manage the 

needs of the population of the growth, the demographic of the 

North, and the growing population, the age of the population, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the member from Cumberland should 

be very thankful that lean in fact is something being engaged 

and will be engaged in the health regions as we look forward to 

this building. 

 

Now I know I was . . . I had the honour of a couple of weeks 

ago taking part in a bit of an exercise with the member from 

Northcote, the member from Sask Rivers as well, when in 

Prince Albert after a 5-day lean first initial process of the 3P 

[production preparation process] model design for the new 

hospital in Prince Albert. They engaged everybody that would 

be involved in that particular hospital in the future. Patients, 

staff, EMS [emergency medical services] staff, the police force 

was also part of that. Interesting enough the fire department was 

there as well. And they walked us through what would be 

technically a change of the design of the first floor — 

emergency room, some diagnostic testing, some basic 

ambulatory care facilities as well. 

 

And what was exciting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they had 

. . . The staff members took a leadership role within their team 

structure, looked at designing what would be the best model to 

move forward. And oh, by the way, architects were there as 

well, because the architects will take what’s been learned from 

that exercise and incorporate that in future design concepts. 

Again not just an architect saying this is the best thing that they 

think is for the hospital, but they’re going to be listening to the 

actual people who are going to work there. And there were 

patients taking part in that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this design function is going to help in the future moving 

forward to design the Vic hospital. So a lean process like this is 

very exciting. And I know myself, the members from Prince 

Albert and area are . . . I won’t be here most likely when that 

hospital is built. But I’ll tell you what. I’ll be there to see the 

grand opening. If I have a day off from the police force, I will 

show up there absolutely. It’ll be a very proud day for me. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have other 

quotes from doctors who talk about lean. And you know what? 

And there’s one from Dr. Vino Padayachee. 
 

A Member: — Padayachee. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Padayachee, thank you. Chief executive officer, 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, and it says: 

 

We support Saskatchewan’s transformation agenda in 

improving the health of the people of this province, and 

the use of LEAN methodology to improve access to safe, 

quality patient care. 

 

You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Again it’s going to take 

money to save money. We know that already from what’s been 

talked about in the government from different ministry 

agencies, how they’ve saved money already, and across health 

regions. It’s going to take new ideas to look at new design 

concepts to build health care facilities. It takes money to save 

money. It takes money to make money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And in this case we’re seeing an investment of taxpayers’ 

dollars, which we see already has saved dollars, have improved 

patient care, have moved the agenda away from emergency — 

help me, I need help right now — to how do we make the 

system better to involve patients, to move them through the 

system, and to actually support the conditions as we go forward, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So today I’m proud to stand today and say 

I will not support the motion at all. 

 



5224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 65 minutes for debate has 

expired. Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

committed to setting progressive goals and works to achieve 

them. In 2012 our government came out with the growth plan 

which laid out our plans for the future of Saskatchewan. In the 

growth plan our government committed to surgical wait times 

that are no more than three months. 

 

To date our government has invested 186 million to achieve this 

goal and we are almost there. Eighty per cent of procedures are 

now performed within three months. And the leader of the NDP 

has now been in his position for over a year, and they still have 

no plan. We know they do not support lean, but we have no idea 

what they support because they have no policies. So to the 

member from Regina Rosemont: what is your party’s health 

care policy? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Part of our health care policy, Mr. 

Speaker, is recognizing that at a time where you’re growing, 

that you need to make some direct investments into where they 

matter for Saskatchewan people. We need to make sure that 

Saskatchewan people have access to a family doctor, something 

that far too many don’t have. We have to restore and ensure the 

trust in our emergency rooms and emergency services across 

the province. And we need to make sure that the seniors of this 

province have the supports they need in seniors’ care, Mr. 

Speaker, a circumstance that for far too many is not dignified. 

 

One way to get there is to divert the tens of millions of dollars 

being wasted by this government on an out-of-country 

contractor and this whole lean obsession of this government, 

and to redirect them in practical ways back to where they matter 

— in the life of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

mean some of the arguments that get made over there are kind 

of laughable, but we’ve heard from different members on that 

side that every penny they’ve shovelled into lean, on the part of 

this government, has been money well spent. The $40 million 

with the one US consultant, the $17 million on kaizen 

promotion offices, the $3,500 per day for senseis, Mr. Speaker, 

and the meter is running — not just in health care but 

throughout government. But we hear that that’s money well 

spent. 

 

I guess my question is to the member from Moose Jaw North: if 

that’s money well spent, says who? The US consultant that 

they’ve done all the deals with? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, well thank you for the 

question, the member opposite. When we think of money well 

spent, when we think of the $4 million that has been made up 

already and we’re just starting this whole process, I think it is 

well invested. I’d rather use the word invested. 

 

But I would ask the member, if they’re so concerned about this 

money well spent, we don’t see their plan. All we saw was 

closing hospitals. And what was the money well spent when we 

talked about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] and those kind of initiatives coming 

from that side? So the money well spent for increasing health 

benefits and health information, a better system, more efficient, 

and looking after the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s what’s monies well spent. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the opposition leader said in a leadership platform, 

“Our focus needs to be on establishing a more efficient system 

that is centred on patients and their families.” We agree with 

that statement. And thanks to lean, we have found many of 

those efficiencies. The blood and plasma product lean project 

has saved our government $35 million since 2010. Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region’s mental health and addictions clinic 

reduced their wait lists from 400 clients to only 70, and they 

reduced the number of cancelled appointments from 42 to zero. 

 

Thanks to lean, 100 per cent of patients in Regina Qu’Appelle 

in-patient mental health unit are now connected to the 

appropriate community service before they leave the unit. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: will you stand with 

our government and your leader and endorse a lean initiative 

that finds efficiencies in our health care system while focusing 

specifically on health care? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our leader spoke 

about being centred on patients and families. And that would be 

Bill 606, Mr. Speaker, the private member’s bill that our side 

has brought forward ensuring that there are minimum quality of 

care standards in our long-term care homes. This government is 

spending untold millions on lean and can’t even get the basics 

done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

was listening with interest with what the member of Moose Jaw 

North was saying, and of course we’re interested in hearing 

some proof, who actually says there are savings. But you know, 

what he was saying in his speech, he went on waxing 

eloquently about how the creativity of lean is really helping 

them to think things through. In fact he was talking about the 

ability to think outside the box and how he could not possibly 

have done this without the help, the creativity of the 

consultants. So it sounds like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he has 

leaned himself right out of a job. So today I’m asking him, why 

doesn’t he simply resign? 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5225 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the premise of the 

question just shows how ridiculous and out of touch that side is 

with the people of Saskatchewan. If he’d have been listening 

and if he wants proof, if he’d have been listening when I said I 

went for a blood test in the Moose Jaw Hospital less than two 

weeks ago, I didn’t have to stop in the front and get a number 

and sit down. I didn’t have to spend 20 minutes there. They 

took me right back to the lab. The lab test was done in a matter 

of 10 minutes. Mr. Speaker, it’s only a matter of 20 minutes to 

me, but when you think of 400 people in a given week, that’s a 

lot of time and a lot of savings. And the efficiencies that we see 

in this whole lean system, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this 

government wants, that’s what lean’s about, and they should 

learn that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s track 

record on health care worker staffing is far from stellar. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite the opposite. Between 1996 and 2001, 

Saskatchewan lost 451 nurses. This trend continued from 2001 

to 2006 when Saskatchewan lost a total of 1,160 health care 

workers, Mr. Speaker. Since 2007 our government has strived 

to recruit health care providers and took measurements such as 

adding 300 physicians and 1,000 nurses to our health care 

system. 

 

To the member from Cumberland: do you think it’s acceptable 

that your former government watched health care workers 

march out of the province in droves and did nothing about it? 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To get in on this, let’s be very clear. The 

priorities of the money that this government is wasting, 

taxpayers’ dollars could be definitely building a long-term care 

facility in La Ronge, could deal with a lot of the issues. Now let 

me tell you why. There has been a lot of good work, a lot of 

good work done by community members, by community 

members who . . . [inaudible] . . . embarrassed this government 

to put 500,000 into long-term planning — but embarrassed 

them. They should have announced and not waste the money, 

40 million on lean all over. 

 

Let’s do the right thing. Let’s respect the community of the 

North. Let’s respect our seniors. Do the right thing and 

announce a facility once and for all. The planning’s over; the 

need is now. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the member 

from Moose Jaw North say with a straight face that his 

government is actually meeting the basic needs in our long-term 

care and our acute care facilities — with a straight face, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, you know, basic care is 

everywhere. We don’t have to put limits on it or establish . . . 

We want to look after people. We know that they shut down 

more long-term care spaces, and we’re building them, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re building hospitals. We’re looking after people. 

With a straight face absolutely I can say this government is 

doing better in this province for the betterment of people than 

the NDP did in their last 16 years. Time after time you can see 

the improvements that we’ve done, both in seniors and 

disability, with people with special needs. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

doing the job that they didn’t do because they never got around 

to it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, again in this debate we’ve 

seen the NDP playing politics and not supporting good policy. 

It was the same with the 2014-15 budget. Before the budget 

came out, they said they wanted a La Ronge long-term care 

facility. Our budget committed funding to adding more 

long-term care beds in La Ronge. They said emergency wait 

rooms were too long. Our budget committed $4 million to 

reduce wait times. And they said that the Sacred Heart School 

needed a new gym. Our budget committed 4.1 million to 

completely replace Connaught and Sacred Heart School. 

 

Even though our budget included funding for many of their 

demands, they still voted against it. To the member from 

Cumberland: when will your party . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75 minutes has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2 — Saskatchewan’s Forestry Sector 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s great to 

be able to talk about forestry, and I will be moving a motion at 

the end of my talk here. It’s well known that Carrot River 

Valley is not only known for its great agriculture land, but it’s 

also known for its forestry . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and 

the Carrot River Wildcats, who have won the provincial title, by 

the way, for four different times in their football team. I thank 

the member for mentioning that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud to announce in this House 

that, at the same time, I’m not going to be challenged for the 

nomination in Carrot River, as it looks like I’ll be able to run 

for this side of the House next election. And hopefully, 

hopefully . . . It’s been a privilege to talk about Carrot River 

Valley and to represent Carrot River Valley, and I hope that the 

people will see the same thing next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I am the Legislative Secretary to the Minister 

of Environment and with a focus on forestry. So it makes me 

very happy. And I think what I should do is put in some of my 



5226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

expertise that I was picked for, to be a Legislative Secretary to 

Environment, with forestry. And that is what I did in my former 

life before becoming a politician, before coming into this 

House. 

 

First off I know something about forestry as my father owned a 

lumber mill, a small lumber mill as back in those days they 

were all small lumber mills, out in the Pasquia Hills area. And, 

fact is, it’s still well known, Mr. Speaker, as the Bradshaw mill 

site. It’s one of the places out in the Pasquia Hills that the snow 

toboggan trails go through, and it was quite interesting. 

 

Now needless to say, I was quite young at that time, and I really 

didn’t do all that much out there. I used to go out there on the 

weekends and, you know, I used to hook up chokers for the log 

truck, and also I tailed the edger a little bit and piled lumber. Of 

course, everything was done manually at that time, so it was 

certainly different, and obviously not near as efficient as the 

mills that we have operating in Saskatchewan nowadays. 

 

The other thing I have done, Mr. Speaker, is I have a Class 1A 

driver’s licence, and I still hold it because you never know in 

this business if you’re going to be around or not. But I still hold 

my Class 1A driver’s licence and I’ve hauled logs to the various 

different mills. I hauled logs into the plant in Carrot River that’s 

now owned by Edgewood, the Weyerhaeuser plant in Hudson 

Bay, and the pulp mill plant in Prince Albert. 

 

So needless to say, I’ve seen some of that on the forest end of it. 

The other thing I’ve also done in my former life is I was an ag 

pilot. We actually had a separate company called Green Forest 

Applicators, Ltd., owned by . . . with myself and a couple of my 

friends, and we did forestry spraying, Mr. Speaker. And so 

consequently we went out there, and I guess that’s why we 

called it Green Forest Applicators because it was to make the 

forest green. And we actually did four contracts here in 

Saskatchewan, and in truth we were the first one to ever run 

turboprop spray aircraft within the province. 

 

So I guess what I’m saying is that I was very happy when I was 

given the position of Legislative Secretary, and with it, to 

concentrate on forestry. Now there’s a big difference — I know 

the member from Saskatoon Centre doesn’t think very much of 

legislative secretaries — but it’s a lot different than when that 

government was in power. When that government was in power 

they had all these little, little jobs that they gave to all the 

different people. And you know something, Mr. Speaker? They 

all got paid for them. They all got paid. Now that wasn’t very 

efficient. 

 

The one thing about legislative secretaries within this 

government is we don’t get paid for those extra duties. We just 

do it on our MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] wages 

and we don’t get paid. We do it because we like doing it and we 

appreciate what we can do for the province as MLAs. We’re not 

like the other side. We don’t want to get paid for every little 

odds and ends that we do, Mr. Speaker. And when you take a 

look at that end of it, when you take a look at that end of it, it’s 

been a lot of fun being in the forest industry, talking to the 

different people within the forestry. I know a lot of the 

contractors personally, working within the forest industry. And 

I’ve been through quite a few of the mills, seeing the 

efficiencies that they put forward. You know, those mills have 

to operate efficiently or they’re not in business. And we saw a 

great downturn in the forest industry for a while. And of course 

the NDP didn’t help that at all. 

 

About the only thing the NDP ever did was just before the 2007 

election, decided to go along to Domtar and offer them $100 

million, which Domtar didn’t know anything was coming. Their 

president was actually in New York at the time, never knew 

anything was coming. And the former premier, Calvert, offered 

up $100 million for him and made him fly back so they could 

try and buy some votes in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Saskatchewan saw through that and that didn’t work. 

 

But I do take exception for the work that we have done on our 

Legislative Secretary end of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what was said by the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. And I’m going to quote a little 

bit that came out of Hansard of what he said on March the 12th: 

 

And again I think that when we have legislative secretaries 

that they’re . . . And I was one too. And I remember I was 

the Legislative Secretary for a few short, a few months of 

SchoolPlus. And I think the initiatives then were that we 

would see legislative secretaries do a lot of work. And I 

think about the member from Fairview and her work on 

bullying and there was actually a lot of profile and her 

work did create a lot of interest. 

 

And we have to thank her for that. She did a great job. 

 

But many of the other legislative secretaries haven’t quite 

achieved the same level of profile in the public. And I 

think that it’s important that when we have people who are 

appointed legislative secretaries that they actually do get 

out there and create profile within the public and do some 

work on that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’m going to end my quote at that 

part. Mr. Speaker, this going around and looking at these 

different forest plants, talking to the contractors, do you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? This isn’t going to go out and generate just 

a ton of public interest. But what it does do, what it does do is I 

can take stuff back to the ministry and tell them where things 

maybe should be looked at, things maybe should be changed. 

It’s not a matter of being out there. You’re not in the news. 

You’re not on TV or anything else. But that work, Mr. Speaker, 

is being done. 

 

Now apparently the member from Saskatoon Centre thinks that 

unless you’re in front of a TV camera, unless you’re writing 

reports I guess for them, then you’re not doing anything. Well 

I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but we are. We are working. 

 

He goes on to say, and I’m going to quote again: 

 

So I think there is a role for legislative secretaries, but they 

need to be much more active. And as I say, I think that 

very few of them actually do achieve that profile in the 

public, and so I wonder, why do you even have legislative 

secretaries? Now you’re getting rid of the idea that you 

have to reappoint them. I mean I think it would be good 

for them to show up maybe once a year to get their new 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5227 

contract. That would be at least showing that they are 

interested in their role. I mean I know some of them over 

there are legislative secretaries and we haven’t seen them. 

 

Well I’ll tell you what, other than the two members that are one 

from Athabasca and the one from Cumberland, the rest of them 

really don’t live in the forest area, so maybe they haven’t seen 

somebody like me going around there and looking at the forest 

industry. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And speaking of the members from Athabasca and Cumberland, 

I’m actually very disappointed in them for not even talking 

more about the forest industry because the forest industry 

obviously is in their area. And they should want to see 

improvements within the forest industry because 15 per cent of 

the forest industry has Aboriginal employees. That’s the highest 

percentage, Mr. Speaker, in all of Canada. But I know what 

they think about the forest industry, and they haven’t got a plan. 

You know, they haven’t got a plan. They’ve never had a plan 

on basically any industry. 

 

Do you remember the famous tree book, Mr. Speaker, forestry? 

And here you have two of their members, Athabasca and 

Cumberland, the forest industry was not mentioned one time, 

not one time in their famous tree book. You know, that tree 

book used a lot of paper, but truthfully the pulp that they used 

to make the paper in that tree book would have been far better 

off on a roll, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And speaking of that, Mr. Speaker, they still haven’t come up 

with any kind of policy. I would like to see them try and move 

forward. I would like to see them look at the forest industry. 

 

Let’s go back to some of the challenges that the industry had in 

the past, you know, when the NDP, they were shutting down all 

the mills. Well at one time Weyerhaeuser wanted to cogenerate 

power. That may have kept that mill operating in Prince Albert. 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know what? The NDP said no to 

cogeneration for that plant. That plant now is cogenerating and 

is producing power. It’s producing employment. It’s getting rid 

of the hog fuel, Mr. Speaker. This is a government that said, 

yes, you can go and you can cogenerate. You can go and 

operate. 

 

In my area alone, Mr. Speaker, we have Edgewood Forest 

Products who moved in from British Columbia. Now 

Edgewood Forest Products bought up the Weyerhaeuser stud 

mill in Carrot River. Edgewood has a plant in British Columbia. 

They’ve got a plant in Alberta. And they looked at 

Saskatchewan and they said, you know, it looks like we have a 

pretty good government in Saskatchewan now, rather than the 

NDP. So they decided to move here. Never asked for any 

money, never asked for any concessions. And they moved here 

all on their own and got that plant operating in Carrot River, 

which made a very significant difference to the money and the 

employment that’s going on around Carrot River. 

 

You have to realize that the forest industry, it’s not just a matter 

of the plants themselves, Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of all the 

spinoffs. Like you can go to the tire shop in Carrot River, and 

they’re busy. We have the truck tires, the loader tires. You 

know, you take a look at the contractors. Basically all the 

contractors in Saskatchewan when the forest industry went 

down were pulling out. These contractors are going out there 

and employing people, working. 

 

We’ve also done some things within the government to help the 

forest industry. You know, the highway, Highway 55 running 

from Carrot River basically comes through Hudson Bay, Carrot 

River over to . . . well it goes right out to the west side of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. That highway was in deplorable shape, 

and that is an understatement. I drove truck on that highway. I 

drove car on that highway. I drove pickup trucks on that 

highway, and it was terrible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government made a commitment to fixing 

those highways so the truckers could go and operate properly, 

hauling logs back and forth as needed. They’ve also got the 

chip trucks that are running, and there’s also been a lot of work 

done actually right through to Shoal Lake where a lot of the 

chips, Mr. Speaker, are going out to Manitoba. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the opposition says, or I 

guess maybe doesn’t say because they really haven’t said hardly 

anything about forestry at all, some of the things also that we 

have done is we’ve done some restructuring within the forest 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve assigned the Prince Albert Forest 

Management Agreement to a new company called Sakâw forest 

management inc., and that was in November of 2010. Now that 

was done through Economy. You have to realize, although I’m 

Legislative Secretary going through to Environment looking at 

the forestry, part of forestry is also under Economy. 

 

Now this was something new. Sakâw is six forest companies 

that are in partnership with two First Nations groups. This is 

where all partners have received a wood supply allocation. The 

agreement was subsequently amended to better address the 

business needs of the partners and to accommodate the unique 

structure of that particular FMA [forest management 

agreement]. 

 

Also over in the Pasquia/Porcupine Forest Management 

Agreement, that’s now jointly owned by Weyerhaeuser and 

Edgewood. And subsequently in 2013 that agreement was 

amended to better meet the business needs of those companies. 

 

Conducting an analysis of forest inventories for biomass 

availability to support energy from a biomass industry with a 

focus on the Meadow Lake area was something else that this 

government has done. These are all things, Mr. Speaker, to help 

our forest industry work and thrive in Saskatchewan. We have a 

revised wood supply analysis and prepared harvest volume 

scheduled for northern timber supply zones. 

 

We also have an insect and disease program, and from April 

2008 till September 2013, the insect and disease program in 

support of the forest industry and other forest values has 

expanded $5,189,536.21 for provincial aerial and ground-based 

insect and disease surveys and associated spruce budworm 

spray services. During this time frame, a total area of 57 203 

hectares have been sprayed for spruce budworm. 

 



5228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

A total of $1,966,748.43 has been spent on mountain pine 

beetle surveillance and management services from 2008 to 

2013, including support for on-ground control work in Alberta. 

Now we’ve all heard about the pine beetle, and hopefully this 

. . . We didn’t really want this real cold weather that we’ve had, 

Mr. Speaker, but all the scientists are saying that if we have a 

real cold winter, this is going to help eradicate the pine beetle. 

And I guess we’ll find out this year if that’s actually true 

because it’s really something that is scary. We definitely don’t 

want to see the pine beetle come into Saskatchewan. And I’ll 

tell you what, there’s almost no way to eradicate it other than 

fire or cold weather, and although I don’t like either one, I’ll 

take the cold weather over the fire. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we have the forest service renewal program. 

The program continues to reforest old harvest areas, which are 

the government’s responsibility in support of the forest industry 

and other forest values. In the spring of 2013, 2.561 million 

seedlings were planted on approximately 1383 hectares of NSR 

[not sufficiently reforested] lands. A total of 12,716,990 

seedlings have been planted on 8601 hectares of NSR lands in 

the province since April of 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another thing that this government is doing 

to help the forest industry. From April the 1st to August 31st of 

2013, approximately 925 hectares of plantations have been 

completed, and a total of 7637 hectares of plantations in the 

Pasquia/Porcupine forest management area have been treated in 

the province since April of 2008 — another shot that we are 

helping within the forest industry of which, I’ll go back again 

and say it, that side never mentions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have approved Mistik Management’s new 

forest management plan — that was in June of 2009 — the first 

forest management plan that conforms to the new forest 

management planning standard. Forest management plans 

provide long-term strategic guidance for forest management 

including determining appropriate harvest level and addressing 

other forest values. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also tabled the state of the provincial forest 

report. That was done in February 2010. Published a new 

guidebook, Field Guide to the Ecosites of Saskatchewan’s 

Provincial Forests, and that was in 2010, which provides 

detailed information about the characteristics associated with 

the . . . [inaudible] . . . and wetland ecosystems found in 

Saskatchewan’s provincial forests and parks, providing a 

foundational piece for the results-based framework. Also The 

Forestry Professions Act was passed in 2013 spring session of 

the legislature. This Act moves from protection to the title of 

right to practice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are a lot of different things that our 

government has worked forward, and one other thing we 

brought up is, obviously forest fires are a bit of a problem. They 

can be a big problem. We went to the automated fire tower 

system and, Mr. Speaker, this is proving to work very well. This 

system now monitors 24 hours a day. It contains infrared so it 

can see through smoke. It contains cameras. It goes into the 

forest service in Prince Albert. And this is a great initiative that 

was put forward by this government to help improve our 

detection, early detection of forest fires. 

 

Now the member from Saskatoon Nutana was totally against 

this. Actually that was one of the few times that forestry was 

brought up, and they were against these fire towers. They would 

not believe in the benefits of 24-hour surveillance. Now I can’t 

figure that one out, Mr. Speaker, why they wouldn’t want great 

24-hour surveillance of our forests. I guess it was just a matter 

. . . They didn’t care. They didn’t think it was all that important. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana brought 

up some facts that just, well, they weren’t really accurate. Some 

of the things that came out was the NDP Environment critic, 

that’s the member from Nutana, claimed that Oregon is only 

using fire detection cameras as a pilot project in one small test 

area, and she said all the rest were just still using human 

observers. Well Mr. Grafe from Oregon confirmed that the fire 

detection cameras are a statewide program in Oregon. They 

operate over 30 detection cameras statewide, and they also 

continue to expand them. Now I don’t know where that member 

from Nutana was going on this, but obviously she was getting 

wrong information. Unfortunately they were spreading it out 

throughout the public, and I actually had some calls into my 

office on it. But once it was explained that this is a better 

system for looking at fires that were happening, it wasn’t a 

problem anymore. 

 

I think sometimes what the NDP does is they just don’t 

understand. Maybe they don’t understand the forest industry. 

Maybe they don’t care about the forest industry. Maybe they’re 

just more worried about trying to get the city vote. But where 

are the members from Cumberland and Athabasca, Mr. 

Speaker? They should be very interested in the forest industry. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can continue on, you know. Forestry is — and 

this goes back to the member from Athabasca and the member 

from Cumberland — it’s northern Saskatchewan’s 

second-largest economic driver. And, Mr. Speaker, also 

Saskatchewan forest industry currently has the capacity to 

utilize approximately 70 per cent of the AAC [allowable annual 

cut] in normal market conditions, generating over $1 billion in 

forest product sales including 800 million in exports and over 

5,000 direct jobs. Mr. Speaker, I am very happy, very happy to 

be a Legislative Secretary on this end of it, to be able to help 

facilitate moving forward with our forest industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that was brought up was under the 

NDP they had a very convoluted dues system. In other words 

you could have one plant . . . And I’ll just use an example. You 

could have the Weyerhaeuser plant over in Hudson Bay had 

different stumpage fees than Carrier who just opened up a new 

mill up in Big River. Mr. Speaker, what this government did is 

they went through and they levelled that playing field out and 

made it so it wasn’t a convoluted system, made it so all of the 

mills were running on an even keel because what it does is it 

creates conflict between the different mills. Well one mill 

would say, well we got this. And the other mill would say, well 

we’ve got this. And it was very hard to have proper operation 

within the province on stuff like that. So this was something 

that was done, and it’s made all of the players within the 

industry very happy. 

 

Now that one was done, Mr. Speaker, through the economy end 



April 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5229 

of the forest industry. And it has definitely improved relations 

between the different mills because obviously you don’t want to 

have one mill saying, oh we’ve got this, and the other mill says, 

well we’re paying way higher. It was totally unfair. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this government is about. This 

government is about steady growth and it’s about ready for 

growth and it’s about taking action, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

the other side, they can talk. But it’s been well said by our 

Premier many times, that side talks; this side takes action, Mr. 

Speaker. And we want to move, and we want to move forward 

and we want to do things as seamlessly for business as possible, 

whether it be in the forest business, whether it be basically in 

any business. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why we have a red 

tape committee set up, which I know the other guys never 

thought about at all. But we have a red tape committee set up to 

try and make things easy for business to operate within this 

province. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, some of these things must be working 

or else why would we have this influx of people coming into 

Saskatchewan, coming into Saskatchewan to do business? 

People like Edgewood who came from British Columbia to set 

up a plant in Carrot River. People who think that Saskatchewan 

is a good place to do business under this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going back to the forest end, you know, we have 

quite a few of our mills . . . There were a lot of our mills shut 

down through the downturn, the largest downtown that we’ve 

ever seen in the forest industry. We’ve had quite a few mills 

start back up again. And the latest actually is the member from 

up in Big River. The member from Saskatchewan Rivers is very 

happy just to have a mill start up, up in their area. You know, 

that was a Weyerhaeuser mill at one time up there, Mr. Speaker, 

and they shut down. Carrier has taken it over now, and now 

they are operating. And as far as I know, I think that they are — 

I think, I’m not positive on this, Mr. Speaker — but I think that 

they’ve got two shifts going there. 

 

I know the Weyerhaeuser mill in Hudson Bay is running three 

shifts. The Edgewood mill just increased to a two-shift here last 

fall. 

 

So things are looking, things are actually looking quite good 

within the forest industry as long as we, as long as we do not 

get in their way, Mr. Speaker. Let’s let these people go out, do 

their jobs, and move this province forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have, you know, we worked at trying to lower 

the tax rate for these various different plants. The corporate 

capital tax has been eliminated and the corporate income tax 

rate is . . . Well it’s at 12 per cent. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’d be nice if we could get that down 

more some day, and maybe some day, you know, we will. It’s a 

work-in-progress, Mr. Speaker. You have to realize that we still 

have to have some taxes here in this province because we’re 

still working on trying to fix up the great infrastructure deficit 

that was left to us, the legacy that was left to us under the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I talk about the forest industry and the 

things that have been done in it, you go into the new plants 

nowadays, the efficiencies that they have put in in the grading 

system . . . It used to be everything was graded manually. And 

now you go into those plants and it’s absolutely amazing. They 

use photoelectric lights. They take pictures and grade the 

lumber. It runs through there, slick as can be, comes out . . . 

And Saskatchewan’s well known for having top-grade lumber. 

 

Actually I can talk about a friend of mine down in North 

Carolina, and he has a Weyerhaeuser mill that’s only about 7 

miles away from his place. But you know, the contractors down 

there prefer to use the lumber from here. And the reason being 

is their trees grow so fast, the rings are so wide apart and they 

grow fast there. They are generally about 17 years from cut to 

. . . from plant to harvest. And our lumber is much stronger. 

Where we can use . . . I was looking in his garage and they were 

using four-by-fours for rafters. That’s because their lumber isn’t 

as strong, whereas in a garage, normal garages, you’d just use 

an ordinary two-by-four. And so consequently the contractors 

down there love using the lumber that is coming from here. It’s 

a great export market. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with those things, we have to make sure that 

we help them along. One of our initiatives also, Mr. Speaker, 

has been talking about the rail issue. And I think we should 

keep pressing on that, because the rail issue not only affects 

grain, but also it affects our lumber industry. I know that 

Weyerhaeuser over in Hudson Bay shut down two times this 

winter. And it costs a lot of money to shut one of those plants 

down because they operate 24 hours a day. They had to shut 

down two times because they had so much inventory that they 

actually ran out of room. CN [Canadian National] was supposed 

to be supplying cars for them and the cars weren’t there. They 

have told me that they have lost quite a bit of money on sales, 

Mr. Speaker, due to the fact of poor rail transportation. 

 

Edgewood, Mr. Speaker, has told me the same thing. Edgewood 

lumber has . . . They had some cars in there, came in in 

December, and it was for just-in-time delivery and it was close 

to the end of January before the cars were picked up. So 

needless to say, this did not make their sales contract. So it’s 

something that I believe we, as a government, should also work 

on CN on this rail transportation issue, not just for grain and not 

just for oil, not just for potash, but also for lumber because this 

is very important and very critical to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go back to this Legislative Secretary 

piece again, Mr. Speaker, because I think that this is an 

honourable thing that I have been tasked with and, like I said 

before, you know, it’s not out in the public. It’s not good TV 

material. It’s not good radio material. Personally I don’t look 

very good on TV anyway, or in any picture as far as that goes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the thing is you have to think of the work that 

is being done behind the scenes. And that behind-the-scenes 

work, for not just myself as the Legislative Secretary, but for all 

of us that were put in as legislative secretaries to work in the 

various different ministries, I believe it is very important work, 

and work that shows that we have a government that cares. And 

it’s not caring about the extra money because we don’t get any 

extra money for this. It’s a matter that we are doing it because 

this is a job, Mr. Speaker, that we are passionate about. We 



5230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2014 

want to work to move the province forward because we can see 

the growth that is happening in this province. 

 

And that’s one thing about the backbenchers on this side of the 

House, of which I am one of them. We are very fortunate. We 

have a cabinet that listens to what the backbenchers say. We 

have a Premier that listens to what the backbenchers say. And 

we want to continue to move the province forward because I 

can tell you, it’s really nice. A matter of a few years ago, you 

used to go into the States and people, you’d tell them you were 

from Saskatchewan, nobody even had a clue. Well they 

couldn’t even say it to begin with. But they didn’t have a clue 

where Saskatchewan was, what was happening there or 

anything. With this Premier, with this government that’s 

operating here, I’m totally shocked that how many people know 

where Saskatchewan is. 

 

Now mainly we’re thought of because of our agriculture, 

because of our oil, because of our potash. But forestry is also a 

very integral part of this province. And people do not realize 

sometimes how important, people in the province do not realize 

sometimes how important the forest industry is to the province 

of Saskatchewan. $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, is not small change. 

Maybe to you, Mr. Speaker, but not small change to people like 

me. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to now move my motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s initiatives 

to ensure the vitality of the Saskatchewan forestry sector. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the member from 

Carrot River Valley: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s initiatives 

to ensure the vitality of the Saskatchewan forestry sector. 

 

Is it the pleasure . . . I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. It is the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

Monday, April 28th at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:59.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5203 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5203 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5203 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5204 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5204 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5204 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5206 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Messages of Hope 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5206 

 Easter Greetings 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5206 

 New Arena Opens at Southend 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5206 

 Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5207 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5207 

 Contract Extension for Rider Quarterback 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5207 

 Support for Culture, Sport, and Recreation 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5208 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Hospital Services 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5208 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5208 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5208 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5210 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5210 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5212 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5213 

 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5213 

 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5213 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5214, 5224 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5216 

  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5217, 5225 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5219, 5224 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5220, 5224 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5222 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5224 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5224 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5224 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5224 

 



 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5225 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5225 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Saskatchewan’s Forestry Sector 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5225 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


