
























































Hansard: March 20, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 20, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4789 
 March 20, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Merci, monsieur le Président. [Translation: 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] Today is International Francophonie 
Day, and we are lucky to have students who are fluent in French 
sitting in the west gallery. It’s a group of 56 students, all grade 
8, from École Monseigneur de Laval. And accompanying the 
group today is teacher, Sylvie Fletcher, Stéphanie Alain; and 
from Montreal, exchange students Pierre-Yves Chateauvert and 
Mr. Jean-François Descoste. I would ask all members to join 
me in welcoming this group to their legislature today. Merci. 
[Translation: Thank you.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Je voudrais dire 
une grande bienvenue à tous les élèves de l’école Monseigneur 
de Laval à cause de l’opposition, et je voudrais dire félicitation 
pour la célébration aujourd’hui. Merci. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a big 
welcome to all the students from École Monseigneur de Laval 
on behalf of the opposition, and I would like to say 
congratulations on the celebration today. Thank you.] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. We know that in May 2013 the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we 
know that the privatization of health care laundry will mean that 
fair wage jobs will be replaced with poverty wages, and public 
accountability will be lost. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry, which will result in 
the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw. I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
concerns around safety on Dewdney Avenue, the need for 
rerouting heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue, and 
recognition that this issue was caused by actions of that 
government and any delays to address the safety concern is 
unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action, as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting of 
heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, and be 
developed through consultation with the city of Regina, 
communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Outstanding Principals 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate a friend and a neighbour of mine on his 
achievements. Owen Fortosky is the principal of St. Mark 
School in Saskatoon Riversdale and is one of two Saskatchewan 
recipients of Canada’s Outstanding Principals Award. 
 
Owen was nominated by staff and community for his tireless 
commitment to improving education. His work and education 
have taken him all over the world — to Uganda, Guyana, 
Thailand, India, Sri Lanka, Dominica, and Granada. He said 
recently: 
 

When you think of people maybe being frustrated when the 
photocopier isn’t working, then you think about how in 
Uganda, for example, people walked for two days to take 
part in those workshops. It changes a person for sure. 

 



4790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

Fortosky has taken incredible strides to help newcomer students 
at a school who face the challenge of learning in a new 
language. He involves parents in the process to help build trust 
in his students. As a result, St. Mark’s School has become an 
integral community space and works with Saskatoon Open 
Door Society to help welcome and support these families. 
 
Owen’s leadership has helped make incredible contributions to 
the quality of education in Saskatoon. He fostered the 
community-based model at St. Mary’s School which included 
the creation of a school-based pediatric clinic in 2007 — one of 
the first of its kind in Canada. As well, he helped establish a 
student co-op and credit union at St. John’s School. He was also 
co-founder of Saskatoon’s Core Neighbourhood Youth Coop or 
CNYC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate Weyburn 
educator Arlene Dobson who also received this important 
award from The Learning Partnership. We are fortunate to have 
leaders like this in our province. Please join me in recognizing 
the important work of educators in shaping our future 
generations. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

International Day of the Francophonie 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Monsieur le Président, aujourd’hui je suis 
fière d’avoir l’occasion de reconnaître la journée internationale 
de la francophonie. Aujourd’hui les francophones autour du 
monde ont l’occasion de célébré leur héritage français. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, today I am very proud to have the 
opportunity to recognize the International Day of the 
Francophonie. Today francophones around the world have the 
opportunity to celebrate their French heritage.] 
 
French is truly a worldwide language, except maybe for me, 
Mr. Speaker. It is the official language of 33 countries in five 
continents around the globe. Here in Saskatchewan, this day is 
an opportunity to honour the French language and the 
contributions of the French culture to our province. We’re very 
lucky to have a deep and flourishing French culture here, and 
today we have the opportunity to be able to celebrate it with our 
French brothers and sisters around the world. 
 
For more than 100 years, Saskatchewan has benefited from the 
presence of French culture and language. Francophone 
organizations provide employment, immigration, and 
community development programs with the province as well as 
immigration and interprovincial migration services. 
 
As I mentioned in the introduction, today we have students 
from École Monseigneur de Laval. These students take the 
majority of their education in French, and they will help to keep 
the French language alive in our province. 
 
Monsieur le Président [Translation: Mr. Speaker], even those of 
us who do not speak French should take the time to celebrate 
International Francophonie Day with our French-speaking 
community. I ask all members to join me in recognizing and 
celebrating International Francophonie Day. Merci. 

[Translation: Thank you.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Environmental Concerns 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing we didn’t hear 
about much in yesterday’s budget speech, and that is the 
environment. In fact the word wasn’t even mentioned. 
 
What’s even more alarming, Mr. Speaker, is the numbers. Year 
over year, this government shows us that proper stewardship of 
our environment and resources has not been a priority. Climate 
change funding has been cut by 82 per cent since 2009, and this 
year was no exception. 
 
The Premier has publicly said that the US [United States] 
administration should be given a little environmental elbow 
room on Keystone. It’s hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. The reality on 
the ground in Saskatchewan is that this government continues to 
cut environmental assessment, environmental protection, and 
climate change funding. 
 
While the Boundary dam project promises to curb a portion of 
greenhouse gases, it will only address coal emissions. Not only 
that. The project is already over budget and there is no sign of it 
opening in the near future. This project, as valuable as it may 
prove to be, is not a climate change policy. It only deals with 
one aspect of emissions and does nothing to move us forward to 
a renewable energy economy, putting us in the back of the pack 
of progressive countries who are aggressively moving their 
emissions on a downward track. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? 
Because carbon capture, as expensive as it is, will only deal 
with one-seventieth of the emissions we are currently 
producing. 
 
Despite their election promises, emissions continue to rise. 
When will we ever see real climate action from this 
government? All we’re seeing today is broken promises and a 
failure to act. This budget, once again, fails future generations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, our law recognizes the 
inherent dignity and equal, inalienable rights of all members of 
the human family. We do this as a province because the causes 
for which we stand — of justice, of freedom, and of fairness — 
cannot flourish where discrimination is given rein to coexist. 
 
Today I stand alongside my fellow members to speak in 
particular on the matter of racial discrimination. Tomorrow is 
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, where citizens and governments meet the call 
of the United Nations to respect, protect, and defend our rich 
diversity. I will be joining the Minister of Education and the 
Minister of Advanced Education and students from the Misbah 
and Brunskill Schools at the University of Saskatchewan to 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4791 

celebrate the day. 
 
Diversity has always been a source of strength for our province. 
In fact it would be impossible to tell the story of Saskatchewan 
without it. Throughout our history, indigenous and newcomer 
populations have endeavoured to create a society in which 
people of every race can prosper. To date, immigrants from 
over 190 countries have settled in roughly 320 communities 
across our province. We are honoured to welcome the almost 
50,000 newcomers who have arrived since 2007 alone. Their 
presence makes the cultural mosaic of our province stronger to 
everyone’s benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing tomorrow as International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Hosts University Men’s Hockey Championship 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend all eyes will be 
on Saskatoon as the CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] men’s 
hockey championship is set to take place at Credit Union 
Centre. Presented by Co-op, the PotashCorp University Cup 
will bring together the top six men’s CIS hockey teams for a 
seven-game tournament to decide who takes away this year’s 
top honours. 
 
The host team, the University of Saskatchewan Huskies, enter 
the tournament ranked fifth but look to use their home ice 
advantage to keep the cup at home. Leading the Huskies in the 
tournament is forward Derek Hulak who was named Canada 
Westmen’s hockey Most Valuable Player and First Team 
All-Star. 
 
The team is coached by Dave Adolph who is also the longest 
serving head coach at the championship with 25 years of 
experience in CIS including 21 with the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan]. 
 
Other teams in this weekend’s event include Canada West 
champion University of Alberta, the Acadia Axemen, Windsor 
Lancers, McGill Redmen, and the Carleton Ravens. The 
tournament kicks off this afternoon as the Golden Bears take on 
the Ravens this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
wishing the University of Saskatchewan Huskies men’s hockey 
team luck in what is sure to be a great weekend for hockey. And 
for my colleagues in the Saskatoon area, I encourage you to go 
and take in what is sure to be a first-class event. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

World Down Syndrome Day 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize World Down Syndrome Day, which takes 
place tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, tomorrow marks the ninth 

anniversary that the United Nations has observed this global 
awareness day. This year Down Syndrome International has 
focused its theme on Health and Well-being — Access and 
Equality for All. 
 
Those with Down syndrome have unique strengths and abilities 
and go on to live a full life, reaching all the usual milestones but 
at their own pace. We saw this last week, Mr. Speaker, when 
we learned about Taylor Layton, the award-winning young 
woman from Outlook who developed her own successful 
recycling business despite having Down syndrome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province continues to support those with 
disabilities. This year’s budget included 9.9 million in funding 
for the Ministry of Economy’s employability assistance for 
people with disabilities program to assist adults with disabilities 
to prepare for, secure, and maintain employment. Mr. Speaker, 
we are continuing unprecedented support for people with 
disabilities with enhancements for programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me today in 
recognizing World Down Syndrome Day and supporting our 
government for all that it’s done and continues to do for those 
with disabilities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Happiness 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday the Finance minister presented the 2014-15 budget. 
Now members of this House will debate the merits of that 
budget, and that’s perfect timing, Mr. Speaker, because today is 
also the United Nations International Day of Happiness. 
Members of this Assembly should be very happy with what the 
Finance minister announced yesterday: a balanced budget, a 
budget that does not raise taxes, a budget that invests in 
infrastructure for our future, and a budget that invests in the 
people of our province. 
 
Certainly the Education critic should be very happy to see 
commitments to education dollars to replace Connaught and 
Sacred Heart schools right here in Regina, as well as dollars for 
St. Brieux School and Sacred Heart School in Moose Jaw. I 
hope he votes in favour of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Cumberland should be very happy today as 
well with the money for long-term care facility expansions in 
La Ronge. I certainly hope the member from Cumberland will 
vote in favour of this budget and be happy today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read a quote from Amy McNeil, 
executive director of Saskatchewan Association for Community 
Living and she quotes, “We are leading the country, if not 
North America and the world, in supports for people with 
disabilities.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition should be the 
happiest of all today because if he really believes in what he 
says about politics being about people doing well, I am sure that 



4792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

he will stand up and vote in favour of this budget as well. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Patient Safety and Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last four years, 
Mr. Speaker, the number of critical incidents in hospitals and 
care facilities has jumped by almost 30 per cent across the 
province. These critical incidents involve deaths and serious 
injuries of patients because of something that went horribly 
wrong in health care. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Why has patient safety been 
getting worse at the same time that lean was being forced upon 
the health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately hospitals and health care organizations, 
not only across Canada but across North America and across 
the world, do deal with safety incidents like infections, 
medication errors, and falls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last number of years we’ve put more of an 
emphasis within the system to report critical incidences, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we frankly think that it’s probably still 
under-reported, as it would be in other provinces, but we are 
putting in place, Mr. Speaker, initiatives to encourage the 
system to report on critical incidences. 
 
We’re also doing much work on the safety front, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of the surgical initiative, for example. We’ve put in 
place a surgical checklist as a part of the surgical initiative. 
Believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, prior to this, just in the last 
couple of years there really was no checklist that the surgeons 
or the surgical team would actually go through before the 
surgery would begin, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the proper 
patient was being operated on, the proper part of the body was 
being operated on, Mr. Speaker. That’s nearly at a 100 per cent 
uptake, Mr. Speaker. We need to get that up to 100 per cent. 
And we’re also investing, Mr. Speaker, in piloting a 
stop-the-line patient safety system in Saskatoon which we’ll roll 
out across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, critical incidents involving deaths 
and serious injuries have been reported all along, and what the 
numbers show, Mr. Speaker, is that they have increased in the 
past recent years. In the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. 
Speaker, the number of critical incidents has almost doubled 
over the last four years. The number of critical incidents that 
involve death went up by 40 per cent over the last four years, 
and the number of critical incidents that involve injury or harm 
to patients jumped by 750 per cent. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: why has 
patient safety been getting worse and why have critical 
incidents jumped at a time when his government is leaning the 

health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I said in my previous answer, Mr. Speaker, we’re putting an 
immense amount of focus on compliance with the legislation to 
ensure that our health care organizations, our front-line staff are 
actually reporting when critical incidents take place within the 
system, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s a broad range of literature 
all across the health care system, not just in Saskatchewan, but 
across the world, Mr. Speaker, that indicate that even today 
probably we’re under-reporting critical incidences. So we’re 
trying to put a focus on actually having staff and administration 
report on critical incidents. That’s one of the reasons why 
people believe that the number of incidences that are being 
reported have actually been increased because of this increased 
focus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also, Mr. Speaker, putting in place new tools to make it 
easier for those incidents to be recorded. So a new electronic 
incident reporting system has been implemented as opposed to 
the old paper-based system, Mr. Speaker, which is I think a 
more efficient way to do things. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you at the provincial leadership 
team that we have at a quarterly basis, we do review all the 
critical incidences, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s an important part 
of the accountability within the system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government would be well 
served to listen to what front-line health care providers are 
saying. Here’s what Tracy Zambory, president of the nurses, 
said yesterday: “Two-thirds of our membership are telling us 
that patient safety has not improved and in fact has even gone 
down in our facilities across Saskatchewan.” This is serious, 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the Minister of 
Highways says this is about contract negotiations. The nurses in 
this province are committed to their job, Minister, and they care 
about patient safety. And to suggest that it is about contract 
negotiations is an offence to every hard-working nurse in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the member to direct 
his comments through the Chair. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, two-thirds of nurses are saying 
that safety is actually getting worse in the province, and the 
government’s own numbers, Mr. Speaker, back that up. The 
number of critical incidents in facilities across the province is 
up by 30 per cent over the last four years, and the number of 
critical incidents here in Regina has doubled. 
 
To the Premier: when will he listen to front-line health care 
workers and start prioritizing patient safety? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, what we have acknowledged as a 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4793 

provincial government on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
is that we need to ensure that we have a proper complement of 
health professionals within the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why we’ve hired 1,000 more RN [registered nurse] 
positions in the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 
see over 300 more physicians practising in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And the list goes on in terms of the health 
professionals and their ranks have only grown over the last 
number of years under this government, under record health 
funding from the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the comments by the president of SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], the members will know that 
there’s a meeting between the Ministry of Health and the 
president tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, to discuss some of these 
concerns, as we’ve discussed in the last number of weeks, as I 
have in face-to-face and telephone conversations, Mr. Speaker. 
I think it’s important to note though what the president of SUN 
did say yesterday morning on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] radio where she said, and I quote: 
 

It’s not that we don’t support lean. We need to make that 
clear right off the start. There is a lot of valuable tools in 
lean. We need to create efficiencies. We need to reduce 
waste, absolutely. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Back to the drawing board, Mr. Speaker — 
that’s what the nurses had to say about this government’s 
approach to lean because it has lost its way. Nurses have been 
saying, Mr. Speaker, that lean has not been helping in terms of 
patient safety. In fact nurses say the production line approach of 
lean doesn’t fit very well with improving patient safety. But this 
government just plows ahead, refusing to listen and refusing to 
acknowledge the very concerning statistics. 
 
The data from nurses shows that 84 per cent of adverse events 
in our health care system are related to inappropriate staffing 
levels. But instead of fixing the basics, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
ensuring appropriate staffing levels are in place, what does this 
government do? It spends $40 million on one US consultant and 
flies in Japanese senseis at a cost of $3,500 per day. 
 
To the Premier: why is this government neglecting the basics, 
hurting patient safety, while it pours massive dollars into its pet 
lean project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all, as I’ve indicated before, what we did 
acknowledge when we formed government in 2007, as SUN 
had indicated, is that we didn’t have enough nurses in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t have enough RNs in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. We were short 600 positions that needed 
to be filled, Mr. Speaker. We committed to the 600 positions. 
We added 200 additional positions to that to bring us to 800 
positions that weren’t available under the members opposite to 
provide safe care for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And we exceeded that goal by an additional 200, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Tracy Zambory, as I mentioned, has indicated that 
it’s not that they don’t support lean. She said that yesterday 
morning, Mr. Speaker. That to me doesn’t say, go back to the 
drawing boards, Mr. Speaker. We are listening to what SUN 
and our providers have to say. That’s why there is a meeting 
scheduled tomorrow to find out what the concerns are, to find 
out what has changed since January 15th when Ms. Zambory 
said this on the RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] 
website: 
 

The most exciting aspect of the lean process is that 
registered nurses are being engaged alongside the entire 
health care team on the front end of change. This approach 
of reducing inefficiencies will improve patient safety, 
maximizes the collective knowledge of our front-line staff, 
and demonstrates true leadership. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, nurses have clearly said that 
patient safety is not being prioritized in this government’s 
approach. That’s why we have two-thirds of nurses saying that 
patient safety has actually decreased in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t need to spend $40 million 
on a lucrative contract to a US consultant. It doesn’t need to fly 
in Japanese sensei at a cost of $3,500 a day. It doesn’t need 
Japanese-English dictionaries on government websites. What it 
needs to do is listen to nurses, listen to front-line health care 
providers. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier talked about how 
newborns weren’t wrapped in blankets when they were put on 
weigh scales, but front-line workers said, why don’t we want 
them in blankets? Mr. Speaker, that’s a great idea and it 
illustrates my point. The government needs to listen to 
front-line health care workers, because John Black and 
Associates, Mr. Speaker, because senseis from Japan don’t have 
anything to do with wrapping babies in blankets. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is he wasting so much money 
on massive contracts with a US consultant, with Japanese 
sensei, when what he needs to do is listen to the ideas from the 
front lines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the 
Opposition would perhaps educate himself on what lean 
actually is, Mr. Speaker, it is exactly that — listening to the 
front lines of our health care system to find ways to improve 
care to patients, improve efficiencies within the system, and 
gives the system the tools to become a high-performing health 
care system, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s what we’re hearing from RNs, from nurses, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll quote, “To get rid of so much waste and see 
how we can spend more time with our patients was enough to 
keep me wanting more.” Here’s another patient, another quote 
from a nurse: “Patients now can get to spend more time with 
their nurses. We don’t have to spend time running to the fax 
machine, clarifying physician orders, or looking for missing 
medications.” Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker: “This was 



4794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

refreshing to see a process change within a few days. I have 
nothing but good things to say about the process.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition truly has an inbox 
that is full with concerns from front-line staff with lean, Mr. 
Speaker, I would urge him, redact the information; we don’t 
need to know who it is. But I would urge him to send that 
information over, Mr. Speaker. We’re interested in learning 
what, in finding out what people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Patient Care and Lean Initiative 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, a few months ago, this 
government received 250 pages of urgent requests from seniors’ 
care facilities for desperately needed staff, equipment, and 
repairs. But at that time, this government actually said no to 
$8.5 million of those urgent requests. The Health minister said 
there would be more money to come in the budget. On 
November 13th, the Health minister said: “. . . some facilities 
do talk about staffing issues, and we’ll look to address those 
either through the action fund, or in next year’s budget . . .” 
 
But the budget contained no new dollars to address the seniors’ 
care crisis or to meet the $8.5 million of urgent requests that 
were previously rejected by this government. To the minister: 
why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would just correct the member opposite. While we 
did discuss last fall the $10.04 million that cabinet approved 
mid-year to address the first tranche of the Urgent Issues Action 
Fund, Mr. Speaker, that we’d indicated that we would be 
reviewing to see if those dollars had actually reached the front 
lines, had reached the residents in approved resident care. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, we knew that some of those dollars would 
have an impact in terms of the future budget. So this budget 
does include close to $3.8 million in dollars that were not 
available in last year’s budget for front-line staff for equipment, 
Mr. Speaker, and to make some changes to how resident care is 
delivered within long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also does include $15.3 million for 
equipment. Eleven million of that has been identified for 
regional health authorities already. And what we’ve determined, 
Mr. Speaker, is that 30 per cent of that will go into equipment 
into long-term care, which adds an additional, Mr. Speaker, just 
under $4 million in equipment to long-term care in this budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Regional health authorities that are being 
asked to cut more than $51 million, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
care facilities put forward 250 pages of urgent requests to this 
government for staff, equipment, and repairs. This government 
rejected $8.5 million of those requests. The rejected requests 
included desperately needed staff, nurse call systems, lifts, and 
bathtubs. Those are the basics that are needed in care facilities, 

but this government rejected those urgent requests and there’s 
not one new dollar in this year’s budget to meet those urgent 
needs. 
 
To the minister: why is this government once again refusing to 
fix the basics in seniors’ care? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — There is $3.764 million in this budget 
that was not in last year’s budget. Mr. Speaker, that is new 
dollars to go towards staffing issues, to go towards equipment, 
to go towards maintenance, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 3.764 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also equipment dollars that are funded to 
the regional health authorities. Of the $15.3 million, we’ve 
already determined that $11 million of that will flow to the 
regional health authorities. We’ve said to them that 30 per cent 
of those dollars need to be dedicated to long-term care 
equipment, Mr. Speaker, which equates to $3.3 million. So $3.3 
million plus $3.764 million equals $7.064 million in new 
long-term care dollars for equipment, staff, and capital, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Give with one hand, Mr. Speaker, take away 
with the other — $51 million inefficiencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government said no when care facilities put 
forward urgent requests for much needed staff, nurse call 
systems, lifts, bathtubs, and repairs. When Saskatoon Health 
Region said they needed 450 more care aids but modestly just 
requested 38, this government made them scale that request 
back to 19. Saskatoon Health Region needs 1,700 lifts. It 
requested just 100, but this government made them scale back 
that request to just 56. 
 
But while this government was saying no to desperately needed 
staff and lifts, it was saying yes to massive and unnecessary 
contracts with American consultants and flying in Japanese 
sensei at a cost of $3,500 a day. Again to the minister: why is 
this government refusing to fix the basics in seniors’ care but 
spending well over $50 million in consultants? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
wants to talk about giving with one hand and taking back with 
the other hand, let’s go over the record of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. In 2004, with a budget 
increase of 6.3 per cent in the health budget, Mr. Speaker, 90 
beds, and I’m quoting from The Western Producer: “. . . 90 
beds — 50 of them used for long-term care — will be cut in 12 
communities. That will result in 92 job cuts; 40 of them are 
nursing positions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, “Another 160 jobs could 
go, because Nilson said the regional health authorities must find 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4795 

$20 million in cost savings through administrative efficiencies,” 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in years of increases of 6 and 7 and 8 
per cent, we knew where the members opposite would go to 
find efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. It was to fire staff. It was to 
close facilities. It was to close beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We decided to take a different approach. In a year even when 
the health budget was only increasing at 3 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to continue to do what we’re doing 
through inventory management, through blood savings, Mr. 
Speaker, and other ways through lean which have been 
effective. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we have a seniors’ care crisis in 
this province, and this government is refusing to fix it. While 
this government neglects the basics in health care and in 
seniors’ care, it’s Saskatchewan families that are paying the 
price. If the Health minister actually read through the urgent 
request from care facilities, he would have found this on page 
206: “There are clients that cannot currently be placed in 
long-term care as they have complex needs which require 
additional staffing that is not currently available.” People like 
Mr. Caron. So people are being turned away from care homes 
because their needs are too complex and there is not enough 
staff in place to help them, yet this government is spending $40 
million on just one lean consultant and flying in Japanese sensei 
at $3,500 a day.  
 
To the minister: how can you justify $40 million on consultants 
and $3,500-per-day senseis to the families like the Carons that 
are being turned away from care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d remind the members opposite that what we’re spending in 
terms of lean have already in fact paid for themselves, Mr. 
Speaker, represent point two per cent of the health budget, Mr. 
Speaker, which is the same proportion of what lean spending 
under the NDP in the Five Hills Health Region equated to. 
Point two per cent of Five Hills health budget went to lean 
spending under the NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s in the same proportion to what the 
members opposite were spending. We’re just deploying it 
across the entire health care system, the first of its kind in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. And it has proven results . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, I would hope that members on both 
sides, especially the member asking the question, would like to 
hear the answer. So please, members, tone it down a bit. I 
recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated where we 
are investing within long-term care within the system, Mr. 
Speaker, through the Urgent Issues Action Fund, through 
additional dollars on equipment that will be dedicated towards 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also indicated that, as the Finance minister 

read out, that we do need to start planning for the next renewal 
of long-term care capital, Mr. Speaker, here in Regina 
Qu’Appelle as well the community of La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to the member opposite voting in favour of that 
when the budget comes for a vote. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re also 
investing in seniors outside of long-term care, Mr. Speaker, 
through the seniors’ house calls and other initiatives. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Saskatchewan Futures Fund 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on December 30th here’s 
what the Premier had to say about the futures fund: 
 

I just don’t see how we would want to delay any longer. I 
think it sends the right signal that first of all this wasn’t just 
a public relations exercise, because it most assuredly 
wasn’t. Secondly, that all of us as a province can start 
thinking long term. 

 
Well it turns out it was, in the Premier’s words, just a public 
relations exercise. And in the words of families and taxpayers, 
the futures fund turned out to be a flip-flop and a broken 
promise. My question to the Premier: why the flip-flop? Why 
the broken promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for the question. It’s an 
opportunity for us to talk about the 44 per cent of general 
operating debt that this side of the House, this government has 
paid off since we were first elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official policy of the government with respect 
to this, with respect to a futures fund, was announced in the 
growth plan when we first commissioned and engaged Peter 
MacKinnon. At the time I indicated that it would be the 
preference of the government as a positional stance to pay off 
all of the debt, the general debt of the province, the general 
operating debt of the province first, and then start to save. 
 
Mr. MacKinnon made some recommendations about what 
measure, what would trigger in fact us moving towards savings 
or debt. That’s that 26 per cent level of revenue that would 
come from the resource sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today everything’s still on the table. The official position as 
reflected by the Minister of Finance in the budget hasn’t 
changed. The official position is, let’s pay the debt off first and 
then start saving. Typically you pay more interest on debt than 
you can in some of the funds in terms of return. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it’s on the table. We may well, as we 
move to structure that particular heritage fund, that futures fund, 
through a legislative framework, we will have a debate in the 
province and a debate in this legislature. And all options remain 
on the table, including paying down the debt even as we start to 
build the savings fund for the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 



4796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just a tad strange that 
for the Premier that pretended yesterday he was going to focus 
on a summary basis, that he’s now focusing on the manipulated 
numbers of debt that he’s been held to account for by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
When it comes to the futures fund, there’s no question this is a 
flip-flop and a broken promise. Here’s what the Canadian Press 
reported in November, and I quote, “Saskatchewan Premier 
Brad Wall says he thinks it’s a good idea for the province to try 
to save money for the future while also paying off the debt.” 
 
To the Premier: what changed? Why is he sacrificing this good 
idea for sustainability and prosperity for the long term? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance critic, he’s had a 
tough couple of days. All the things that he asked for, the major 
points he wanted, are represented in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s also had some difficulty getting basic facts right. The 
general debt of the province is still reported in the new 
budgeting documents of the province of Saskatchewan. He 
needs to look over those documents. They were just tabled 
yesterday, to be fair, but he needs to look at them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when he looks at them he’s going to see that the 
general operating debt of the province we inherited from 
members opposite when they were in government has reduced 
by members on this side by 44 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in fact speculated about when we structured 
that futures fund, which will happen very soon, Mr. Speaker, 
that we might actually begin saving while we pay off the debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from Saskatchewan people. I’ve 
heard from caucus. And we’ve heard Saskatchewan people say, 
you know, we in Saskatchewan, we’d like to pay off 
unsupported debt. This is unsupported debt we’re talking about. 
There’s no structured payment on principal that happens, as 
members opposite know, only when government wills it to 
occur, as our side of the House has done with 44 per cent 
reduction in the debt. 
 
 So, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are saying, pay it 
off first, then start the savings. But we’ll have the debate. All 
options are on the table, Mr. Speaker. And I welcome further 
questions on this from the critic. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was directly 
that the Premier was saying before that he thought it was a good 
idea to save money for the future and pay down the debt. Now 
of course he’s flip-flopped. He’s broken that promise. And it 
seems, as he said with his, you know, with his own words, that 
this was nothing but a public relations exercise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The idea that we have to wait for the debt to be paid off is 
short-sighted and it defies Saskatchewan common sense. For 
one, the budget that was presented yesterday jacks up debt, $1.5 
billion this year alone. And it’s hiked debt since 2009 by over 
$4 billion. And even on the other core debt that he speaks of, 

there’s no plan to pay down that debt. So we’re not seeing a 
fund any time soon. While other resource-rich jurisdictions 
have used their natural resources to build prosperity and 
sustainability for the long term, this government spends every 
last penny of our $100 barrel of oil to just get by. 
 
To the Premier: if he can’t put a few dollars away to improve 
our sustainability now in a strong economy, then when? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
unsupported debt. What that means is that there’s no structured 
payment on the debt unless a government decides to make 
payments. Picture a bright orange credit card, if you will. 
We’ve got a huge balance on it, and you’re only able to pay the 
interest. He’s saying that the Saskatchewan common sense is 
just ride that orange credit card. Don’t make any principal 
payments, Mr. Speaker. The people of the province would say 
. . . I think it’s an open debate what actually is Saskatchewan 
common sense, and we’re going to have that debate discussion. 
One of the options might be to start the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is international happy day, and I don’t 
understand why the members opposite are not happy, frankly. 
They asked us to go to summaries. We’ve gone to summaries, 
Mr. Speaker. They asked us to leave the credit union tax 
structure the way it was. We’ve done that. They asked for 
Sacred Heart School. We’ve done that. They asked for 
Connaught School. We’ve done that in the budget. They’ve 
asked for a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve done that. They asked for new child care 
spaces. There’s 500 new child care spaces, Mr. Speaker. Why 
are the NDP so negative, Mr. Speaker? 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Oral Presentation of Petitions 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a statement to 
make. There was a point of order raised on this past Tuesday, 
and I wish to report on that. 
 
On March 18th, the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
presented numerous pages of a petition that he had previously 
presented in parts over the course of the current session. While 
presenting the petitions, the member cited a number of place 
names in Saskatchewan that he said were the locations of the 
petitioners. 
 
On orders of the day, the Deputy Government House Leader 
raised a point of order, claiming that many of the communities 
listed by the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre did not 
appear on the petition. The member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre responded to the point of order by stating 
that the list of communities cited related to previously tabled 
parts of the petition and documents he provided to the Minister 
of Education . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t need help 
from either side, thank you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Does 
the member want to leave the Chamber quickly? 
 
[10:45] 
 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4797 

First of all, I want to be clear that the issue here is not the 
petition itself, but the oral presentation of the petition. In that 
regard the rules of this Assembly state as follows: 
 

16(3) The period for Presenting Petitions is subject to the 
following conditions: 
 

(e) The Member may read the prayer, provide a general 
explanation of the subject matter and location of the 
petitioners. 

 
There appears to be some misunderstanding about this rule that 
needs to be clarified. 
 
Over the past few decades, the practice has developed of 
presenting a petition in parts over the course of a session, 
sometimes one page at a time. For the sessional record, each 
successive part is considered to be an addendum of the original 
petition. Given this practice, members have a broad opportunity 
to mention the location of the petitioners for each of the parts of 
the petition as they are presented. 
 
In addressing the point of order, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre noted that the locations he named related to 
all of the individuals who signed the petition. On March 9, 
2010, Speaker Toth ruled that the locations announced must in 
fact appear on the petition that is being presented. The member 
for Regina Elphinstone-Centre mentioned the names of 45 
locations but what he tabled on March 18th contained the 
signatures from only six communities. It is not permissible to 
orally list any locations that are not on the pages being tabled 
that sitting day. Furthermore, it is not in order to cite the 
location of persons who signed other documents that might be 
ancillary to the petition. 
 
For these reasons, I find the point of order well taken. When 
presenting petitions, I ask that members ensure that the location 
of the petitioners is confined to what is being presented that 
day. 
 
Before closing this subject, I want to address what is meant by 
the rule where it states that the member may provide a general 
explanation of the subject matter and location of petitioners. 
The rule does not define what is meant by general explanation. 
The rule leaves it up to the Speaker to gauge how best to 
preside over the oral presentation of petitions. Over the course 
of this session, I find that some members have begun to provide 
more than a general explanation of the petition. In some cases, a 
substantial level of detail is provided in the explanation, and in 
other cases the commentary might be considered a provocation 
for debate. 
 
Members are reminded that rule 16(3)(b) states that, and I 
quote, “No debate on any matter on or in relation to the 
petitions is permitted.” I ask members to be mindful of this rule 
when choosing the language used to introduce a petition. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 225 through 262. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 125 through 162 . . . 262, sorry. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to follow up on the budget debate here today and 
provide a bit of a local perspective and speak in a way that 
allows me to focus on some of the local priorities that are 
certainly important. But before doing so, I just want to certainly 
just touch back on something that’s just come out of discussion 
in question period as well, and something that was missing in 
that budget yesterday, and that’s any commitment at all to the 
futures fund that had been discussed and touted by government 
opposite. 
 
Of course, this is something we’ve championed for a long time, 
a futures fund, the idea that we should take some of our 
resource wealth of today and put a little bit of that away for the 
long term. This is a common sense approach to a budget and it’s 
the kind of approach that focuses on the long term. 
 
Right now the current government, in now their broken promise 
on this front, communicates to Saskatchewan people that they 
just can’t get the job done for Saskatchewan people, despite the 
strong opportunity they’ve been provided. It tells Saskatchewan 
people that they broke their promise as it relates to the futures 
fund. 
 
We know just a little while ago the Premier, it was said that he 
thought it was reasonable to both put a little away for the long 
term and pay down debt at the same time. Now what we’re 
hearing from the Premier is something entirely different. We 
see a broken promise. We see a flip-flop. And in fact what 
we’re worried is that, in the Premier’s own words, that this 
whole piece that he’s engaged with on the futures fund was 
simply a public relations exercise for him and his government, 
that he never had serious intent in implementing this. Because 
it’s pretty evident that with the Premier’s new position that he 
thinks he needs to pay the debt off first — which we should 
point out that this government’s not paying the debt off; they’re 
actually increasing debt, Mr. Speaker — that’s there’s no future 
for that future fund. 
 
We believe there should be a better plan for Saskatchewan 
people. We believe Saskatchewan people deserve a little bit of 
the resource wealth today to serve the long-term prosperity and 
needs for tomorrow. And you know, it’s not excusable for the 
Premier to flip-flop and change positions and break this promise 



4798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

for Saskatchewan people. And really this is way more than just 
a broken promise. It’s a lost opportunity for Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I do want to provide a bit of a local perspective back to the 
constituency. I’m always honoured to bring forward the issues 
that matter for my constituents, and in doing so I have to reflect 
as well on the good people that I do serve. And I’m thankful for 
all their efforts in building and improving our community and 
strengthening our schools and making sure there’s sports, 
culture, and recreation programs for the kids, to make sure 
there’s supports out there for seniors. And this is done in many 
ways by those that are providing service on the front line every 
day. 
 
It’s delivered by those in the schools. It’s delivered by so many 
in volunteer efforts. I’m so thankful for the efforts that we see 
within our schools, the work of the teachers, the work of the 
staff, the work of the parents who are involved within those 
schools. That truly makes a difference. I also think of all the 
coaches, all the facilitators, all those that provide sport, culture, 
recreation throughout the community. And I’m thankful for 
those individuals. I’m thankful for the role that churches play 
throughout the community to provide opportunities for many 
and places for people to connect. And I’m thankful for our 
community associations. 
 
The community that I represent represents, you know, I think a 
lot of what we see across the province — hard-working people, 
hard-working business leaders, and people that are doing their 
part in Saskatchewan. And we see that in many ways. We see 
people . . . We see this government dropping the ball in 
important priorities. 
 
But when I’m thinking of those types of leaders, I think of 
Dennis and Judy Zawyrucka, who keep the shack over at the 
Outdoor Hockey League, and I think of Dustin Henderson and 
Bradyn Parisian who have dedicated their time and energy to 
make sure that sport’s accessible, that hockey’s accessible 
through the Outdoor Hockey League. I also enjoy being able to 
get over and assist a bit if I can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or people like Guy Lohman in the Normanview West 
Community Association who’s dedicated to planting trees and 
improving the neighbourhood and creating park spaces that are 
livable and enjoyable and that can be appreciated by all. Or 
those over in McNab, Mr. Speaker, a dedicated group that 
makes sure that if there’s ever an ounce of graffiti that it’s 
removed, and their efforts to continue to improve the park as a 
place to congregate over there as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of the good people throughout Rosemont Mount Royal 
Community Association, and just the time we had this last 
weekend at their Family Fun Day once again, where they bring 
together community, have games and crafts and activities for 
young people, have fiddlers there for all ages, and had 
strawberry social that of course we all enjoy. It’s these kind of 
people that really do bring together community. 
 
I also think of St. Cecilia Church and the work that they’re 
doing with those that are new to Canada in supporting ESL 
[English as a second language] and supporting settlement, such 
good efforts and important efforts that strengthen our 

community and provide important supports. 
 
And I think of local leaders, and I could list many on this front. 
But I think of Alanna Kalyniuk on Dewdney Avenue who’s 
working to make sure that we work toward safety, get those 
heavy-haul truck traffic moved off of Dewdney Avenue and 
make sure that the people have the protection that they deserve, 
the safety that they deserve. 
 
When I look at some of the local issues within Rosemont that 
we’ve been identifying to government, we don’t see a whole 
bunch of action in this budget. And this is a budget of course 
that’s failed families, as we’ve identified, doesn’t go the 
distance it needed to in education or health care or in seniors’ 
care where we have a crisis, does nothing to address 
affordability. We spoke about these items yesterday, or I spoke 
about these items yesterday. 
 
But I want to focus on just a few projects that haven’t been 
advanced by this government that should be, one of them being 
the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. This is 
nothing short of a major safety concern. It’s going to require 
government’s actions and in a very immediate way before it’s 
too late because the risks on those streets, on that road is huge 
and those actions are going to be important. We’re going to 
continue to call for immediate actions. Of course the long-term 
solution has to be a commitment in a timely way to the bypass 
on west Regina. But we need immediate actions and they need 
to be supported by this government to make sure that that truck 
traffic can be moved off of Dewdney Avenue far before that 
west bypass ever gets fully completed. 
 
And there’s practical solutions that could be advanced on this 
front. A very small portion of Pinkie Road just west of Regina 
could be improved. There’s a small bridge, Mr. Speaker, that 
meets the creek right out by the Goulet golf course that, Mr. 
Speaker, frankly I’m scared to drive my bike over, Mr. Speaker, 
or to jog over. And if that was simply improved and replaced, 
which is needed anyways, it would allow that truck traffic to be 
bypassing Dewdney Avenue in a very immediate way. 
 
But as I say, this is a safety concern that requires the actions of 
government. And this issue, and the fact that the heavy trucks 
have inundated Dewdney Avenue, is an issue created by this 
government who created the Global Transportation Hub without 
properly putting in place measures to ensure proper and safe 
traffic flow. So they didn’t think the project all the way through 
and ensure the safety of many, and my constituents. So it’s a 
safety issue. It’s degrading infrastructure. It’s taking away 
peace of mind. 
 
These trucks are crashing down Dewdney Avenue at all hours 
of the day and night and in many ways are actually literally 
rattling the homes and shaking the homes and the foundations 
along it. It’s not safe. It’s not appropriate. This is a major artery 
through a residential neighbourhood that connects families to 
schools, that connects people to their church, connects families 
across Saskatchewan to Pioneer Village and the seniors’ care 
that’s there. It connects people to tourism sites such as the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Depot and 
Government House. And you know, quite frankly it just needs 
to be addressed and any further delays, as I’ve said, are entirely 
unacceptable. 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4799 

We also didn’t see anything in this budget, any measures as it 
related to education to make the investments that are needed in 
classrooms across Saskatchewan and across our communities. 
We have overcrowded classrooms, many of them that have 
faced cuts because of this government’s funding, and we have 
teachers that are overworked, under-resourced. We have 
students that are in classrooms that are bursting at the seams 
without educational assistants, without the supports they 
deserve. 
 
And we didn’t see anything in this budget in a very local way to 
support and work with the school division here in Regina to 
reopen or recommission Dieppe School, a school that was 
closed in part because of the funding of this provincial 
government and a school that was very important to a 
community and I hope soon could be very important to that 
community again because I know it’s been very difficult for 
them to have that school closed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to continue to focus on Pioneer Village. We see 
nothing in this budget to address this very important 
infrastructure from a health perspective and from a social 
perspective for many across this province. This is a care facility 
that provides many families, many people care that they need 
and deserve, but the facility is way past its due date. It requires 
replacement and we saw nothing in this budget to meet those 
needs. 
 
If I look at the other areas that we touched on yesterday, those 
are the priorities that were important to my constituents as well: 
the fact that in this budget, the government didn’t do anything 
to address the affordability pressures that hard-working families 
are facing; failed to deliver in the classroom and make 
improvements; failed to make sure that the emergency room — 
I think of the crisis over at the Pasqua Hospital this last year — 
that the emergency rooms in Saskatchewan are supported and 
that they can be trusted by Saskatchewan people and certainly 
my constituents. And as well when we see the whole lack of 
support for seniors’ care, this is a troubling issue for all in this 
province and certainly my constituents as well. 
 
I know there was lots of concern by my constituents and those 
across the province about ensuring that we have books that we 
can trust, about ensuring that the finances are an honest, true 
portrayal of the reality. And we’ve been calling and pushing 
this government to make changes towards a summary budget 
and making sure Saskatchewan people have nothing short of 
honest books they can trust. 
 
[11:00] 
 
There’s some changes in this budget. We’re going to continue 
to track that through to implementation and make sure that 
Saskatchewan people have nothing short of books they can 
trust, of course recognizing that this Finance minister, this 
Premier are the first in Canadian history to fail an audit of its 
books. And we know what their approach was after that, and 
that was to dismiss the auditor’s concerns and 
recommendations. But we continue to push on this issue, and 
we’re pleased to see at least a first step on this front. 
 
I know many are concerned in the province and in my 
constituency with the selling out of opportunity, the contracting 

out, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have, on so many streets, 
Sask stickers on vehicles that say SaskPower and SaskEnergy 
on the side, but on the back, Mr. Speaker, they have Texas 
plates. And I know that, you know, that many across 
Saskatchewan say that defies common sense and takes away 
good opportunities for Saskatchewan people by way of jobs, by 
way of business opportunities. And it just doesn’t make sense to 
be exporting all that opportunity far outside our borders. 
 
We see that in many other areas as well. And I think, you know, 
the recent steps towards some level of what looks like prison 
privatization potentially, Mr. Speaker, is a concern as well, 
where you take away strong people within the community that 
have been providing important roles within our correction 
system, providing important rehabilitative roles within our 
correction system, and having those individuals now outsourced 
to some private company. That’s not the Saskatchewan way, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s giving away of the Saskatchewan 
advantage and our ability to secure our future. 
 
As we’ve said, there’s a lot of waste and excess this 
government is engaged in. We see them shipping well over $40 
million into one American contract, Mr. Speaker, for a lean, 
kaizen, Japanese project that they’re engaged with that just isn’t 
delivering the results that Saskatchewan people deserve. Those 
should be diverted into where they count — on the front line of 
health care and seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. We see the 
government wasting millions of dollars on an old-fashioned, 
outdated standardized testing regime, Mr. Speaker, that should 
be able to be diverted to making a difference in the classrooms 
all across our province and certainly in my community, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we think as well about the wasteful agenda that we’ve seen 
from this government, creating three more MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] when they’re not needed that are 
going to cost millions into the future, Mr. Speaker. Or the fact 
of the dollars that were wasted on so many other fronts as well, 
where we look at that boondoggle that was Enterprise 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. These are just examples of dollars 
that could have been diverted, that could have been better used, 
and that could have been advancing the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The member from . . . Well one of the members opposite gets 
really, you know, is choosing to get noisy. I think he’ll have a 
chance to speak. I hope he takes it this year, Mr. Speaker. But 
the reality is that despite the blessed opportunity Saskatchewan 
people find themself in by way of the resource opportunity, this 
government’s failing to get it done where it counts for 
Saskatchewan people. And that’s why we aren’t supporting the 
budget. 
 
We see the broken promise to deliver a futures fund. We see 
inadequate actions for First Nations and Métis young people 
across this province, and all people, to make sure that there is 
better opportunities well into the future. And we hear lots of, 
you know, we heard lots of announcements yesterday, but we 
didn’t see the funding to back it up. We’re going to be tracking 
that. We heard reference to a north commuter bridge in 
Saskatoon. That’s good, but there’s no funds to back it up. So 
we’ll be tracking those sorts of commitments. And as well, they 
introduced schools and then sent a paltry amount of dollars to 



4800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

go with it. 
 
You know, the reason for some skepticism with this 
government on these fronts is because of their record. And if 
you remember, Mr. Speaker, it was quite a few years ago, I 
think 2008 or 2009 that they were introducing some long-term 
care facilities, many of which are still being talked about here 
today, Mr. Speaker, that have never been built, that have never 
been operated, Mr. Speaker. I think of the North Central Shared 
Facility, Scott Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, in Regina that was 
announced back in 2007, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, 2007, and talked again in 2008. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that facility, it’s never been realized. 
 
So we’ll see, Mr. Speaker, if the words from the Finance 
minister is more empty rhetoric from this government, if they’re 
more announcements without funding. But we’ll be tracking 
those commitments and making sure that this government’s 
held to account and make sure that they flow those dollars to 
build the infrastructure that they are speaking of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With those comments, at this point in time, and mindful that 
many others would like to enter the debate here today, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be moving an amendment here today, moving a 
motion. And you know, as I say, this is a budget that just very 
simply fails families, fails to address affordability, fails to 
improve health care, fails to address education, fails to address 
the seniors’ care crisis, breaks a promise on the futures fund, 
Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people deserve better than that. 
So at this point in time, I will not be supporting the budget and 
will be moving the following motion: 
 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
offers only cuts and crumbs for Saskatchewan families, 
doesn’t address the needs and priorities of today, and fails 
to plan for the long term. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I know this will be seconded I 
believe by the member from Lakeview, who I look forward to 
his entry into this discussion here today as well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the member from Regina Rosemont, seconded by 
the member from Regina Lakeview: 
 

That all words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be added: 
 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
offers only cuts and crumbs for Saskatchewan families, 
doesn’t address the needs and priorities of today, and fails 
to plan for the long term. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 
support this amendment to the budget motion. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as many of you know, I’ve been here for a while, and I 

know that there are often things that need to be done. I thought 
one of the key phrases used by the Minister of Finance when he 
delivered his speech was that he used this sentence: “That 
meant that some difficult choices had to be made.” Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what budgets are all about. Budgets are about choices. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this government has not lived up 
to their duty of making some of the appropriate choices around 
how the money of the public is being spent. Now at least this 
year we have some steps towards getting a clearer piece of 
information about what money we actually have and how it’s 
being spent. We know that last year the auditors had a great 
deal of difficulty with some of the steps that were taken by the 
Minister of Finance with the concurrence of the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have listened to that I think quite late in the 
game. I think my perception would be that in this budget, they 
were working along on a process like they had for quite a 
number of years. And all of a sudden it struck them, oh we 
haven’t addressed the auditor’s questions, and the public are 
concerned about this. And so when you go in here to these 
documents, they’re kind of the same as last year except they 
changed the titles on some of the documents, and they changed 
the titles in some of the charts. Mr. Speaker, I thank them for 
doing that and taking the step towards moving toward a 
summary statement like every other province in Canada. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the way they’ve done it is — kind of like how 
they do all the things in this government — is by the seat of 
their pants. 
 
The Premier gives a little bit of a comment. And I suspect that 
when something like this in cabinet and caucus were getting 
some of the preliminary reports from the Minister of Finance 
and treasury board, there was this, well, we’re on the same track 
as we had before. We’re going to do this. We’ve got The 
Financial Administration Act that says that these things have to 
be reported this way. And all of a sudden the Premier says, no, I 
think we need to go to the summary statements right away. 
 
So then you look, you look at these documents. Anybody who 
looks at these documents knows that this whole job was done in 
the last four or five, six weeks at the most. And, Mr. Speaker, I, 
once again, I thank them for taking that step. But practically 
what we need to do is make sure that they will take further steps 
to make sure that by next year we’ve got a clearer statement on 
where we’re going. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our response as an opposition is to say that 
for ordinary families there are just crumbs out there. They’re 
just things . . . Now the problem is, because of this confused 
way they’ve done the books, we can’t even tell yet where the 
cuts are going to be, where the changes are going to be. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are . . . The types of budgets that 
they’ve provided to the regional health authorities means that 
there’s going to be cuts in that whole system, but we don’t 
know where because they’ve basically delegated or pushed it 
out. That’s what they did last year. And we saw and we see the 
things that we see that are issues for the people of the province 
— elder care, the issues around how quickly responses come, 
the cleanliness of a hospital. 
 
Now how, you know, how many of us would have thought that 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4801 

the cleanliness of the University Hospital, the Royal University 
Hospital, our flagship hospital in the province, becomes a 
day-to-day issue? And it is. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s money 
allocated to the regional health authority. But there isn’t a 
response or a clear response to some of the very specific things 
that were requested by the health regions. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s those types of things that we are going to continue to look 
at. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when this budget was prepared, there’s also 
areas in education. We know that in the K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] education system, they need more money, that they 
need certain types of resources. And this government has 
chosen to put the money in some other places. Now we’re going 
to be trying to track where they’re putting this money in some 
of these other places. But what we do know is that kids in 
classrooms are not getting the full benefit of what they should 
under our system. Same way at the universities. We know that 
the way the enrolments are going up, the numbers of people that 
are interested in getting post-secondary education, that the 
funding that’s here is not sufficient to meet all of that demand. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, once again that’s a choice. Now why are 
these choices being made by the Premier? We don’t really 
know. And that gets me back to this whole business of how we 
manage, how we work at any kind of system. Now the latest 
bright light or bright idea is to spend a lot of money on outside 
consultants on lean management. But, Mr. Speaker, any type of 
management is always about leadership. And I think the 
problem that everybody is seeing in our health system as it 
relates to the lean management is starting to show up in other 
departments. 
 
We have a minister — I’m trying to remember her title here — 
Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative, the member for 
Rosthern or for Martensville. The whole lean initiative is in her 
area. We don’t hear a word from her about all of this. We didn’t 
hear a word from the Premier today because I think he realizes 
this is not an easy one to talk about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the problem with any management system, 
whether it’s total quality management . . . Or you can go back 
every decade for 60, 70 years, maybe even longer, but I think 
probably, you know, about 60 years is when this whole 
management consultant world was created. You can go back 
every single one of those letters that describe some kind of 
management system, and they either pass or fail on whether 
there’s leadership and there’s actually a vision of what is going 
to be provided for people, what a company is going to do, what 
an institution is going to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the failure of our latest management 
gurus and other things relates to the fact, as we identified a 
couple of years ago, there isn’t a plan. There isn’t a plan for this 
government. And so that shows up every time some crucial 
issues arise. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plans in the health system are often suspect 
because we don’t really know what it is that they’re intending to 
do, and we see quite a number of initiatives that say, well yes, 
we’re trying to work it out the best way we can. And then they 

go and end up with all kinds of public-private kind of 
developments in the system where the people in the system say, 
well that’s not a very good way to do it. You look at a whole 
number of things that are being done that just don’t have any 
direction. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when we have a budget like this that, you 
know, I guess that is . . . Everybody tries to be very careful. 
They try to give a little bit here, a little bit there, and cover up 
any kind of negative aspects of it. We all get concerned. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that there doesn’t appear to be the 
leadership at the centre. 
 
I know one interesting comment I had — I guess it’s almost two 
weeks ago now — when we heard that the Premier was quite 
interested in another job somewhere. And, Mr. Speaker, that hit 
the front page because it’s of concern to people. And the 
comment to me was, well I’m an employer. I have many 
employees working for me. And if I hear of somebody who 
wants to go and get another job, I’m already thinking, well 
who’s going to replace them? And, Mr. Speaker, I think at this 
time with our Premier, people are starting to say, okay, well 
who’s the next guy that’s going to do this job? 
 
In Alberta they did it very quickly, and they did it through the 
members of the caucus. And maybe we should appeal to the 
members opposite to do a little bit of work there and see 
whether or not we can launch our presently most — sort of, at 
least from some of the polling — honoured citizen, launch him 
on to a new career. And I think we’d all wish him well. 
 
But I think the people of Saskatchewan, and especially those 
who are suffering within our system, would say yes. I think it’s 
time that we got somebody else who’s going to give us some 
direction, is going to give us 100 per cent of his interest, and 
he’s going to work on the things that are important to people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what are those things that are important to 
people? And I know, based on how we’ve been listening as an 
opposition to the public, that there are a number of points, and 
we listed those out on Monday. And then I think it’s worth 
going back to them and saying, what is it that people actually 
want? Well you know, it’s right off the top; they say let’s end 
these crazy contracts. Let’s end the spending of money that 
doesn’t appear to have a direction. And as we saw today, the 
Premier doesn’t really even want to defend anymore. He’s 
going to let somebody else do it. I assume pretty soon the 
minister responsible for the lean initiative will actually get a 
chance to talk about this. But we’ll see about that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, people are saying, let’s end that contract. Well they 
haven’t done that yet. 
 
We know that in long-term care, personal care homes, there’s a 
basic issue about quality of care standards and just how people 
are being cared for. And, Mr. Speaker, those stories and those 
situations are very, very difficult for all of us. And I’m sure that 
members opposite are getting some of the same comments. 
They obviously don’t have a chance like we do to raise them 
here. But we’d be happy on a, you know, quiet basis to raise 
issues in Kelvington or wherever the issues might arise. But, 
Mr. Speaker, that sense that people have is that somehow we’re 
not getting the proper care. That is a real concern. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we frankly expected a little more money, a little more 



4802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

of a response to this. 
 
Now I was quite — oh what’s the word — I guess concerned 
that the Minister of Health today was trying to go and dig into a 
number of areas and say, well this answers that question. I have 
a lot of respect for the Minister of Health. He used to work for 
me. I think everybody knows that, but maybe they don’t. But he 
worked very carefully in our team that developed the health 
plan for the province. He was a new graduate from Luther 
College, University of Regina. And he ended up working and 
developing a lot of the health policy. So he knows this 
information very well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he then went to work for the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus. And I think all of you remember how, when there 
was a particularly cumbersome question that we would get from 
somebody, I would always say, well let the member from 
Weyburn work on that file and prepare the question because at 
least then we’ll get an understandable question. So, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the kind of praise you get when you’re in 
government, you give toward an opposition staff member. And 
I think, you know, I appreciate his work, but now when he’s 
gotten into this new role, I think he’s forgotten that how you 
build health care in this province, how you build social policy 
and social services, how you build in any of the policy areas in 
this province is that you build on the work from before. And I 
know that the Minister of Social Services knows that and that 
she’s built on a number of different things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t serve the public well, it doesn’t 
serve the people of Saskatchewan well when the kinds of 
comments we heard today in question period come from the 
Minister of Health, or the comments that we’ve heard the last 
couple of days from the Premier, because, Mr. Speaker, what 
the public want is they want to know we’re going somewhere 
and that we’re going to be providing things for the public. And 
unfortunately I think that there’s been some distractions or 
something that’s gotten the leadership, the Premier off on some 
other tracks, and we’ve gotten some difficulties in the actual use 
of a very expensive management tool because there doesn’t 
appear to be direction or leadership around that particular use of 
that tool. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when you get huge numbers of employees 
afraid to tell their superiors that there’s something funny about 
this, there’s something that doesn’t work about what you’re 
telling us on this particular management program, well then we 
all have a problem. Because what suffers is the care for the 
people. What suffers is, if this stuff moves into the education 
system, what suffers there is the education of our children. We 
know that some of these things have caused difficulties within 
the Department of Social Services and that we are getting 
stories and questions raised there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, all of these things go back and reflect on, what 
is the central goal? What is it that is the plan or the leadership 
that comes right from the top? And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
where we all have a problem in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can go and look at a number of other 
issues. We know that the evidence is against this whole issue of 
using standardized testing in schools. And the practical advice 
from the front-line workers is we could use some dollars for 

some other things, and we know what the evidence says about 
this. But what happens here? The minister goes ahead, the 
Premier goes ahead, and they are off on some track that comes 
from we’re not certain where. 
 
Now I know from a lot of meetings that I’ve gone to with 
legislators from other states and other provinces that there’s a 
certain bent and a certain perspective that brings this stuff 
forward. And, Mr. Speaker, I think here in Saskatchewan we’re 
smart enough to use and do things that make sense to us, not 
bring in some of this other stuff from other places, which is 
only going to create problems, and unfortunately it’s expensive. 
So how many different things are we going to do where we’ll 
ship money out some other places? 
 
The Minister of Health is here now and maybe he can listen a 
little more . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He’s shouting from 
his seat and, Mr. Speaker, what we know is that he’s put in a 
very difficult position because he’s brought in on all of these 
issues and is asked to defend some things that were done by the 
previous minister of Health, who’s now the Minister of 
Highways. And we know that there’s some sort of gung-ho 
feeling about this management plan that once again goes back 
to my comment that it’s about, what is the leadership saying? 
What is the goal of using this particular information? And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s where some of the problems have arisen, 
is that you need to articulate what it is that you are doing. You 
need to lead to where you are going. And that’s where we have 
some of our problems. 
 
Now we know that the size or the demands on our school 
system are continuing. We know that the class sizes are getting 
larger and larger and that we need to deal with that particular 
question of how we can make sure that our well-trained teachers 
in this province are doing the best job that they can. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s an area that’s being neglected. 
 
Now I know that the government has had a great deal of 
difficulty figuring out how to pay for a lot of things that they’ve 
announced or proposed or whatever. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
tried some ways of trying to spread the cost out onto future 
generations. And so basically, many of their P3 [public-private 
partnership] proposals appear. You’re basically asking the kids 
in grade 1 to pay for the school when they’re 35. And so, you 
know, how smart is that? I mean basically what we all want for 
our children is that they are launched into adulthood with a 
good education and without a whole huge amount of money put 
on top of them. Usually we talk about tuition for SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] or 
post-secondary education as being a burden that students will 
have when they are finished their education. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the policy choices made by this Premier, and 
this crew across here, are basically going to put the cost of the 
elementary school that they start in kindergarten on the people 
who graduate from that school. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re still 
going to be paying for this way down the line. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what’s the point of that? 
 
This is the time in this province when we’ve had the most 
income from a whole number of areas, and people are resorting 
to some of these pushing out of financing way, way down the 
road. And, Mr. Speaker, why is that happening? Mr. Speaker, 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4803 

why is that happening? The only thing I can say is that there 
doesn’t appear to be a central leadership and there doesn’t 
appear to be management of the resources that we have. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when we end up basically saying that 
priorities and needs of today aren’t being met, the long term 
isn’t being looked at, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of thing that 
we’re saying is that there’s a lot of decisions where they’re not 
really thinking about the consequences. And it’s those financing 
decisions are the ones that are the most difficult. 
 
We know, and you’ve heard me talk about this before, that there 
was a group of accountants headed by Mr. Gass who tried to 
sort out all of the financing schemes that were there from the 
1980s government. And, Mr. Speaker, what we know is that we 
all were put into very constrained positions for a number of 
years, probably even extending to now, because we still are 
working to deal with some of the things that we didn’t work at 
and deal with in an orderly fashion. Mr. Speaker, why do we 
then fall back on some of these ways of looking at things? Why 
do we not plan for the long term? 
 
Now the whole issue of Mr. MacKinnon’s report and setting up 
of a bright futures fund, or the pension fund they call it in some 
countries, or the oil fund or the resource fund is very curious in 
how this government appears to have responded to this. 
Because I listened a little bit to what the Premier was saying 
yesterday and it was kind of like, oh well, we’re going to do it; 
but no, we’re going to wait. No, we’re going to do it; no, we’re 
going to wait. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has to happen is there has to be a plan. It 
can’t just be on the whim of the Premier. We’ve seen enough 
situations where the Premier gets a bright idea and everybody’s 
off in one direction. He sees something else, he goes the other 
direction. 
 
I mean, I remember getting to give quite an interesting, fun 
speech about Louis Riel when the Governor of Montana was 
here to sign a big deal with the Premier about some kind of a 
pipeline going to Montana. Well where’s that? I mean we 
haven’t heard anything more about that. And if we go back and 
look at the different kind of whims that this Premier comes up 
with over the last few years, we would have quite an interesting 
little story about how we’ve moved here, moved there. And, 
Mr. Speaker, people are finally getting fed up with that. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re finally getting fed up with that. 
 
Now the Minister of Agriculture is talking about some of these 
things and maybe objecting a bit. Well the Minister of 
Agriculture has to listen to the people of the province as it 
relates to the community pastures. As a former minister of 
Environment, one of the largest continuous areas of prairie in 
the world is under the sponsorship and responsibility of the 
Minister of Agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, this is land that is 
prairie and it’s down to, I think . . . I don’t know what the 
percentage is. I think it’s about 3 or 4 per cent of the land that 
used to be here in this province that’s very, very different than 
most every landscape in the world. 
 
And we have then the Minister of Agriculture who has the 

responsibility as the trustee for that land. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have not heard him listen to the people who are using that land 
now. We have not heard him listen to all of the others who are 
saying, look, Saskatchewan, this is an important part of Earth, 
let alone an important part of Canada or important part of 
Saskatchewan. And so where are the plans, where is the 
long-term plan that recognizes that we need to preserve these 
parts of our prairie? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking this as a Saskatchewan person. 
I know my rancher relatives out along the Saskatchewan River, 
my farmer relatives, they have a similar perspective. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they are all asking the question, where’s the plan? Mr. 
Speaker, we’re getting something from the Premier and from 
the Minister of Agriculture that does not recognize how 
important some of this land is for us. And clearly prairie is for 
grazing. I mean it’s great for that, but there’s also another 
responsibility that we all have. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Minister of Agriculture to 
sit down and listen to the people who are actual pasture patrons 
and put together something that actually we all can be proud of. 
Mr. Speaker, I think he has it in him to do that, but we’re not 
hearing it yet. And, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s the same way 
in whole number of other areas, where there just doesn’t appear 
to be any listening from the government. 
 
Now one area where they did have another little bit of a whim 
or a suggestion from the Premier, about using education tax on 
property for something else other than education, that one kind 
of got shut down fairly fast. Now I don’t know if that’s the style 
of management of issues or creation of issues that is planned or 
not. But it doesn’t look planned, and I think the public doesn’t 
see it as being planned. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why, as going 
back to my previous point, there may be a happy grand send-off 
of the Premier on to his next career. And the sooner the better, 
from this side of the House, for sure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that this budget does — 
and it’s done it over a few years, but last year was kind of hard 
to tell what was going on; but this year we’re getting a little 
better picture — but what it’s done is it’s shifted the debt onto 
the Crowns. And basically we’ve increased the debt $4 billion 
over the last four years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw always has comments 
from way over there. But on this particular issue, I know that all 
of the public sees what’s going on. They see it in their utility 
bills that come. They know that they’re paying more because 
there’s a lot of money that’s been borrowed in the Crowns. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve ended up having a Minister of 
Finance who has taken money from that place over the last few 
years. 
 
Now it may be in this particular budget that they’ve taken as 
much as they can and so they’ve got to figure out some other 
ways to get resources. And I think this budget balances if you 
add in, under summary finances, the Liquor and Gaming Fund, 
the Crop Insurance Fund, the Auto Fund, a few other funds. 
And basically what you end up with is a balance on the 
summary. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we all will be paying over the long term 
is these debts that have been created on the Crown’s side. And 



4804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

that’s where the cost-of-living issues in the province are right 
front and centre. I know that when people sit down and talk 
over coffee or look at some of the issues, it’s these kinds of 
things that are of concern to them. 
 
And we’re proud of the kind of service and the work that’s been 
done through our Crown corporations — SaskPower, SaskTel, 
SaskEnergy, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] being 
the key ones — and we’re very supportive, as some marketing 
people say, almost loyal to a fault to SaskTel in a way. But I 
think we all know that our support of a Crown like that is in our 
interest in the long term. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we have lip service from the Premier about 
this because he knows of the political consequences of not 
having that lip service. What we want to make sure is that 
there’s also the budget, the plan, the long-term plan that makes 
sure that our locally controlled institutions are here for the long 
term. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, how do we respond to concerns that people 
have around higher costs? And I think there is a number of 
things that we can do. But I think the most important thing is 
that we take our job seriously and we make sure that we make 
the right choices about how we spend the money of the public. 
And that’s the part where I’m having some difficulty with the 
budget that we have here. 
 
Now when we look at a number of other issues, I’ve made some 
brief references to some issues around the environment, but 
practically Canada and Saskatchewan, following in the same 
track, have made some substantial steps in the wrong direction 
around how we deal with a number of these issues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, where are we going to make a change? What are we 
going to do? Well then you end up with a budget which further 
diminishes the ability of our Ministry of Environment to 
respond to a number of these issues. We also, we know that that 
has long-term effect on how our . . . what we’re going to deal 
with as a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do live in a place that I call a green space on 
Earth. That’s because we have 1.1 million people living in a 
very large area and we have a role as trustees and as people 
responsible. As I indicated, the Minister of Agriculture is 
trustee on all of that important land in the southern part of the 
province in the same way that the Minister of Environment is 
the trustee for the North of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those are very serious jobs, and in some 
ways maybe the most important jobs if we’re thinking in the 
long term for the province of Saskatchewan. And how those 
decisions are made about our land and our water and our air, all 
of those ones are crucial. And, Mr. Speaker, it appears that in 
the cutting or tailing back or the perception of, well let’s reduce 
government, they’ve forgotten the important role that is there 
for the trustee of the land and the water and the air: Minister of 
Environment in the North, Minister of Agriculture in the South. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say let’s have those members of the 
cabinet, along with the Premier and the Minister of Finance, 
take that role seriously and make sure that we have sufficient 
resources, both in dollars but more importantly in people and 
managers. And that’s where we see there’s been some very, 

very dramatic changes that affect many, many things. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you’re trying to deal with a budget, 
we know that it’s the spending plan where the government tries 
to set out what it is that they intend to do. And I guess my point 
and why I’m supporting the amendment to this budget motion is 
that we don’t have a plan. We have lots of places where people 
are going to be suffering because of the decisions that are made, 
where our province is going to be suffering because of the 
decisions that are made. And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I will 
conclude my remarks. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Debate will continue on both the 
main motion and the amendment concurrently. Before I 
recognize the next speaker, I’d simply remind members that 
there’s sufficient time for all members to enter into the debate. 
And as such, I would ask them to save their comments until 
they have the opportunity to enter into the debate. I recognize 
the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s truly an 
honour and a pleasure for me to stand here in this Assembly 
today and enter into this debate on our 2014-2015, our 
balanced, summary budget that was delivered by our Finance 
minister in this Assembly yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just at the outset, I’d like to just make a couple of 
acknowledgments, as often happens in the Assembly. I would 
like to acknowledge my constituency assistant who was down 
yesterday to observe the proceedings on budget day. She 
headed back today, Mr. Speaker, to get ahead of the snow on 
the roads a little bit, but Ms. Sally Fitch is the eyes and the ears 
and the face of the constituency office in Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
As well my family, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve alluded to before, no 
individual serves in this Assembly alone. It definitely is a 
family effort. And I’d like to acknowledge my son who’s in 
university up in Saskatoon and, quite frankly, got a summer job 
here the other day in his field. I’m thrilled about that. So is he. 
And my daughter . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We’re all 
thrilled. And my daughter, Mr. Speaker, who wakes up with a 
grin on her face every day and attends school, attends dance, 
taken up snowboarding this winter, Mr. Speaker. The love and 
laughter that she approaches every day of her life is truly 
inspiring for myself, Mr. Speaker. And my wife: my wife, 
Krista, is truly my best friend and my rock. And she is a good 
woman to put up with me the last 20 years, most definitely, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third budget that I have taken part in 
since I was elected in 2011. And I can’t help but think, and I’m 
sure many in this Assembly can relate in it, that this budget was 
just a little bit different maybe than the last two I’ve seen and 
the ones previous to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And I think it has the opportunity to be quite a bit different, Mr. 
Speaker, when we come to voting on it. Because when I 
watched the Minister of Finance release the budget yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, and when he announced that there’s going to be 
no tax increases in this budget — no personal tax increases, no 
education tax, property tax increases, Mr. Speaker, and 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4805 

specifically no increases to the credit unions’ tax incentives that 
they receive — Mr. Speaker, I saw members of the opposition 
applaud that initiative, Mr. Speaker. And I was encouraged that 
they might have a look at this and vote in favour of this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, make it a unanimous vote in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also applause across the way from 
opposition members when our Finance minister announced that 
in addition to the nine joint-use education facilities that have 
been announced previously this year, there will be additional 
renovations to many schools as well as two more facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, two more education facilities right here in Regina, 
being Connaught and Sacred Heart School, that’ll be funded in 
this coming budget, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite 
acknowledged that with applause yesterday, and I again was 
encouraged that we may have a unanimous vote when it comes 
time to vote on this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other note and something that makes this 
budget maybe just a little bit different than many of the others 
that, or a couple of the others that I’ve seen in this Assembly 
but many of the others most significantly since 2004, Mr. 
Speaker, in 2004 this government moved, and to the NDP’s 
credit — they were in government at that time — but they 
moved to reporting on not only the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund], Mr. Speaker, but the summary financial basis. And it’s 
been that way, Mr. Speaker, up until yesterday. 
 
Yesterday this Finance minister in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
tabled a budget or introduced a budget, Mr. Speaker, that 
focuses on the summary financial statements. Mr. Speaker, this 
is something that the Provincial Auditor has asked for and it’s 
something that this Premier, this Finance minister, and this 
Saskatchewan Party government delivered yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would like to read actually the Acting Provincial Auditor’s 
comments on yesterday’s budget, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read 
them into the record. I think they’re significant and they’re 
important in light of the budget that was announced yesterday. 
And this is the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, 
“Our office strongly supports these changes. They will 
eliminate confusion and help legislators and the public better 
understand the government’s finances.” Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
Acting Provincial Auditor, Ms. Judy Ferguson’s comments on 
yesterday’s budget that was introduced in this Assembly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m encouraged that the members of the 
opposition will be supporting this budget and it’ll be a 
unanimous budget as the member from Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, 
has been on his feet or asking questions in excess of 120 times, 
calling on the government to report on summary financial 
statements. And it happened yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And I look 
forward to a vote on this budget next week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more specifically to this budget that was 
announced or released in this Chamber yesterday, this budget is 
most definitely about steady growth for the province of 
Saskatchewan. This budget contains, as I said, no tax increases, 
which were popular with all of the members of the Assembly. 
And this budget controls spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues to make investments in the 

infrastructure for our Saskatchewan communities. And most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, this budget continues to invest in 
Saskatchewan’s most valuable resource, and that’s our people. 
Mr. Speaker, it continues the province of Saskatchewan on a 
path of fiscal responsibility. And this summary financial budget 
that was released in this Assembly yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
most importantly, was balanced. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it had a 
$71 million surplus. 
 
And I must say, I must say, Mr. Speaker, that this balanced 
budget did not come easily. It’s only through the concerted 
effort of our Finance minister, our members of cabinet, and 
their ministry officials, Mr. Speaker, as well as input from 
caucus and, very importantly, the co-operation of stakeholders 
across the province, that we’re able to control spending and 
introduce a balanced budget like we were yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this balanced budget is exactly what the people of 
Saskatchewan have come to expect from this government, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve introduced numerous balanced budgets. We did 
it again yesterday. And it’s precisely what the members of the 
province of Saskatchewan or the people of Saskatchewan 
expect on budget day from the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
I would like to note however that the easier route to take in this 
instance, Mr. Speaker, because there is spending pressures, 
there is people that need money for different projects — we 
realize that, Mr. Speaker — but the easier route would have 
been to maybe not make some of these tougher decisions and 
not to control the spending of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and this ultimately would allow deficits to creep 
in. And, Mr. Speaker, this has been shown all too often in many 
jurisdictions across North America that this has actually been 
the case, in particular in recent years, Mr. Speaker. Not so in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The reality in Saskatchewan is quite simply this, Mr. Speaker. 
In 2007 residents of Saskatchewan have experienced the largest 
income tax reduction in the history of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, nearly 112,000 people no longer pay any 
provincial income tax at all. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 the people 
of Saskatchewan have had the largest property tax reduction in 
the history of the province, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts. 
 
Just this week, Mr. Speaker, it was reported that our population 
continued to grow in the year 2013 by more than 20,000 people, 
Mr. Speaker. This now means that 1,117,503 people are now 
calling this province home. This makes Saskatchewan the 
second fastest growing province in the Dominion of Canada and 
puts us well on our plan to reach our growth plan goal of 1.2 
million by the year 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we introduce budgets into this Assembly, 
they are an outlook of the next year of how the government is 
going to spend or invest the people of Saskatchewan’s money 
throughout the next year, but they are really in essence an 
outlook through that year and some on either side. Mr. Speaker, 
I heard some allusions in the member from Lakeview’s speech 
about long-term plan and suggests that we don’t have a plan, 
and I would very quickly refer him to The Saskatchewan Plan 
for Growth, Mr. Speaker. If he looked in that booklet, he would 
very quickly see that the amendment about cuts and crumbs . . . 



4806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

And I didn’t hear after that, but I heard cuts and crumbs, Mr. 
Speaker, which very precisely is not a long-term plan for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So I encourage members opposite 
to have a look in The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth. 
 
That plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, again was a vision by 
Saskatchewan people for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 
the budgets that we introduce in this Assembly are really in 
essence rungs on the ladder to achieving the goals in that plan 
for growth. Mr. Speaker, when I look in that Plan for Growth, I 
very quickly go to the page with the six core growth activities. 
And when I look at our budget, I look at how our budget ties 
into those growth activities, Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased to 
say that this one does in a very large way. 
 
First of all, this balanced summary budget that was introduced 
yesterday by our Finance minister enhances the Saskatchewan 
plan for growth by investing in infrastructure projects required 
for that growth. First of all, Mr. Speaker, infrastructure projects 
are most notable in the Ministry of Highways in the investment 
of almost $665 million to build and to operate and to maintain 
our provincial highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over $400 million of this money is a direct 
investment in capital programs, capital programs to catch up on 
the $1 billion CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 
identified deficit that we inherited in 2007 but also capital 
plans, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the growth that we have as we 
move forward in Saskatchewan. Capital plans such as the 
twinning of the No. 16 Highway from Saskatoon to Clavet, Mr. 
Speaker. Pre-construction work is going to be done for twinning 
projects involving highways between Regina, Estevan, and 
Bienfait, as well as from Saskatoon to Delisle. Mr. Speaker, 
these are all high-growth areas. There’s also growth in the 
industrial sector in these areas, so there’s trucks on the road, 
Mr. Speaker, and there’s efforts being made to make those 
highways safer and to move more traffic down them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s passing lane pre-construction work being 
done for Highway No. 7 between Delisle and Rosetown, again, 
Mr. Speaker, a highway with ever-increasing capacity and as 
well, trucks on the road. 
 
Something that is a little near and dear to my heart, Mr. 
Speaker, is the municipal roads for the economy program which 
is funded again this year with twenty-five and a half million 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, through my work as Legislative Secretary 
to our Minister of Agriculture, I’ve had the opportunity to meet 
with a number of different agribusinesses and value-added food 
processors and different businesses within the ag industry. And, 
Mr. Speaker, these places have a lot of product coming in by 
truck and a lot of processed product going out by truck, and 
they don’t always have the luxury of being located right on one 
of our provincial highways. This heavy truck traffic going in 
and out of the plants, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard on the access roads. 
The municipal roads for the economy program is a program that 
supports Saskatchewan business, it supports the expansion of 
Saskatchewan business, and it’s a good program for the 
agricultural processing business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone that’s been through Saskatoon or in 
Saskatoon or tried to move through Saskatoon by vehicle in the 
last number of years, the unprecedented growth in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Speaker, has caused traffic challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think there’s anyone that has moved around in that city 
that hasn’t noticed the benefits of the south bypass in 
Saskatoon. I know I sure have, as we’re in there frequently, as 
I’m through the city as well. Mr. Speaker, in this budget there’s 
a commitment to work with the city of Saskatoon as well as the 
federal government to look at methods to fund the north 
commuter bridge in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, which will again 
affect and improve traffic flow in one of our fastest growing 
cities, Mr. Speaker, I believe one of the fastest growing cities in 
Canada at the moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about infrastructure, I talked a little 
bit about highways, but I’d be remiss if I didn’t add a few 
comments in on health care, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 
infrastructure in health care. As a matter of fact, there’s nearly 
$95 million that’s being invested in Saskatchewan’s health care 
projects across the province, Mr. Speaker. And again to speak 
about something that I have some experience with and 
something that is near and dear to me is some of the funding 
that’s available for the 13 long-term care facilities that were 
announced a number of years ago, Mr. Speaker. As everyone 
knows here, we had the opportunity to open one of those 
integrated facilities in the community where I live. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s up, it’s operational with full services, and it’s paid for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s $27 million in this budget to continue 
work on five more of those facilities that are going in Biggar, 
Kelvington, Kipling, Maple Creek, and Prince Albert. There’s 
also, Mr. Speaker, in this budget $16 million for the completion 
of a new hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something else a little closer to home, to the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook to do with health care, Mr. 
Speaker — and this is an important project moving forward; 
these projects take some time — is the funding, the $2.5 million 
. . . Or sorry, this is in North Battleford, the $2.5 million for the 
early-stage funding of the Saskatchewan Hospital. And I know 
my constituency gets right up into . . . It’s close to North 
Battleford. I know my colleague from The Battlefords is happy 
to see that project moving forward, Mr. Speaker. And that’ll be 
an interesting project as we move through the next number of 
years, not only for the community of North Battleford, but the 
Saskatchewan Hospital services the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert we have the Prince Albert 
Victoria Hospital, which is a regional facility, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my facility. It’s where my daughter was born. When my son 
breaks his ankle, that’s where we go to have his ankle reset, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a facility for many . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many ankles has he broken? 
 
Mr. Moe: — Some of . . . He’s broken some of his ankles. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a catchment facility. It’s a regional facility, 
not only for the communities surrounding Prince Albert such as 
the community where I live, in Shellbrook or Leask or Birch 
Hills, but it also is a catchment for health care for the entire 
North, Mr. Speaker. And when I speak of the North, I speak of 
all of up in the treeline and north there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know there’s a couple of members opposite that have 
self-anointed them as the voice of the North in this building, 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4807 

which is precisely not true, Mr. Speaker. We have a member 
across the treeline from Carrot River. We have members from 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers, across 
Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, right across to Lloydminster. And 
the investment in the P.A. [Prince Albert] Victoria Hospital in 
this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, to further the construction 
planning for that facility, Mr. Speaker, is appreciated by 
northern Saskatchewan in its entirety. Mr. Speaker, there’s also 
increased funding for the 24 additional beds at the Pineview 
Terrace in Prince Albert as well. 
 
And a couple other items within health care that maybe are just 
off the infrastructure topic a little bit but nonetheless important, 
Mr. Speaker, is the funding to enhance the primary health care 
model in many of our communities and the funding to get the 
other three collaborative emergency centres up and rolling, Mr. 
Speaker. We have Shaunavon going. We have Maidstone going. 
And I know in our constituency, we have the community of 
Spiritwood working closely with the health region to get their 
collaborative emergency centre up and going this year. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s investment again in the rural family 
physician recruitment program to create that locum pool to 
bring stability to our rural facilities, as well as investment, Mr. 
Speaker, in house calls for seniors, as well as hot-spotting to 
recognize those individuals that require a little bit more care and 
a little bit of . . . to assist the high-risk and high-needs patients, 
Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan — some exciting 
investments in health care, not only on the capital side but also 
on the service delivery side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back to my six core items of the growth plan. This 
balanced summary budget enhances the Saskatchewan plan for 
growth by educating, by training, and by developing a skilled 
workforce. Mr. Speaker, to educate and train a skilled 
workforce, I think it’s best to start with the children. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget definitely does that by an addition of 500 
new child care spaces. 
 
These have been . . . To bring this to a local level, Mr. Speaker, 
last June 18th I attended the grand opening of the Love and 
Laughter child care centre in the community of Spiritwood. 
This April 5th, so just coming up here right away, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m going to attend another grand opening in the community of 
Shellbrook for the Happy Hearts Childcare that’s going to break 
ground here . . . sorry, not a grand opening. They’re going to 
break ground on a new facility. And we have some other 
communities that are looking at this important initiative as well. 
And it gets your kids into the frequency of later getting to 
school. 
 
Following that, Mr. Speaker, another $20 million in pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs which have also been noticed in 
many communities across the province but also in our 
constituency. And there’s steady growth in our schools, Mr. 
Speaker, very steady growth. Last year there was interim 
growth funding for school divisions in Saskatchewan, and this 
year there’s an increase of over $19 million in operating 
funding for our school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much needed facilities that are on the 

horizon in addition to, like I had mentioned, the nine joint-use 
facilities that were announced earlier this year. There’s also an 
announcement in this year’s budget to replace the Connaught 
and Sacred Heart School using whatever methods of funding, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
These initiatives have been noticed by the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to enter in a 
quote from Janet Foord, the president of SSBA [Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association], on the record here. And it goes 
like this, and I quote: 
 

School boards are currently facing close to a $700 million 
backlog of education infrastructure funding, and with the 
average age of K-12 education facilities being 50 years 
[old] this is a serious problem for students. Today’s 
announcement that the government will provide additional 
capital funding outside of the previous P3 announcements 
is much welcomed news [says Foord]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as we move out of the primary system into the 
post-secondary system, which I personally am having some 
experience with now with my son being there, post-secondary 
funding in general has received an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 
$24 million, or a 3.7 per cent increase in advanced ed funding. 
Mr. Speaker, $17 million, or pardon me, in addition . . . In this, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s $216 million that are provided in student 
supports for post-secondary education students. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s $7 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship. 
Mr. Speaker, there’s seven and a half million dollars in this 
budget for SAGES, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings, which I have had many questions about over 
the last number of weeks and months leading into this. Mr. 
Speaker, people are interested in this program. 
 
And my personal favourite, Mr. Speaker, a personal favourite 
student support program, because I hope my son will be part of 
this one day, is the $82 million for the Saskatchewan grad 
retention program, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
He gets the money and I won’t get the money, but that’s fine. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, just to jump back to health care and 
health care training, this budget also provides for increasing our 
nurse training seats, Mr. Speaker. It further increases our seats 
at the College of Medicine in getting to our goal of 100 College 
of Medicine seats for our physicians. It further increases our 
medical residency positions, Mr. Speaker, with the ultimate 
goal of 120 medical residents working in the province. And it 
adds five more nurse practitioners’ training seats so that we are 
at 15, well on our way to meeting our goal of 20 by the year 
2015-16. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this balanced summary budget enhances the 
Saskatchewan growth plan by supporting increased trade, 
increased investment, and increased exports. This begins with a 
half a million dollars to initiate the start up of the manufacturing 
centre of excellence, also investment in STEP [Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership], Mr. Speaker, or the 
Saskatchewan trade or export partnership which . . . And we all 
know how beneficial STEP has been to our exporting partners 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, and more specifically this 



4808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

Premier, are engaged in supporting Saskatchewan’s trade, 
Saskatchewan’s investments, and Saskatchewan’s exports each 
and every day. This is recently most notable, most notable, Mr. 
Speaker, by this government’s efforts on the grain 
transportation file. Mr. Speaker, it was this government that 
started to engage with the railway industries last spring. It was 
this Minister of Agriculture that engaged with the railways and 
the grain companies last spring in working through a plan to 
move crops to the port. Mr. Speaker, it was the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Minister of Highways that continued those 
discussions with logistics groups throughout the summer into 
the winter. And, Mr. Speaker, here when we hit a roadblock 
through this winter with grain transportation, it was this 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, that appointed a delegation to meet with 
stakeholders within the industry — with rail companies, with 
producers, and with grain companies — to find a solution to 
this very real economic challenge to our province and to our 
agricultural producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all my travels the last few months visiting with 
all these stakeholders, whether it be farmers, grain companies, 
railways, we heard some great input on the different measures 
that would have to occur to clear this grain backlog. And that 
input, Mr. Speaker, was relayed to the federal government 
through our Minister of Agriculture and our Premier prior to the 
order in council that was put through not too long ago and, Mr. 
Speaker, most recently through our Minister of Agriculture, has 
communicated more information on what this government feels 
that Saskatchewan needs in the way of regulations with the 
legislation that will be coming before our federal government 
here shortly. Like I said, Mr. Speaker, these have been 
compiled and communicated. We’re unsure whether the 
opposition has had any communications on this file, Mr. 
Speaker, quite frankly, with anybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout all my travels and in particular those 
travels with producers the last number of months, when we 
talked about the grain transportation file . . . And I want to 
make this clear. Not once, not once in all the producers I talked 
to did I hear this statement. Not once did I hear, boy it sure is a 
good thing that the NDP are making you guys address this grain 
transportation file. Never heard it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that in 63 times that that 
leader of that opposition has gotten to his feet to ask a question, 
he not once has asked a question on behalf of Saskatchewan 
agriculture and Saskatchewan business on the grain 
transportation file. Mr. Speaker, producers in this province and 
people connected with agriculture are fully aware of the lack of 
engagement of the NDP and in particular the leader of the NDP 
when it comes to agricultural issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the grain transportation, the lack of grain 
transportation in this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s not an issue 
that just affects agriculture in our province. This is an issue that 
goes right down main street, Mr. Speaker. It affects every 
business on main street in every community across this 
province, big or small, and it was the largest economic 
challenge that I’ve seen since I’ve been elected, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s my hopes that through our efforts as a province and as 
a federal government that we’re well on our way to providing a 
long-term solution to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, back to our core growth goals of the 
Saskatchewan growth plan. This balanced summary budget 
enhances Saskatchewan’s plan for growth by advancing 
Saskatchewan’s natural resource strengths. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
this provincial government that has been very outspoken and a 
proactive approach to transporting our export products to an 
exportable port facility by any means necessary that are safe, 
efficient, and good for the economy, Mr. Speaker. And most 
notably, I point to a motion on March the 12th, moved by the 
member from Lloydminster, the Minister of Energy, in support 
of the Gateway pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank goodness the people of Saskatchewan have 
entrusted enough people to vote in favour of our economy and 
transporting our goods safely to a port position, as that motion 
passed with no help, Mr. Speaker, no help as the members 
opposite voted against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this balanced summary budget that was introduced 
yesterday in this House enhances Saskatchewan’s plan for 
growth by ensuring, ensuring the ongoing competiveness of 
Saskatchewan’s economy through things like supporting safe, 
reliable transportation methods for oil, Mr. Speaker, by 
advocating for the grain industry so that they can get their 
product to port. Mr. Speaker, this is something that happens 
each and every day in this government, not just on budget day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I roamed the building yesterday, talking with 
different people and talking about the business climate in 
Saskatchewan and how the budget would affect the business 
climate in Saskatchewan, I heard two things. The first thing I 
heard, the budget was balanced. The second thing I heard, Mr. 
Speaker, was the fact that there are no tax increases in this 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a balanced budget, taking into account all 
government entities and no tax increases in that budget, are 
good news for the ongoing competiveness of Saskatchewan 
business. And the CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business] agrees with it as Marilyn Braun-Pollon tweeted 
yesterday: “Pleased the Saskatchewan budget is balanced and 
doesn’t hike education property taxes.” A great tweet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last core growth plan goal in the plan for 
growth is fiscal responsibility. What am I going to say? The 
budget’s balanced. It’s an introduced . . . It’s a 
summary-focused budget this year, Mr. Speaker, for the first 
time that we’re . . . introduced yesterday, here today, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s balanced. It’s got no tax increases in it, Mr. 
Speaker. That is showing the fiscal responsibility that the 
people of Saskatchewan have come to respect from this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget for Saskatchewan. It’s a 
balanced budget. It’s a transparent budget and it focuses on 
reporting on the summary financial basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask the members opposite, and I ask them 
individually to some degree, the Regina members, and more 
specifically the member from Elphinstone. Next week when this 
budget comes to a vote here, Mr. Speaker, I ask him if he’s 
going to stand up and vote against a school in Connaught and 
Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker. I ask him if he’s going to vote 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4809 

against those schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the two self-anointed voices from the North. 
I ask them if they’re going to stand up and vote against the 
long-term care facility in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. And I ask if 
all of you, all of the opposition members, are going to vote 
against holding the line on tax increases to the credit unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I specifically ask all the members opposite, 
but specifically the member of Regina Rosemont who’s been on 
his feet numerous times in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, asking 
this government to report on summary financial statements, and 
I ask him to support this budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good 
budget for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I won’t be supporting any silly cuts and crumbs amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ll be supporting this budget introduced by our 
Minister of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to enter the 
budget debate here. I’ve been into many of them and like I’ve 
always said, this is the budget that was gathered by information 
from the people. And I know when we went around with my 
constituents, you know, the number one priority is a balanced 
budget. They always said we need to always have a balanced 
budget, and that was the number one priority. And I’m glad that 
that was part of designing that balanced budget as we move 
forward. 
 
It was a tighter budget this year, but it was a budget that 
focused on priorities. And that’s what the people of not only 
rural Saskatchewan but also urban members of constituents of 
this great province have said that, you know, you have to focus 
on your priorities when it comes to investing in people. And 
this is a budget that does that. And it was not that easy not to, 
you know, just to easily dip into . . . to raise taxes and just, you 
know, because there always is, as members have said, lots of 
requests for stuff being built. I mean, you know, and people 
expect things to be done just now, right now, like highways 
ought to be twinned, you know, health care to be fixed 
immediately. 
 
You know, but most people understand that you can’t do that. 
And raising taxes and driving yourself deep in debt isn’t the 
way to go. I mean, other governments have done that in the past 
and it hasn’t worked. They’ve done that throughout the country 
and they did that throughout the world and it’s always come 
back to haunt them. The most successful economies are always 
the ones that just do the steady growth and run the balanced 
budgets and prioritize their money, and sometimes you have to 
make some tough decisions. You know out in my constituency, 
I mean naturally agriculture is very important and this budget 
addresses that. You know, we have 371.6 million and that’ll 
help farmers go. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The biggest thing that was in this budget is the western 
livestock price insurance program. I mean I’ve been through the 
cattle industry. I’ve been in the cattle industry all my life, been 

through the highs and lows of it, and there’s been some pretty 
bad lows when BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] hit 
and the low prices over other things. And there was no 
insurance program. I mean you hoped, you know . . . People, 
ranchers don’t like asking for an ad hoc program, but you know 
they were, some of them were asking over the years, you know 
in industry and they crashed bad in the BSE years and when 
you, you know, you couldn’t even sell a cow. So they’ve been 
asking to have an insurance program very similar to what we 
have with crop insurance where they, you know, they pay into 
it. They pay their share, but it gives them some security down 
the road and I think this program addresses that. And I was glad 
we’re moving forward with this program in conjunction with 
Alberta, you know. That’s very important. 
 
It’s also, you know, this budget’s also highlighted by 70 . . . 
[inaudible] . . . million for strategic initiatives such as research 
and market development. I mean that’s very important to our 
industry, to the agriculture industry as we move forward. I 
mean you look at the huge crop that we grew this year. You 
know, it just wasn’t all due to the great weather. It was due to a 
lot of the new technologies that are out there, the new seeding 
implements, the new seeding tools, the new how you lay your 
fertilizer . . . [inaudible] . . . and seed, seed development too. 
You know, over the years that’s all been working towards to 
help farmers grow better and bigger crops, and I think we’re 
going to be growing bigger and better crops as we move 
forward with that. 
 
And with that we need market research. We need research for 
seed development to make more weed . . . you know, so crops 
are more weed resistant and how to kill the weeds that are out 
there as they become stronger. So that’s very important too. 
And that’s what farmers are asking because those are things that 
they can’t do. Those are things that are out of their hands. You 
know, the research and the development and that, that’s out of 
their hands. So they look towards government for that and I’m 
glad that we’re stepping up and doing that. And also developing 
markets throughout the world, that’s, you know, that’s 
something else that your farmers and ranchers look forward to 
as we move forward in how to develop the markets, and our 
government has been very proactive through STEP. And also 
the federal government has been very proactive, signing free 
trade agreements that have increased sales throughout the 
world, and that’s improved the life and quality for farmers 
greatly over the many years, the many benefits of all the trade 
agreements and opening many, many new markets, you know, 
for all the many new crops that are being grown out there. 
 
And every year you always hear of a new crop being tried 
somewhere on the Prairies and possibly a new market for it. 
You know, I can remember when peas and lentils were in the 
experimental stage and, you know, hardly anybody grew them, 
and now they’re the norm for every farm. They’re in every crop 
rotation. That came with research and market development and 
developing the world market. 
 
And actually, as the member that spoke before me, grain 
transportation right now is on the foremost of every farmer’s 
mind right now. When you go home, that’s what every farmer 
will be talking about in the coffee shop. It’s affecting them 
greatly, and I know that they’re glad that we’re trying to work 
in this. And we know that it’s a long-range problem, that it’s 



4810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

going to have to be addressed as we move forward because this 
isn’t . . . As more oil is starting to move down the rail and as 
this province grows, potash, more potash being moved by the 
rail, more manufactured goods coming in and going out by the 
rail, we have to make sure that agriculture isn’t left behind and 
make sure that the railroad companies make their commitments 
to the shippers, that they are moving the tonnage down there. 
And we are working with the federal government to make sure 
that a plan is in place for now and in the future so this situation 
doesn’t happen again. 
 
So we move forward. Revenue sharing is also very important 
out in my constituency. And the Saskatchewan municipalities 
are receiving 394 million in direct provincial support, you 
know, to build communities and enhance the quality of life for 
the residents. Now that’s up 32 million from the 2013-14 
budget and up 152 million, or 63 per cent, from the ’07-08 
budget. 
 
That’s another thing. As I have many very small towns in my 
riding, you know . . . and a very cold winter. I was just talking 
to the reporter from the Last Mountain Times. He’d been at the 
Nokomis meeting, I think last night, and one of the discussions 
was broken pipes. As the frost’s being driven down deeper, 
they’ve had more breaks. A lot of towns have had more water 
main breaks, more sewer breaks than normal this year just 
because of the very cold winter. And then even in Saskatoon 
it’s been, you know, mentioned on the news on that end of it. 
 
So infrastructure is very, very important to all my communities 
throughout my area and also through the urban areas too. You 
know that’s very important as we move forward, is 
infrastructure. As the population grows in the cities and in the 
towns and villages, you know, you need the proper water 
treatment, the proper water lines, and you need them in good 
shape. So I know our government has been stepping up on 
infrastructure. 
 
You know, in my constituency, you know, one of the things that 
is happening is in Blackstrap. An agreement has been reached, 
so we’ll see an estimated 2.6 million of private investment in 
Blackstrap Provincial Park. Agreements with two separate 
companies are now in place, so we’ll see the construction of a 
new marina and rental cabins at Blackstrap. You know, that’s a 
provincial park that I think under the NDP was ignored for 
many years. And we’re stepping up and trying to get that park 
up and running. It’s a very good park. It’s very close to 
Saskatoon. It’s something that many of the Saskatoon residents 
can just visit on a daily basis. You can just bring your kids out 
for, you know, a couple of hours. 
 
It’s not like you have to travel, you know, six or seven hours to 
a park where you’re camping. You can just come out. You can 
zip out on a Saturday or Sunday afternoon and spend a couple 
of hours there with them. And I think that’s very important that 
we’re trying to, ministry and the government, trying to work 
towards, to make that park as useful as it possibly can. You 
know, they’re looking at an operation of a 190-slip inland 
marina at the Blackstrap Provincial Park. You know, that’s 
going to be very important for that area as we move forward. 
 
And you know, as I mentioned before, health is always very 
important throughout my area too. You know, I’m trying to 

touch the base of all the things how this budget will touch my 
constituency. I mean long-term care has always been, you 
know, foremost in the residents’ mind, and also doctors, you 
know, trying to retain doctors. And I know that we are doing 
more there with incentives to keep doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know that we’ve increased the budget for that, 
and that’s important. Also the collaborative care facilities that 
we’re looking to expand there; I think that’s the way of the 
future. The Health ministry has been doing a very good job 
there at working with communities to ensure that they have a 
form of health care in each and every community.  
 
Because when you talk to residents, I mean, that’s the most 
important thing to them is to make sure that there is some form 
of health care in their area. It doesn’t matter how small their 
facility is. You know, they want to be able to know that . . . like 
the member opposite, he had mentioned his boy, you know, 
breaking his ankle. Well they want a facility that they can go to 
immediately very close by for stuff like that, whether it be 
serious injuries or sometimes just minor injuries. But you know, 
they don’t want to be travelling 50 or 60 miles for that. So with 
these centres, you know, as we expand them throughout the 
province, hopefully that will help to improve health care 
throughout my constituency and throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, looking at health care, we’re looking at the 
hot-spotting pilot program, you know, to identify and assist 
high-cost, high-use patients. You know, that’s another way of 
just trying to address the high cost of health care. Because I 
mean we know health care is very expensive to deliver. It’s very 
important but it’s also very expensive. We have to look at ways 
of where we can save costs or where we could prioritize that 
money and move it to different areas so that it can be best used. 
Because them dollars are very precious that we have, that the 
taxpayers have given us, and they expect the very best use of 
them. So when it comes to health care we’ve been, you know, 
trying to prioritize where we can and work towards where we 
can make them savings and pass them on to the users of health 
care. 
 
Highways are, naturally where I come from, are always very 
important, you know. And we’re looking at, I have some 
highways that do need some fixing, but we are looking at 
Highway 15. That’s a four-year project. I mean it’s been on the 
radar screen for a long time. Last year we did 11 klicks of 
grading and I know I had a lot of good compliments on it. We 
widened it. We didn’t pave it but we widened it, made a good 
firm base. And the residents in that area said, at least it’s a start. 
 
Now this year it tenders out I think for 13 more klicks and also 
to pave the first 11 and possibly the 13. We’ll see how the 
tendering goes. But that road is going to be, on 15 Highway, is 
going to be a wide-load corridor, and that’s something that this 
province needs from Alberta as we move east. Because with 
No. 11 being as busy as it is, you just can’t move these wide 
loads down there anymore. I mean it’s just too dangerous. I 
mean even as it is, there is wide loads having to move down 
there yet because they can’t move down that route at times. 
 
And even with pilot trucks, you know, you have people that are 
basically going around them ignoring the pilot trucks. It’s 
getting dangerous on No. 11 Highway to move a very, very 
wide load because unfortunately people don’t . . . When it 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4811 

comes to traffic safety, they seem sometimes to get in a rush. So 
we need to move some of these heavy, wide loads down another 
corridor, and I’m glad we’re working towards that. 
 
You know, twinning is always very important to people. And I 
know we’re looking at, we’re going to be twinning from 
Saskatoon to Clavet. And I know that’s a very, very busy 
highway, you know, just with the growth of our province but 
also with the mining industry out in that area. I know when the 
shifts change there, it’s pretty well steady traffic, from what I 
understand. 
 
We’re looking at, you know, doing more passing lanes. You 
know, that’s been an initiative that’s been brought forward over 
the years that other provinces have tried. And we’ve had a pilot 
project, and we’re moving towards that. And I think that’s a 
very good initiative because unfortunately you just can’t twin 
everything immediately, you know, because we’re also working 
in the context of a balanced budget, which most of the, pretty 
well all of the people of Saskatchewan realize that, you know, 
you can’t do everything. But what they want to see is 
responsible spending with their money.  
 
And I know that when I was talking to residents yesterday that 
that’s the feedback I was getting. First it was a balanced budget, 
no tax increases. You know, they were very happy with that. 
They were very pleased with that, you know, and also that they 
could see that we were prioritizing our spending where we had 
to and focusing . . . You know, I see there’s an increase in the 
health care spending, which has always been asked for. 
 
You know, as our economy is growing, as you know it is, I 
mean our population every . . . You know, whenever we release 
the investments every six months, the population has always 
gone up. And so people realize that we need to be putting more 
and more investment into infrastructure, into health care. But 
also with them people coming, I mean there’s a bigger tax base, 
which most people understand. So that’s one of the things they 
realize. That’s something that our government is working 
towards as we work towards, you know, this budget, as we call 
it a steady growth. 
 
[12:30] 
 
And that’s what they want. They don’t want a boom and bust 
like has happened in some countries and in some provinces. 
They want . . . if we can keep this province the way we have 
been on a nice, steady growth. And it has been, you know, with 
our oil industry and our potash industry, our mining industry, 
agriculture industry, cattle industry, manufacturing — you 
know, there’s been a growth in each one of the sectors. And 
with that comes people and comes that with investment. And 
with the people comes more tax money. And with that then you 
can do more things for infrastructure and more money in health 
care and all of them. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, those are my comments on the 
budget. I fully support this budget. I believe it is as good as any 
of the budgets we’ve ever presented. And it is what the people 
of Arm River-Watrous but also the people of Saskatchewan, 
urban and rural, are supporting. And this is what they wanted. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s a pleasure for me to join in the debate about the 
budget, budget 2014-15. And right off the bat, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d to thank a few people before I get into my 
comments about the budget. 
 
I actually stand the first time, our first budget, as a new father. 
So I’ve learned . . . Our son was born last May, and I’ve kind of 
looked at the budget from a different point of view now as our 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook talked about looking at it, as 
the Saskatchewan advantage savings credit and tax credit is for 
future young people going to university. And I’m looking really 
forward to the day when I’m able to put money away for our 
son’s education, which we’re going to start doing right away. 
Hopefully, hopefully, as all fathers hope, hopefully he’s going 
to be signing an NHL [National Hockey League] contract and 
we’re not going to have to worry about that. But we’ll have a 
fallback plan here in case that doesn’t work out. 
 
And as always, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a few people we 
do have to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And first and foremost I 
have to thank my lovely wife who, I think like many of us, our 
spouses . . . It all has to do with the job that we do, and it’s a 
strain on their lives as much as it is on our lives. They give up a 
lot of time with us so that we can do our jobs and go out to 
community events and represent our constituents.  
 
And my wife does a wonderful job, and with our new little guy 
she is a wonderful mother. I can’t say enough nice things about 
my wife because she puts up with me as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I think that’s no small burden. And she’s a 
wonderful sounding board for ideas, and she’s, as many 
members say, our best counsel. She’s my best friend, and she’s 
one of the big reasons I’m able to stand and give this address 
today. 
 
We also have a hard-working group at our constituency office. 
My CA [constituency assistant] right now took a month 
holiday. She’s in Thailand, but I have a wonderful person filling 
in, Kate Verbeek. She’s is doing a wonderful job. And my 
full-time assistant, Heather Howell-Shiplack does great work 
with the constituents. She’s great for casework. I think she’s 
doing a wonderful job and the people of Walsh Acres have 
responded in such, and we get a couple of phone calls that she’s 
done wonderful work for them. And I’m very happy to have 
such great help in the constituency office. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m kind of going to look at this budget 
from a different point of view. We all have our budget briefings 
and usually we get to go over and pore over them. But after the 
budget briefing this Wednesday I ran home as fast as I could 
and put Nickson in the tub and was able to give him a bath. And 
when my wife was putting him to bed, I went over the budget 
books. And I was looking at it and thinking, you know, in 20 
years I wonder what people are going to look back and 
remember about this budget. 
 
If 20 years from now, if my son asked me, well, Dad, why did 
you do that? Why did you do that? I think we should have the 
answers for them. So I took a look at the budget from that point 



4812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

of view. And I think one thing our budget is going to be known 
for is the first budget presented on a summary financial basis, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that’s something which I think is very important moving 
forward for the citizens of Saskatchewan. It’s a change that 
should have happened. I think the NDP were calling for it for a 
long, long, time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think the fact that 
this change has happened is one of the biggest reasons why, and 
I may be wrong, but I think this may have been the first time the 
opposition gave the government financer a standing ovation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I listened intently to the member from Rosemont’s 
remarks, long remarks, yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And for 
an opposition to come forward, give a standing ovation on one 
point and then absolutely go off the rails and talk about how 
bad things are in Saskatchewan, how bad things are for 
families, well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk to constituents as 
well. And I think that speech that was given by the member 
from Regina Rosemont could have been cut and paste from an 
NDP speech in the ’60s, the ’70s, the ’80s, the ’90s, early 
2000s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think they’ve continuously 
looked in the rear-view mirror and they’re missing out on the 
greatest province in the Dominion of Canada right now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think some of the wonderful things in this budget which 
I’m sure, and a couple of members clapped on occasion 
yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that we can all agree 
and say it’s a good thing that we’re building new schools in 
Regina — Sacred Heart, Connaught. And the member from 
Elphinstone has stood in this Assembly time and time and time 
on petitions asking for a new Sacred Heart school in his 
constituency. He gets it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hope he 
can stand up when it’s time to vote on this budget and vote for 
his constituents, vote for the people of Elphinstone because they 
got the school that they deserve, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think it’s be a terrible misrepresentation of what people want if 
that member stands up and votes against a budget that gives 
them a new school. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I stand in this Assembly, and I think about 
a couple other things that members opposite have said about our 
budget. The member from Regina Rosemont talks about the 
truck traffic on Dewdney. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
budget looks at easing that traffic problem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It looks at doing a truck bypass through Regina. The 
money’s in there for this. I can’t believe the member can stand 
in his spot and talk about how bad the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] is for the city of Regina, the economic 
activity that’s going down there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We don’t see the GTH as a problem. We see it as a solution. 
We see it as an opportunity for people in Regina to have good 
jobs. We see it as opportunity for Saskatchewan to become a 
leader in logistics, in services, in supply chain management, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And for that member, who represents Regina 
— and I understands he represents a portion of Regina 
Dewdney, represents that area — to say the GTH is something 
that’s causing problems, well that’s just a different philosophy, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They say the GTH is causing problems. I 
say it’s creating solutions, creating employment, creating 

opportunity for our city. 
 
And then he wants a solution to the GTH. We’re going to bring 
in a bypass so trucks won’t be going down Dewdney. And that 
member puts forward an amendment to the budget that’s going 
to build schools in Regina, solve a problem that he has in 
Regina with traffic on Dewdney. Then he brings forward an 
amendment and he won’t vote for a budget that’s solving some 
of the problems he himself says there are out there. And I think 
that’s something where, when they take the weekend . . . I think 
they should take the weekend and maybe go over the budget a 
little bit more and realize how many actual good things for 
hard-working families, for parents are in this budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to go over a few of those things right now. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’ve had a record of doing what 
we say we’re going to do with budgets. And this is the seventh 
consecutive balanced budget that this government’s brought 
forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On the summary financial basis, 
a $71 million surplus, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s 
something we take ample pride in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think we work hard as a government to put priorities right. We 
work hard to make sure we were listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and we’re putting the people’s priorities first. 
And I think, first and foremost, one of their priorities is to make 
sure that the government is balancing their books like every 
family, every household, every business has to balance their 
books at home and in the office, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think that another thing that we committed to is steady growth, 
sustainable growth, helping the economy. We know the 
businesses, the people, the hard-working people of 
Saskatchewan grow this economy. I think it’s the government’s 
job to make sure that they create a climate where there can be 
some success, and they stay out of the way of the people of this 
province, ensuring that government doesn’t hinder their ability 
to do business. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree that this budget is about steady 
growth. It invests money in people and invests money in 
infrastructure and in some of the things that we need most. 
Infrastructure is what’s going to enable our economy to 
continue hitting on all cylinders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
some of that investment we can see is that there is a two point 
. . . sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is $681.2 million invested 
in agriculture, the cornerstone of our economy; $589 million 
invested in community development, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
development is something that is very important to our 
province. 
 
Moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Premier’s often 
quoted as saying, we do not achieve growth for growth’s sake. 
We achieve growth for what we can do with that growth. And 
there’s going to be some great examples in the budget of 
priorities which we put in place to ensure that this growth is 
benefiting the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In 2007 this government brought forward a program, a SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program, a 
program for disabilities and giving people some money that’s 
really going to help them out. We have increased that 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4813 

investment in SAID, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We increased the 
investment to SIP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the seniors’ income 
plan, because seniors are what helped build up this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I remember the member from Rosemont talking about how 
we’re not investing in our people. We’re not investing in our 
seniors. We’re not investing in our children. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that could not be further from the truth. 
 
We’re increasing our health capital, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
health budget’s $5 billion. And I’m proud to say that that’s 
something we’re really working hard, we’re working hard to 
make health care better in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’re working hard to find efficiencies because that’s what 
people want, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People want to know that 
we’re trying to make our health dollars go as far as they can. 
 
We’re investing in infrastructure, infrastructure for health in 
Prince Albert. My seatmate was very, very happy to see . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — A new hospital in Moose Jaw. I’m 
happy, happy, happy. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — My colleague, one over, from Moose Jaw is 
very happy with their hospital in Moose Jaw. And it’s nice to 
see all of my happy colleagues on international happy day, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’re all smiling and having a good time. 
 
We are also investing, like we mentioned before, in K to 12 
schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $103.3 million in 2014-15, 96.2 
million for school capital. Which is, in a breakdown quickly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, consisting of 46.4 million for construction 
on 10 ongoing major school projects; $24 million for school 
maintenance, up 4.6 or 26 per cent from last year; 9.5 million to 
proceed to construction for two new schools; 6.9 million for 29 
relocatables, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And this is a problem that the opposition probably never really 
had to look at — relocatable classrooms. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s just a lot easier for a government, as the NDP realized in the 
past, to mitigate stagnation, to mitigate decline, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They wouldn’t know that relocatable classrooms are 
needed because they never experienced population growth. 
They never experienced enrolments increasing in K to 12 
education. And I think these challenges we’re facing are 
challenges that we are happy to face. I think people of 
Saskatchewan are happy that our province is growing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s $1 million for . . . [inaudible] . . . capital projects; $1 
million for 15 new pre-K programs, which in a couple of years 
pre-K programs are going to be very important to my wife and 
I. Our little guy will be getting into the pre-K program. And I 
think it’s very important that those possibilities are there for our 
young people. And like the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 
spoke about, training young people early is important, and 
that’s why we are investing in K to 12 education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We’re also investing in post-secondary education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Advanced education and training infrastructure is 
$32.6 million in 2014-15: 20.6 for maintenance in 

post-secondary institutions, which is up 4.1 million from the 
previous year; and 12 million in projected funding, including 
6.5 for the Health Sciences facility at the U of S, 4.5 for 
Parkland Regional College, and 1.1 million for Southeast 
Regional College. 
 
We’ve had a track record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of investing in 
post-secondary education, investing in K to 12 education, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The infrastructure that is needed in these very 
important portfolios, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is something we take 
as a very serious priority. 
 
I remember when I was going to school and when it rained, 
when I went to Waldeck School and when it rained, you had to 
make sure you didn’t trip over the buckets because all the holes 
leaked in the roof, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this is something 
that we’re really moving away from. We’re trying to ensure that 
the next future, the future of our province realize we’re 
committed to them. Their government’s committed for them to 
move forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[12:45] 
 
I remember the member from Rosemont talking about seniors, 
talking about grandparents, mothers and fathers, like we don’t 
have them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have grandparents. I was 
happy to go visit my wife’s baba in Yorkton last weekend and 
visit her in her residence. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to 
make sure our seniors have the best possible care.  
 
And we actually back that talk up. The seniors’ personal care 
home benefit will increase the monthly income eligibility 
threshold by $75, from $1875 per month to 1950 per month, for 
an average benefit of 385 per month. The senior citizens’ 
ambulance assistance program will receive increased funding of 
$217,000 for additional claims.  
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think it can be said enough 
how when we were in government, one of the first things we 
did was look at the seniors’ income plan. The NDP government 
had 16 years to show how much they wanted our seniors to do 
better. Sixteen years to increase the seniors’ income plan, and 
they didn’t increase it once, Mr. Deputy Speaker — not once. 
So for them to sit on that side of the aisle and talk about how 
much they cared and how much they did for seniors, I think is 
— one of my favourite words — is disingenuous at the best, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit more about some plans we have 
because this government, this budget, is based on our 
Saskatchewan plan for growth. Moving forward, our minister is 
taking long-term care serious in Regina. There’s $1 million in 
planning for long-term care, Mr. Speaker, in Regina, and I think 
that’s for planning where we need to go. We realize the 
population of Saskatchewan is getting older. We realize we’re 
going to need more options for long-term care, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think the comment made by the member from Lakeview that 
we just fly by the seat of our pants, I don’t know how their 
outfit runs over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we generally 
have plans in place. And I think if you want to compare plans, 
well I guess you really can’t because they haven’t had a plan on 



4814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2014 

their website. They’ve had a new leader for a year. Not one 
public policy planned, not one plan for growth, not one crumb 
of economic plans within their party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 
don’t know. Maybe hopefully they have a convention coming 
up soon so they can actually start putting some policies down 
on paper. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
congratulate probably one of my favourite ministers, the 
Minister of Social Services. Sorry . . . [inaudible] . . . She’s 
done probably one of the best jobs in Social Services as a 
minister in this province’s history. The Habitat for Humanity 
home is . . . We backed that talk up with money. We’ve 
provided millions of dollars to Habitat for Humanity. I’ve been 
able to go to a couple of key ceremonies with the minister, and 
when she walks in, everyone recognizes her right away. And 
they know that the decisions this minister’s made for the 
vulnerable people in Saskatchewan are all because she has such 
a big heart and she’s done a fantastic job. 
 
The Headstart on a Home program is . . . I’ve been able to go to 
some of the groundbreaking ceremonies, and some of the 
turning key ceremonies for those too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
the people, to see their faces, walk into their new home and 
look at the home that they’re going to be able to . . . a safe place 
to raise their family and a safe place for their kids, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think we all owe this Social Services minister a great 
round of applause for the job she’s done . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Justice 
minister’s okay as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to speak about education for a bit more 
because I think that we’ve put a lot of money forward for 
education. And there’s a couple of statements I’d like to 
probably fact check for the member from Regina Rosemont, 
especially around EAs [educational assistants], Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Fact check, yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think that EAs in Saskatchewan, I am sure that’s the 
decision made by a school board, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m 
quite certain that there isn’t less EAs in the province now than 
there was before. I’m quite certain there’s more EAs in this 
province than there was under the NDP. 
 
And for them to fearmonger and spread out this false 
information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does nothing but an injustice 
to them because I think a lot of times . . . We’ve heard it time 
and time again with their preamble when they ask questions, 
and our ministers have to stand up and say, well, the preamble 
isn’t exactly right. What the member opposite said wasn’t 
exactly right. So I think at some point in time they have to take 
a step back and realize that just because they say it time and 
time again, it doesn’t make it true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We think the teachers in our province are doing a wonderful 
job. I have teachers in my family. My brother was a teacher. My 
auntie’s a teacher. My cousin’s a teacher. My cousin’s wife’s a 
teacher. And we talk with teachers as well. And we want to 
have a wonderful relationship with the teachers of 
Saskatchewan. We want to make sure that we’re both doing as 
best as we can for the students across Saskatchewan. That’s 
why you see the investment in education capital in our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s why you see new schools 

being built in our province — because we want the best 
possible outcomes for our students across the whole province. 
 
And it’s a commitment that the former minister made. It’s the 
commitment that the current minister makes. And I am sure on 
this side, as long as we’re on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re going to continue to invest in children’s future 
all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few more things I’d like to touch 
on and one would be the support for municipalities. I know 
we’ve had, we made a commitment to one point of the PST 
[provincial sales tax], Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that was a 
commitment that municipalities were calling for across the 
province. I believe we’re one of the first provinces in Canada to 
allow for a consistent amount of money that municipalities are 
going to receive. Municipalities have an easier time budgeting 
because they know how much money they’re going to get based 
on the one point of the PST, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And there’s a slight accounting change show there is a little . . . 
The money that municipalities are receiving is down slightly 
from last year. But, Mr. Speaker, if you want to look at it as a 
whole from 2007 to 2014, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the monies that 
municipalities have received from across Saskatchewan has 
more than doubled, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And Moose Jaw 
received 144 per cent more since 2007-08, and I think Regina is 
around 171, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s a commitment that we make with our partners 
in government, the different levels of government. They 
appreciate that commitment from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And they know that when they want to do 
projects, this government will be there to assist them because of 
the commitment we made with our municipal revenue sharing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And there’s a couple of projects going forward. And you see in 
our budget, there is groundbreaking right now, and there’s been 
an announcement with PCL, who’s going to be doing the 
stadium. So there’s $50 million in the budget for the stadium in 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I believe that when we’re . . . 
I think 2017 is when the stadium’s looking to be finished, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think it’s something, when it’s done all 
of Saskatchewan’s going to look at this facility as something 
that we can be proud of and something that’s going to be a 
first-class facility, and not just a stadium but a convention 
centre as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more things I would like to talk 
about from our point of view that the members opposite, I think 
they’ll be in favour of. And one is the long-term care facility in 
La Ronge. There’s been a member across that aisle that’s been 
asking for a long-term care facility in La Ronge, I think since 
he’s been elected. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that was 
announced he looked shocked — not happy, but shocked. And I 
couldn’t really understand his reaction because as a member of 
the Legislative Assembly you try and get the best possible 
outcome for your constituents. Whether it be in opposition or 
government, we all are here to work hard for our constituents. 
And when someone gets a good amount of money for their 
constituents, they should be happy. But I’m not so sure the 
member from Cumberland was happy. 



March 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4815 

Another thing I’m wondering is that, how is he going to be able 
to go back to La Ronge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and say, you 
know, this government is building a long-term care facility and 
I voted against it? That’s going to be a tough sell to the people 
of La Ronge and I think there are going to be a couple of 
questions around well, well, Mr. Cumberland MLA, why would 
you do that? Why would you vote against a new long-term care 
facility in La Ronge? 
 
And another question I’d have to this member because I 
remember specifically yesterday the member from Rosemont 
say there’s nothing in this budget for the North. Which again, 
there’s some fact checking that needs to be done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because I was running through just a priority for 
growth and at SaskPower we’re investing $1.2 billion for 
electricity generation, clean coal, natural gas, and hydro, as well 
as distribution and transmission. And 380 million of those 
dollars are for expansion from Island Falls to Key Lake to 
provide improved system stability for northern businesses, 
industry, and residents. So how could you go and say a budget 
has nothing in it for the North? A long-term care home, $380 
million for electrical upgrades in the North, and the member 
from Cumberland, and I’m taking a wild leap here but probably 
the member from Athabasca, are going to vote against this 
budget. 
 
I’m looking forward to their speeches, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because when these two members stand on their feet and they 
start talking against a budget that, I’m taking maybe a leap here 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but probably one of the best 
budgets for northern Saskatchewan for a long, long time and 
those two members are going to have to go home to their 
constituents and say, you know, you guys got a fair bit of 
money but we voted against that budget. And I’m going to be 
very interested to see how many constituents are happy when 
they voted against a budget that’s good for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got some time left here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, which I’m pretty happy about because I haven’t even 
got to third party quotes I’d like to talk about. And I’ve never 
done this; this is my first time doing this in the House, but I’m 
going to quote a journalist by the name of Murray Mandryk. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a quote from the esteemed journalist, 
as the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook said, “I want to say 
this at least once in his career. He might be the best Finance 
minister I have seen at actually managing the line-by-line 
costs.” I could not agree more with Mr. Mandryk. I think we 
have a Finance minister, a treasury board that’s worked hard on 
these budget items, line by line, not a seat-of-their-pants 
change. 
 
I don’t remember seeing the member from Regina Lakeview in 
our caucus meetings, and I’m pretty sure he’s never been in one 
of our cabinet meetings, but this government took every item in 
this budget seriously, went over it line by line for many, many 
months. It wasn’t a one-day operation. Once again, I’m taking a 
liberty; I’m not sure how they did their budgets in the ’80s and 
’90s and 2000s. Poorly, I know that, but besides that I’m not 
sure how they organized them. But the member of Lakeview 
could’ve just wrote them all at home actually. I’m not sure. He 
maybe created the term budget actually. 
 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to say is that this budget 
is one of the things that, in 20 years, one of the things I’m going 
to be able to tell my son when he asks me about my time in 
politics, and 20 years is a long time, I’ll be able to tell him that 
this budget, when it brought in the summary financial 
statements as the main way to bring budgets forward, that 
brought in seven consecutive balanced budgets, that took the 
words of people from across Saskatchewan because I think we 
have a wide growth of people from across Saskatchewan in our 
caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from all over the province, and it 
took every person going out and talking to their constituents, 
having great caucus discussions, prioritizing things that we 
talked to the people of Saskatchewan, that they had their best 
interests at heart, investing in people, investing in infrastructure, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m going to be able to tell my son, 
this is one of the budgets we’re most proud of as a government, 
bringing it to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to be extremely happy to go out door knocking this 
summer. And when people of Regina Walsh Acres ask well, 
Mr. Steinley, what have you done for us? I’m going to say . . . I 
just quoted myself. Well as our MLA, what have you been able 
to bring, provide? And I would say, and I’ll be able to tell them 
on their doorstep, on their doorstep I’ll be able to tell them that, 
constituents, we brought balanced budgets to Saskatchewan. 
We brought a new way to deliver our budgets. 
 
As the Provincial Auditor, Acting Provincial Auditor would 
say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our office, and I quote, “Our office 
strongly supports these changes,” Acting Provincial Auditor 
Judy Ferguson said. “They will eliminate confusion and help 
legislators and the public better understand the government’s 
finances.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is fantastic news. 
The people of Saskatchewan think this budget is a good thing 
moving forward. I haven’t got to what the CEO [chief executive 
officer], Steve McLellan, has said yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
I’m going to have a lot more fun door knocking in Walsh Acres 
than they’re going to have door knocking in Lakeview and 
Elphinstone. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the time of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4789 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4789 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4789 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4789 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Outstanding Principals 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4789 
 International Day of the Francophonie 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4790 
 Environmental Concerns 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4790 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4790 
 Saskatoon Hosts University Men’s Hockey Championship 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4791 
 World Down Syndrome Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4791 
 Happiness 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4791 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Patient Safety and Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4792 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4792 
 Patient Care and Lean Initiative 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4794 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4794 
 Saskatchewan Futures Fund 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4795 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4795 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Oral Presentation of Petitions 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4796 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4797 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4797 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4800 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4804 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4809 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4811 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


