
























































Hansard: March 05, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 5, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4549 
 March 5, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce a group of 
French students from École Monseigneur de Laval here in the 
city of Regina. I believe they’re occupying both the east and 
west galleries today. And we’ve got quite a large number of 
them, and we’d like to welcome them here. 
 
With the students and their chaperones from Laval we also have 
some other representatives from the francophone community 
known in Saskatchewan as the Fransaskois. They’re joining us 
today in celebration of the Rendez-vous event. 
 
Today Françoise Sigur-Cloutier is with us. She is the president 
of the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, an organization 
designed to build and strengthen the francophone community 
here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Françoise. And along with 
her today is Chelsea Valois, a bobsledder who recently 
competed at the Sochi Olympics, originally from Zenon Park. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Chelsea got the same reception 
downstairs, an enthusiastic reception from the students. And 
we’d like to welcome all of our guests here today and we hope 
that you enjoy the rest of the proceedings that you’re going to 
witness this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Grâce à vous et 
à vous au nom de l’opposition officielle, il est mon grand plaisir 
d’accueillir les élèves de Monseigneur de Laval, Madame 
Sigur-Cloutier, et Chelsea Valois, et les autres membres des 
notre communauté fransaskoise à leur Assemblée législative. 
 
Vous avez beaucoup à être fiers, une histoire de force dans 
l’aversité and un avenir de l’espérance. Et je suis également 
fière de me considérer comme un membre de cette 
communauté, comme la petite-fille d’Adrien et Jeanne Belcourt 
qui est venu en Saskatchewan dans le début des années 1900 
pour chercher une nouvelle vie et élever leur famille dans leur 
première langue — français. Merci pour tout ce que vous faites 
et bienvenue à votre Assemblée. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to you, 
on behalf of the official opposition, it’s my great pleasure to 
welcome the students from Monseigneur de Laval, Madame 
Sigur-Cloutier and Chelsea Valois, and other members of our 
Fransaskois community to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
You have a lot to be proud of, a history of strength in adversity, 

and a future of hope. And I’m proud to consider myself a 
member of this community, as the granddaughter of Adrien and 
Jeanne Belcourt who came to Saskatchewan at the beginning of 
the 1900s to look for a new life and raise their family in their 
first language — French. Thank you for all you do, and 
welcome to your Assembly.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I’d like to join the member from Eastend in 
saying hello to Ms. Valois. I had the privilege to be on the track 
and field team at the U of R [University of Regina] with her for 
three years. She is a much more accomplished athlete than I am. 
 
She was a fantastic ambassador for the University of Regina 
when she was on the track team for five years, winning 
countless awards and doing us very proud: CIS [Canadian 
Interuniversity Sport] championships, and a world champion 
bobsledder with her partner, Kaillie Humphries. And I just want 
to say congratulations on making it to the Olympics. We’re so 
proud of you. You’re a great ambassador for Saskatchewan, 
Zenon Park, and all of us, and you did us proud. Thank you 
very much and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a guest in your gallery, a 
community leader and a parent in our community, Sarah 
Truszkowski, along with two very adorable guests, one wearing 
a Superman attire there — Otis, can you give us a wave? — and 
then Grace who’s there as well. They’re interested in the 
proceedings here today. I ask all members of this Assembly to 
welcome them here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Bienvenue à tous. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying. And we 
know that bullying causes serious harm and the consequences 
of bullying are devastating, including depression, self-harm, 
addictions, and suicide, and that it’s a human rights issue, one 
of safety and inclusion. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to take immediate and effective action to protect 
Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 
young people are at stake and this government must do 
more to protect our youth. 
 
 



4550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 
across Saskatchewan as it relates to the province’s finances and 
the improper reporting of those finances. They’re concerned by 
the failed audit that occurred in December. In an unprecedented 
way this government failed an audit of its books, of course, and 
it was brought to the attention of Saskatchewan people that this 
government was masquerading a $600 million deficit as a $60 
million surplus. And certainly Saskatchewan people deserve 
better. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 
true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 
with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 
accounting standards and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 
to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 
financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 
people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 
taxpayers, and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
Saskatoon, Shaunavon, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Merci, monsieur le Président. [Translation: 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] I rise to present a petition in support 
of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart Community School. The 
petitioners point out that the gym at Sacred Heart Community 
School in north central Regina is now quite literally falling 
apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for 
students or staff. 
 
Petitioners would also be aware that that has been the case for 
coming up a year now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the closure. 
They’re also aware that the school and community have raised 
this issue with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 
without resolution. They’re aware that the gym at Sacred Heart 
has played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 
literacy leader, having served as the gathering place for the very 
successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They’re 
aware that the Sacred Heart Community School is the largest 
school in north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per 
cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They’re aware that 
enrolment has increased by 100 students over the past four 
years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 
improving. And they’re aware, Mr. Speaker, that as a matter of 
basic fairness and common sense that Sacred Heart Community 
School needs a gym. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, they: 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina, 
Sedley, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the House to 
make a statement of proclamation regarding Rendez-vous de la 
Francophonie. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 
to make a statement regarding Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
officially proclaim March 7th to 23rd as Rendez-vous de la 
Francophonie 2014 in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Rendez-vous is a chance for all residents to join with other 
Canadians to celebrate the French language and francophone 
culture. It’s held annually throughout Canada in the month of 
March and coincides with the International Day of the 
Francophonie, which is designated as March 20th. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Rendez-vous recognizes the historic 
Fransaskois contributions to the cultural, economic, and social 
fabric of our province. And that’s been happening, Mr. Speaker, 
for more than a century. The Fransaskois role in our province’s 
future, however, is even more relevant as an increasing number 
of French-speaking newcomers continue to make Saskatchewan 
their home and contribute to the growth of our province. 
 
We’re proud to have a Francophone community that helps 
shape our cultural identity and contributes to Saskatchewan in 
such important ways. I encourage all citizens to join us in 
celebrating the Francophonie in Saskatchewan. Bonne 
célébration. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Est-ce je peux 
avoir un leave pour répondre? 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I have leave to 
reply?] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
requested leave to respond. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4551 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président, et merci au 
sécrétaire provincial pour son discours éloquent. 
 
Comme j’ai dit plus tôt, je suis fière d’être une membre de la 
communauté francophone et je suis très heureuse de pouvoir 
prendre la parole aujourd’hui pour souligner les réalisations de 
la communauté francophone de la Saskatchewan grâce à cette 
proclamation à l’Assemblée législative. 
 
Le mois dernier, j’ai eu l’occasion de donner un atelier musique 
et la danse à l’école française à Bellegarde. C’était un bel 
après-midi. Je dois appeler une danse-carré en français pour la 
première fois, et j’ai aussi appris à appeler “la danse des 
canards.” Quele plaisir! 
 
Le français est bien vivant dans cette province et de plus en 
plus. Je suis tout à fait consciente cependant que la croissance 
est livré avec ses défis, et la lutte que vous êtes confrontés à 
assurer un éducation en français est financé de manière 
adéquate n’est pas une tâche facile. La bataille judiciaire se 
poursuit, et le jugement de la cause Caron-Boutet de la cour de 
l’Alberta d’appel est décevant. 
 
Cependant, j’ai la foi que la Cour suprême du Canada, chargé 
de la tâche de veiller à notre Charte des droits à la liberté de la 
langue est protégé d’une manière significative, entendra votre 
plaidoyer pour l’égalité. L’enseignement du français financé 
adéquatement est la clé de votre avenir, et l’opposition officielle 
continuera à soutenir vos efforts pour obtenir une véritable 
égalité dans le financement. 
 
Félicitations à toutes les personnes fransaskoises que vous 
célébrez la Rendez-vous de la francophonie 2014. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
Provincial Secretary for his eloquent remarks. 
 
As I said earlier, I am proud to be a member of the francophone 
community and I am very happy to be able to speak today to 
accentuate Saskatchewan’s achievements thanks to this 
proclamation in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Last month, I had the opportunity to give a music and dance 
workshop at the French school in Bellegarde. It was a lovely 
afternoon. I called a square dance in French for the first time, 
and I also learned how to call the Bird Dance. What a pleasure! 
 
French is alive and well in our province, and becoming more so. 
I am always aware that growth has its challenges, and the 
struggle you faced to ensure the adequate funding of 
Francophone education was not an easy task. The legal battle 
continues, and the judgment of the Caron-Boutet case in the 
Alberta Court of Appeal is disheartening. 
 
Nevertheless, I have faith that the Supreme Court of Canada, 
given the task of ensuring that freedom of language under the 
Charter of Rights is protected in a meaningful way, will hear 
your plea for equality. Adequately financed French instruction 
is the key to your future, and the official opposition will 
continue to support your efforts to achieve true funding 

equality. 
 
Congratulations to all the Fransaskois as you celebrate the 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2014.] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now that the 
Oscars are over, I would like to direct members’ attention to our 
own Saskatchewan-grown awards excitement. Created in 1993, 
the Saskatchewan Book Awards is the only provincially 
focused book award program and it is the principal ambassador 
for our literary community. 
 
These awards not only help people choose excellent books to 
read, they make a tangible difference in the lives of our 
province’s more than 500 authors and 75 publishers. The 
Ministry of Parks and Culture and Sport is proud to sponsor the 
awards for publishing in celebration of these hard-working 
members of our business community. This year more than 180 
of Saskatchewan’s best writers and publishers submitted their 
entries to these prestigious awards and the finalists were 
announced a few weeks ago. Members will soon receive an 
invitation to attend the Saskatchewan Book Awards ceremony 
on April the 26th when the winners of the 13 awards will be 
announced. 
 
Through you, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to attend 
the ceremony and the numerous events leading up to the event 
to support and celebrate Saskatchewan’s wealth of literary 
community and our talent. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation Solutions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, just last week more than 50 ships 
sat empty on the West Coast waiting for our province’s 
beautiful bumper crop to reach port. Bins sit full across the 
province and so do producers’ mailboxes — filled with bills — 
and they face the stress of financing the input costs for this 
year’s crop. The economic losses to farmers are huge, in the 
billions, hurting producers, farm families, and rural and urban 
communities alike. 
 
Now more than ever our province needs governments willing to 
stand up to the big rail companies and demand immediate 
accountability. For too long, farmers in the Prairies have been 
held ransom by big rail. This duopoly must end. But in the 
meantime there must be penalties for this outrageous scenario 
producers in our province are facing. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we called on this provincial government and the 



4552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

federal government to get to work and put in strong penalties to 
force the rail companies to live up to their duty to move this 
harvest to market. And we’ve called for solutions that could 
help ease the problem in the short term and long term, like 
opening up running rates and the rail lines and using all the 
good tools available to help producers. 
 
I was glad to hear the Minister of Agriculture yesterday finally 
admit that joint running rates can be part of the solution. I 
encourage him to demand that his federal counterpart put all 
solutions on the table, including legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I call on all members of this legislature to 
put more pressure on the federal government and the big rail 
companies to help our producers and farm families get this 
record harvest to market. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 

Volunteer Wins Community Futures Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a quote from an unknown author saying: 
 

Volunteering is the ultimate exercise in democracy. You 
vote in elections once a year, but when you volunteer, you 
vote every day about the kind of community you want to 
live in. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that Saskatchewan is known across 
this country for its strong volunteer base. Today it gives me 
great pleasure to recognize a volunteer, Annette Dubé of 
Kelvington, who recently was honoured for her many hours of 
volunteer work when she received the provincial 2013-14 
Community Futures Volunteer Award. Nominees must be 
current or past members of the Community Futures board, and 
have delivered outstanding and sustained leadership and 
achievement in the Community Futures world. 
 
Annette has served on the Newsask Community Futures 
Development Corporation for 13 years. She’s been chairperson 
since 2007. As a member of this corporation, she’s served on 
the northeast supported employment program board since 2006, 
and as well being instrumental in the Newsask administrating 
the program there. The program enhances the employment 
opportunities, including self-employment of all persons with 
disabilities, in the Newsask region. 
 
Provincially, Annette is a member of the entrepreneurs with 
disabilities program committee and a member of the 
Saskatchewan Bed and Breakfast Association board of 
directors. 
 
I would ask that everyone in this Assembly join with me today 
to congratulate Annette on her award and thank her for her 
volunteering. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 
Saskatchewan Artists Nominated for Juno Award 

 
Mr. McCall: — At the end of the month, Mr. Speaker, the 
music scene in Saskatchewan will be rooting for Rah Rah as 

this Regina-based band is up for the Juno Award for Alternative 
Album of the Year. Rah Rah were long-listed for the Polaris 
Music Prize and they won Independent Album of the Year at 
the Western Canadian Music Awards in 2013. 
 
Before they head off to Winnipeg for the Junos, Rah Rah will 
have freshly impressed audiences in Vancouver, Edmonton, 
Calgary and have blown the doors off gigs here at home last 
weekend in Regina and Saskatoon. Following the Junos, Rah 
Rah is off to Europe to play more shows, and they’re already 
working on demos for their next album with plans to start 
recording this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rah Rah is comprised of Erin Passmore, Marshall 
Burns, Joel Passmore, Kristina Hedlund, Jeff Romanyk, and 
Leif Thorseth. When asked about their nomination, they were 
humble. Marshall said, “You just try to make records that 
you’re proud of.” I know there are many folks here in Regina 
and throughout the whole province and Canada that are 
extremely proud of not only this album, The Poet’s Dead, but 
also of Rah Rah. 
 
There are other great Saskatchewan talents nominated, Mr. 
Speaker. Our congratulations go out to Little Miss Higgins for 
Roots and Traditional Album, George Leach for Aboriginal 
Album, and father and son duo Kevin and Kane Churko for 
Recording Engineer of the Year. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to congratulate these 
amazing Saskatchewan musicians and producers for their Juno 
nominations, and here’s hoping for winning the awards come 
March 30th. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month the 2014 
Saskatchewan Winter Games were hosted in Prince Albert. I 
had the pleasure of attending both the opening and closing 
ceremonies with my colleague from Regina Northeast who is 
also the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. As well, I enjoyed 
the games in the capacity of a volunteer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The 22nd edition of the games brought together our finest 
young athletes, joined by coaches, managers, and mission staff 
from all corners of our great province to showcase their talents 
in 19 different sports.  
 
Mr. Speaker, by leading healthy, active lives and by pursuing 
something with commitment, the Winter Games athletes are 
role models for people of all ages in our province. Our 
government will continue to support our amateur athletes as 
they pursue their dreams. Last month I may have met some of 
our future Olympians, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also would like to commend the Saskatchewan Games Council 
for their $125,000 legacy grant to help the community of Prince 
Albert purchase sporting equipment and upgrade facilities that 
all current and future athletes can enjoy. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
thank all the organizers, sponsors, and volunteers who helped 
make the 2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games such a great 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4553 

success and congratulate all of the hard-working athletes who 
competed in the games. Their dedicated parents who are an 
integral part of their journey also deserve recognition. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 
All-Star Night Fundraiser 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 
I had the opportunity, along with the member from Moose Jaw 
North, to attend the Friendly City Optimist Club of Moose 
Jaw’s All-Star Night. The freezing temperatures couldn’t keep 
Moose Jaw’s football fans and some of the CFL’s [Canadian 
Football League] finest from raising funds for the pediatric unit 
at the new Moose Jaw Regional Hospital. 
 
Former CFL greats Don Narcisse and Luc Mullinder were in 
attendance, as well as Grey Cup champs Chris Best, Ben 
Heenan, and Moose Jaw’s own Levi Steinhauer. The highlight 
of the night was special guests Chris Getzlaf and Henry Burris. 
 
I was struck by Henry Burris’s quote when he was asked about 
coming back for this event. He replied that, “Saskatchewan was 
home for me and it still feels like home for me.” Chris talked 
about the Grey Cup experience and watching his brother play 
hockey in Sochi during the Olympics. 
 
The Optimist Club’s motto is Friend of Youth. When planning 
this event, they decided there was no better cause than helping 
children and families in the Five Hills Health Region. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the Friendly City 
Optimist Club of Moose Jaw and their successful All-Star 
Night, and also for their ongoing commitment to the youth of 
this city and the new Moose Jaw regional hospital. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Recognizing Constituency Assistant 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
many people that we as MLAs need to thank for supporting us, 
and I would like to thank one of those people today. 
 
Twenty years ago, a very young man walked into the office of 
Bill Neudorf, the MLA for Rosthern. He had a new-found 
interest in conservatism and wanted to chat with his MLA. He 
walked out with a job as a constituency assistant. Twenty years 
later, Whitney Friesen is still serving the people of that area 
even though the constituency has changed quite a bit over the 
years. Boundaries have changed. The constituency name has 
changed. The MLA has changed. But Whitney remains so 
incredibly dedicated to his job, to supporting his MLA, but 
most importantly to helping the people who live there. 
 
Whitney worked for two years for Bill Neudorf. After the 1995 
election, he started working for my dad. And today is the 
seventh anniversary of my by-election win, and over these past 
years it has become so obvious that he is more than just a 
constituency assistant. He has been a friend to my family for 
many years. To his wife, Rebecca, and his children, Matthew, 

Simon, and Julianne, I thank you for loaning us Whitney and 
your patience over the years. And to Whitney, congratulations 
on 20 years of service to the people of this province, and thank 
you so much for all that you do. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Standards in Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We keep hearing very 
concerning news about this government’s approach to seniors’ 
care here in Saskatchewan. We heard incredibly concerning 
testimony from the inquiry into the deaths of seniors at St. 
Mary’s Villa about how this government’s failure to fix a boiler 
led to tragedy. 
 
And we learned this week, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
still hasn’t learned its lesson from that because it recently 
forced health regions to significantly pare down, pare back their 
urgent requests for much needed staff, much needed equipment, 
and much needed repairs. And now we’re hearing even more 
concerning information. It shows that this government’s excuse 
for why it eliminated minimum care standards was nothing 
more than spin. 
 
My question is for the Premier, and he’s had months to look 
into this: how many hours of care per senior do they currently 
receive in each of the health regions in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it would be incorrect to state that there are no 
standards of care within long-term care facilities within 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In fact the most recently updated 
program guidelines for special care homes that was updated 
April of 2013, it’s 193 pages. I’d urge the opposition to have a 
look at it. 
 
Clearly on page 1 it says, “All special care homes shall operate 
in accordance with the standards set out in these guidelines.” It 
goes on to state, “The standards set within this manual are 
considered minimum standards and must be adhered to in 
publicly funded facilities that offer long-term care services.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do know within long-term care, despite 
the fact that the number of facilities have really not changed 
over the last six years, despite the fact that we roughly have 
8,700 residents within long-term care, Mr. Speaker, as did the 
members opposite when they were in the government, Mr. 
Speaker, the full-time equivalent workers in long-term care, be 
it care aids, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], or RNs [registered 
nurse] is up 750 from when the members opposite were the 
government. So I would say by that standard alone, Mr. 
Speaker, that people in our care, our residents, are getting better 
care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve covered in this Assembly 
how this government, in secrecy, removed the specified 



4554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

requirement that there be two hours of care per resident per day. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when they made that decision and did it in 
secrecy, they later on explained, Mr. Speaker, that they did that 
because they saw two hours as too inadequate. But now we 
know, Mr. Speaker, that seniors are hardly receiving anything 
more than that. 
 
The Heartland Health Region has been working over the past 
several years to move towards two and a half hours of care per 
resident per day. They’re still struggling, Mr. Speaker, to reach 
that mark of two and a half hours of care to seniors. So my 
question is for the Premier. He said that the standard of care of 
two hours per day per resident, Mr. Speaker, was too inadequate 
and was incredibly out of date. So my question for the Premier 
is, is two and a half hours of care per resident incredibly out of 
date and too inadequate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What we did do, and to correct the member opposite because it 
is in regulations . . . When the regulations do get changed, that 
does get publicized, Mr. Speaker. As legislators you would 
think that they would look to see what the regulation changes 
have been. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it took two years for the 
members opposite to actually do their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . Mr. Speaker, in terms of what is 
taking place within long-term care as I said before, Mr. 
Speaker, the positions of LPNs, the positions of RNs, of care 
aids, for example, care aids in long-term care, full-time 
equivalent positions in the last year of their government, Mr. 
Speaker, 4,487. Today it’s 4,924, a 9.7 per cent increase. Mr. 
Speaker, LPNs are up 37.4 per cent in long-term care and RNs 
are up 9.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. When you take all of that 
combined, all of the hours that are combined, Mr. Speaker, 
under the NDP [New Democratic Party] in their last year, Mr. 
Speaker, would have averaged 4.09 hours per day for a resident. 
Today with those increased numbers, it’s closer to four and a 
half hours per day, Mr. Speaker. But of course every individual 
case would be different. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is this government, it is that 
minister, that cabinet, Mr. Speaker, that chose to eliminate the 
minimum care standard of two hours per resident per day. And 
this was reported in the media, Mr. Speaker: “Health minister 
Dustin Duncan told reporters the regulations that were changed 
dated back to the 1960s and didn’t speak to the care needs of 
the present day.” 
 
So the government’s excuse for scrapping the minimum care 
standards was that it was out of date and didn’t speak to the 
present reality. But the reality for seniors who are in care, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the current amount of care they receive hardly 
exceeds that two-hour minimum requirement that was there. So 
instead of scrapping the minimum requirement, Mr. Speaker, 
this government should have strengthened it. My question to the 
Premier: will this government realize that strong, province-wide 
minimum care standards are absolutely essential here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we do believe that . . . A number of things. First of all 
that we do need to ensure that we have the proper complement 
of staff within long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. I would 
wonder and I would question the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, if he would agree that long-term care was clearly 
understaffed when they were the government, considering there 
were 750 fewer full-time workers in long-term care for the same 
number of residents in the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the standards, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
indicated, when we updated the program guidelines that all 
long-term care facilities have to follow in April of 2013, we 
clearly indicated that those were considered minimum 
standards, Mr. Speaker. They speak to, Mr. Speaker, they speak 
to the care standards that are required for resident-centred care. 
Mr. Speaker, they speak to the staffing requirements that are 
required within long-term care, keeping in mind that every 
facility is different, the makeup of every resident is different, 
and we should provide individual care when possible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, residents are hardly getting more 
than the two hours of minimum care that were in the regulations 
that were specified. It’s this government that took those out. 
 
It’s the government’s role, Mr. Speaker, to provide leadership 
here and to provide clear minimum care standards for seniors in 
Saskatchewan. And if the minister does not like my belief that 
there are not the appropriate standards in place, he should listen 
to his own health region. And here’s what the Heartland Health 
Region says: “In the absence of any provincial staffing 
standards, Heartland Health Region developed regional 
minimum staffing guidelines for services provided in our 
facilities.” 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that Heartland Health Region is 
struggling to even hit 2.5 hours of care per day. Their long-term 
goal, Mr. Speaker, is 2.75 hours per day. That’s their long-term 
goal. That’s just three-quarters of an hour more, Mr. Speaker, 
than what the supposedly outdated, inadequate guidelines were 
that the minister was referencing or claimed to reference. And 
we know, Mr. Speaker, that experts say seniors actually need 
around 4.1 hours of care per day. 
 
So again my question is for the Premier: when will this 
government set strong, province-wide minimum care standards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe, and I think the numbers would bear out, that 
we are in a better position today to provide, Mr. Speaker, a 
standard of care for our residents that we should strive for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re in a better position today because of the fact that this 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4555 

government has invested significantly within our regional 
health authorities, within the budgets of our authorities to the 
point where they can hire 750 more full-time equivalents for the 
same number of residents, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well as 
through the Urgent Issues Action Fund, an additional 57 
positions will be hired through that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that shows I think the level of commitment, knowing that there 
is more work that needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask though the Leader of the Opposition — he indicates 
a few numbers — what his number would be, Mr. Speaker. 
What would be the number that he would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that he would provide for if he were the, heaven forbid, ever be 
the government of the day? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Hospital Conditions 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Kerrie and Darren Anderson are constituents 
of mine. Kerrie has MS [multiple sclerosis] and has spent a lot 
of time as a patient in Royal University Hospital over the last 
year. 
 
Kerrie and Darren have major concerns about cleanliness and 
short-staffing at RUH [Royal University Hospital]. They use 
words like disgusting and filthy to describe the condition of the 
hospital. They do use words like phenomenal to describe the 
front-line staff, but they say the number of workers is woefully 
inadequate. We keep hearing these kinds of concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. To the minister: why isn’t this government listening? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this has been something that has been raised in the 
past, and certainly Saskatoon Health Region is well aware of 
the issue, Mr. Speaker. And they are making strides to make 
improvements within not only that hospital, but other hospitals 
so that, Mr. Speaker, patients can have as best an experience as 
possible and so that we can address issues around infection 
control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this government has done is we have indicated that we 
will be investing into our health regions as we have over the last 
number of years. Mr. Speaker, the budget of the Saskatoon 
Health Region six years ago, when the members opposite were 
the government of the day, was $640 million, Mr. Speaker. In 
this past fiscal year that is just ending, it is $962 million, a 50 
per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The health region has used those dollars to be able to provide 
better service, quicker service, Mr. Speaker, more efficient 
service, and have done so by ensuring that they have, Mr. 
Speaker, hired positions, whether that be front-line staff, 
nursing staff, or in this case, maintenance staff. But they do 
know that they need to do a better job going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Kerrie and Darren talk about a bathroom with 

black mould in it, a tap that wouldn’t work properly, garbages 
not emptied for days, brown liquid caked on to the wall and left 
there for weeks. 
 
Workers told Kerrie and Darren that the filthy conditions were 
caused by cuts to the cleaning staff. And the system is getting 
worse under this government. For a family dealing with severe 
pain and the constant worry of infection, filthy conditions are 
not only unacceptable but they are a threat to health. To the 
minister: how many times does this government need to hear 
these concerns before it will listen? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I indicated last fall when these issues first arose 
within Saskatoon Health Region, the health region had 
indicated that they were aware of the concerns that had been 
raised, Mr. Speaker. They were instituting some new processes 
to do more timely checks and cleaning, Mr. Speaker, of areas 
that were particularly high traffic use areas, Mr. Speaker, that 
see more volume, that will from time to time, Mr. Speaker, need 
to be cleaned more often. They are embarking on putting in 
place the people and the processes to ensure that that’s done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the member opposite did reference what 
would be considered some maintenance issues within Saskatoon 
Health Region in those facilities. Certainly we are well aware of 
that, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have, just in life safety and 
emergency, in maintenance, Mr. Speaker, in the last six years 
invested $145.5 million in our health regions as opposed to only 
$22 million by the previous NDP government. In six years, Mr. 
Speaker, a 561 per cent increase under this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the lack of 
cleanliness that is a major concern to Kerrie and Darren. They 
are extremely concerned about the overall quality of care. In at 
least one overcrowded room on the neurosurgery ward, they 
gave the patient a urine sample container to shake. A urine 
sample container with something in it to make noise was 
supposed to serve as the call bell. To the minister: how on earth 
is it acceptable to make a patient shake urine specimen 
containers in order to get attention from nurses when they need 
help? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of what the 
member opposite has raised in terms of that being told to a 
patient. Mr. Speaker, I would be very happy to look into that for 
her. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, short-staffing was also a major 
concern for Kerrie and Darren. What short-staffing meant for 
Kerrie is a whole lot of unnecessary and unbearable pain. Kerrie 
needed pain medication every hour but she was lucky to see a 
nurse every three hours because there weren’t enough nurses on 



4556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

shift to give her the medication that she needs. 
 
These are all huge concerns and this government needs to start 
listening. Filthy conditions, overcrowded rooms, bizarre 
improvised call bell systems, not enough nurses and front-line 
staff, and patients are bearing the consequences of all of that. In 
Darren’s words, “When it becomes unsafe for the patient, they 
need to start to do something different.” 
 
To the minister: what assurance can you give to Kerrie and 
Darren that this government is going to stop making health care 
worse in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with all due 
respect to my colleague across the way, I don’t know how, I 
don’t know how the member opposite can ask a question like 
that, Mr. Speaker, and insinuate that the health care system in 
this province is getting worse, considering what we inherited 
from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, in a lack of support 
and budgets for RHAs [regional health authority] in previous 
budgets under the members opposite. We had to drastically 
improve that, Mr. Speaker. A 100 per cent increase in the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s budget in the last six years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Obviously we had some deficits to get rid of, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what we found in terms of the lack of investment into 
our capital facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker, in health 
care, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, record investment is what 
we’re doing now, Mr. Speaker. Hiring, ensuring that we have 
RNs and LPNs and physicians and specialists, Mr. Speaker, in 
this province, and the training seats to train the next generation 
of physicians and nurses and practitioners in the province — 
those are all the things that we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, as 
opposed to what the members opposite left us in terms of health 
care in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

School Funding 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, an engineering report 
received by the Regina Public School Board has cast concern 
and uncertainty for the school board and the Connaught School 
community. This requires urgent action and support from that 
government. It needs immediate interim funding made available 
to make sure that a solution for next year that meets the needs 
of community and the school board can be arrived at. 
 
We’re joined today by the Vice-Chair of the Connaught School 
Community Council, Sarah Truszkowski. She’s here with her 
son Otis who’s planning to go to kindergarten at Connaught 
next year to join his sister who’s a student there right now. 
Students like Otis and his sister and parents like Sarah deserve 
some certainty as it relates to school next year for their children. 
 
To the minister: will he make an immediate commitment for the 
required interim funding to support the school board and 
community to find a solution that meets the needs of parents, 
the community, and students for next year? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the member opposite for the question. I can advise the 
Assembly and particularly the people that are here today that 
the safety and security of our students is absolutely paramount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been at Connaught School. I’m aware of the 
situation that’s there. They have made a formal request to the 
school division with regard to the issue. I happened to be in the 
school by coincidence on the day that the engineer’s report was 
there. This is a difficult thing for the community and for the 
school division to go through. I can advise them that this is 
something that will be considered as the ministry officials 
assemble information and deal with the matter as part of budget. 
 
I would like to also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, 
welcome Ms. Truszkowski to the legislature. She’d written to 
us earlier indicating that they were having a meeting. We sent 
officials to the meeting. And, Mr. Speaker, it is an issue that is 
taken seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, but no answer to the 
interim funds that are needed right now. Amy Petrovitch is the 
Chair of the SCC [school community council]. Amy says, “Our 
school serves a very diverse cultural, socio-economic student 
population which houses English and French programming, a 
fantastic pre-K class, and the all-important Wise Owl daycare 
program.” 
 
The Regina Public School Board has written that minister on 
February 12th calling for the approval of funding for the 
long-term needs of the school. They highlight in that letter that 
they’ve been calling for support for Connaught from this 
government for many years. They state, “In light of recent 
developments, the urgency of this request is now paramount.” 
And we followed up as the official opposition with a letter to 
the minister calling for the funds required for the full rebuild or 
renovation needed to serve the Connaught community for 
decades forward. 
 
Can the minister here today make a commitment to families that 
those dollars will be made available at the latest by the 
upcoming budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
members opposite, we will continue to work with the various 
applications dealing with priorities within our school division. 
We’re well aware of the importance of this particular issue and 
want to have a resolution. We will continue to work with the 
school division as they work through this as well. I can advise 
the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that this is a government that has 
spent over $600 million on school projects, big and small. 
There’s been 43 major capital projects. Nine new joint-use 
schools have been announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we inherited from the 
previous government was a lack of any kind of capital 
expenditure in Regina. Mr. Speaker, I have a quote that I’d like 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4557 

to read from Don Hoium, director of education, Regina Public 
Schools, in January . . . [inaudible] . . . “We haven’t had a new 
build in Regina for over a decade.” 
 
So we’re looking forward to what is quite an expansive capital 
development in Regina public schools, Mr. Speaker. That deals 
with some of the new capital and some of the new joint P3 
[public-private partnership] facilities that are going to be built. 
We look forward to the members supporting those as they go 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the school board and 
community need immediate resources to address the current 
uncertainty and to do some short-term planning. No answer 
from the minister here today on that front. They also need a 
commitment of funds required for a full rebuild or renovation 
for the long term to serve the Connaught community well into 
the future. No answer from the minister on that front either. 
What the community and school board don’t need is any further 
delays or to be dictated to or hamstrung by that government. 
 
For example, the approach this government has taken with its 
private P3 rent-a-school scheme has caused widespread 
concerns. Like many, for common sense reasons we know 
that’s the wrong way to go. So can the minister confirm today 
that he won’t be forcing a P3 rent-a-school scheme on the 
families and kids of the Connaught School community? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member is 
concerned what we won’t do. I can tell you what we won’t do. 
We won’t be taking any lessons from them. We won’t be 
closing 176 schools like those people did. What we will be 
doing, Mr. Speaker, is continuing what we’ve done for the last 
six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina and area capital, $131 million spent. Ten 
major capital projects: École Monseigneur de Laval, Balcarres, 
Lumsden Elementary, Emerald Ridge, Campbell, Scott 
Collegiate, Arcola, Douglas Park, Seven Stones, and . . . 
[inaudible] . . . 11 relocatables, 121 renovation projects, seven 
early years projects and three joint-use projects. Mr. Speaker, I 
would call on the members opposite to support the budget when 
it comes. It will have things in the budget that they should like 
and I’d encourage them to look at it, set the politics aside, and 
do what’s right for the family and children of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Malfunction in Parks Reservation System 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this year’s much anticipated 
provincial park registration opened up on Monday, and as of 
yesterday at least 1,500 Saskatchewan people had already been 
overcharged because of a malfunction in the system. To the 
minister: has his ministry figured out exactly who was 

overcharged and how much they were overcharged? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the hon. member for the question. In fact on this past 
Monday our reservation system went live, and we discovered 
. . . I was informed about noon that there was a malfunction 
between an interface system between the reservation system and 
the financial transaction processing system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Officials worked with the service provider well into the wee 
hours of Tuesday morning to identify there’s 1,500 individuals 
that we believe where an error code has shown up in the system 
that have been possibly overcharged. We are proactively 
contacting those people, Mr. Speaker. As soon as we were 
aware of the problem going on with the system, we put a notice 
on our website where people were going to the parks website to 
indicate that we had discovered there may be a problem with 
their credit card charging; please check your statements 
proactively and let us know if in fact there was. 
 
Other than that, Mr. Speaker, we have contacted all 1,500 by 8 
o’clock last night to indicate that we would ask them to check 
their credit card statement to find out. They will be fully 
reimbursed, Mr. Speaker, in due course. We’re working as 
quickly as we possibly can. I briefed the hon. member yesterday 
at noon with officials to let her know exactly what was 
transpiring. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government chose to 
privatize the parks registration system and hand control to an 
Ontario company. The government argued that this 
privatization was necessary because it would improve the 
system. But what it has really meant is that Saskatchewan 
families have had to pay significantly more in fees with the 
lion’s share of that money going straight to that Ontario 
company, not to improving our parks, and clearly not to 
improving the park registration system. 
 
The contract with this Ontario company specifies penalties 
when incorrect fees are charged to Saskatchewan campers. The 
penalty is $100 per occurrence. To the minister: will this 
government be recouping that penalty of $150,000 from this 
company and put that money into our park system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I find it a little strange that 
the hon. member who represents that party, who literally 
walked away from the regional park system in this province, 
who walked away from our provincial park system in this 
province, where we are spending thirteen and a half million 
dollars annually, Mr. Speaker, in capital improvements to our 
parks, where we’re seeing record visitation year over year over 
year coming to our parks, I find it a little passing strange that 
that hon. member would make this a partisan issue. 
 



4558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this service provider deals with five 
provinces in the country of Canada plus Parks Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes, in fact we have a contract with performance 
measures with respect to the delivery of this service. We will be 
reviewing that contract, Mr. Speaker. I can assure hon. 
members that every individual who had a charge on their credit 
card will not be charged for the transaction costs by that service 
provider, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 106, An Act to amend The Legal 
Profession Act, 1990. It’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that one of 
the issues over this winter has been whether the government is 
listening to people when they raise concerns about all manner 
of issues. We’ve heard four or five different issues in question 
period today. We know that the papers continue to have issues 
that are of concern to them, whether it’s the cleanliness of the 
hospitals, whether it’s the contracting out of jobs that shouldn’t 
be contracted out, all those kinds of things. 
 
Today in this bill, Mr. Speaker, we have some amendments that 
are made to The Legal Profession Act that have been requested 
by the Law Society of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, on 
first glance it appears that at least the Minister of Justice is 
listening to some of the requests that have been made so that 
particular issues can be dealt with by the legal profession. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, The Legal Profession Act, is 
the legislation which regulates the work that’s done by lawyers 
on behalf of various citizens and corporations in the province. 
And it’s quite often that we receive bills in this House that 
relate to the legal professions Act because there are so many 
times when different issues arise that need to be corrected. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in this particular legislation, we have 
some quite specific requests from the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan, and those requests I think are practical and they 
do make some sense. Now one of the quite interesting parts of 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to ask leave of the House for an introduction of a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for a leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I’d like to recognize a distinguished guest in your 
gallery, and that is a former minister of the Crown federally, a 
distinguished Member of Parliament, Monte Solberg. He’s in 
town today doing some work on behalf of First Nations 
University. 
 
And we just want to say how much we’ve appreciated his 
public service, his partnership with the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the work that he’s doing on behalf of First 
Nations and Métis students and scholars across this province. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this 
distinguished guest to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of my speech, 
I think I’ll also welcome Monte Solberg to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. Whether he knows it or not, but I think he does, he’s 
part of the Viking club of legislators across the country who 
have strong Norwegian roots. And we know as 
Norwegian-Canadians that there are many things that are 
important, and we appreciate the work that he’s doing in his 
present role. We look forward to many more good things from 
the work that he’s done. So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, back to this legislation, the Act to amend 
The Legal Profession Act. The Minister of Justice has listened 
to the requests from the Law Society around some changes, and 
I was just getting to some of those changes. I think there’s quite 
a few pages of amendments that are here. But I think one that’s 
kind of top of the list, and it’s actually quite small in the total 
text but it’s the one that the minister identified first off because 
it’s important, which is to make sure that the profession, the 
legal profession knows that the public interest is paramount 
over the interests of members of the Law Society when those 
members are being disciplined. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the whole purpose of professional 
legislation is protection of the public, and sometimes this 
wasn’t as clear as it should have been in this particular 
legislation. And what’s brought forward in this bill identifies 
that that public interest takes precedence over the interests of 
any member of the legal profession who is being disciplined. 
 
Now another aspect of this legislation is to deal with the 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4559 

committees that are part of the legislation. And in fact, one of 
the definitions is being changed to make sure that the 
committees that are dealing with issues are done so in such a 
way that practically these steps can be taken properly. 
 
And what’s done in this particular legislation is that there’s a 
definition of admissions panel which allows for the Law 
Society to set up panels to deal with particular problems 
primarily around discipline in a way that makes this workable. 
And it’s ended up, I think, capturing and dealing with a 
particular problem and doing it in an appropriate way. 
 
Another aspect in the definition section of this legislation 
relates to the definition of a firm. Over many years, The Legal 
Profession Act was set up in a way to regulate individual 
lawyers. But what it didn’t do was specifically recognize the 
fact that many, if not most, lawyers in private practice operate 
within a structure which would be called a firm or a partnership. 
And so this particular legislation addresses that issue and it 
gives the Law Society the ability to regulate firms as well as 
individuals. 
 
Importantly, it doesn’t lump together all government lawyers as 
a firm so that they’re caught in some of these rules nor does it 
deal with the fact that there may be a legal department in a 
corporation that’s not designated as a firm. So it’s primarily to 
deal with lawyers in private practice. 
 
And once again going back to my first point, it’s about 
protection of the public. It’s making sure that anybody who 
deals with lawyers will be treated fairly and with appropriate 
care. So those are some of the changes that are in the definition 
part. 
 
Then what we looked at in the legislation, that they’ve added a 
whole new section that wasn’t here before, and this goes to this 
question of how discipline hearings are set up and how they’re 
dealt with. And so this new section ends up creating procedures 
that make . . . are more practical in dealing with some of the 
discipline issues that arise. 
 
And so what does this do? Well it effectively says that there 
will be panels available that include some of the benchers but 
also some others that can be part of that process, so that there’s 
not such an overload on each of the benchers who are part of 
the overall management of the legal profession itself. I think 
that this is a request that’s come forward over a number of years 
with substantial thought behind it from the legal profession, but 
I think also some pretty strict review from within the Ministry 
of Justice’s lawyers to make sure that once again the protection 
of the public is the main goal of the legislation. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And practically what this means is that issues of discipline of 
lawyers will be heard in a more appropriate time than has 
maybe been some other times because of the pressures that were 
there on the subcommittee of the benchers. I should point out 
that the word bencher effectively means a member of the board 
that manages the legal profession in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the other issues that are being dealt with here is to address 
some of the time limits that were in previous legislation that 

sometimes were quite unworkable in how the timing of the . . . 
[inaudible] . . . of the benchers were there. What this legislation 
does, after some appropriate discussion obviously, is to set out 
some of the deadlines to have much more flexibility. Always 
you have overriding any decisions that are made the common 
law rules of natural justice, in other words it has to be fair but 
there is a recognition that sometimes the very strict deadlines 
that have been in the legislation have not been fair either to the 
lawyer who is being disciplined or in fact to the people who 
have made the complaint and are part of the particular process. 
So I think that’s an appropriate response to a particular problem 
that has arisen. 
 
Now the next area under this legislation which has been 
changed relates to the statutory exemption for liability when 
members of the board, the benchers make decisions. And this 
statutory exemption is also being extended to the Law 
Foundation. 
 
For the interests of the public, the Law Foundation is a place 
where interest on trust accounts that are held by lawyers — and 
some other sources of revenue but primarily interest on trust 
accounts held by lawyers — goes to a fund which is managed 
by a committee of primarily benchers but also some others who 
are appropriately involved with this. And this money is used for 
a whole number of very positive aspects in the community — 
whether it’s law libraries, whether it’s the law reform issues, or 
sometimes some other specific projects that relate to the public. 
But the Law Foundation has as its goal to use this revenue, 
which comes to them as the foundation, in a way that benefits 
the public as a whole.  
 
And so what this legislation will do is extend the protection to 
those members who are part of that body, the same protection 
that’s there for other volunteers who are involved in various 
activities and who end up doing work that is of benefit to the 
public. 
 
Now the other, the one aspect of the legislation which I think 
it’s practical but it’s something we do need to watch and that 
does relate to this whole question that I talked about earlier 
where changes have been made to facilitate the hearing panels 
for lawyers who are being disciplined, this legislation, 
responding to the request from the benchers of the Law Society 
of Saskatchewan, allows non-benchers and non-lawyers to sit 
on hearing panels around discipline matters. And this I think is 
a practical way of dealing with this, but I think that it would be 
prudent for the Minister of Justice and various people who work 
within his ministry to monitor it carefully as this is developed 
over the coming years. 
 
One of the traditional values of having just benchers do this was 
that there was pretty clear responsibility for the final decisions, 
and that went right to the benchers as a whole. I don’t think 
there’s any intention of changing that responsibility, but there is 
the possibility of diluting that responsibility if you end up 
having a number of non-benchers, in other words, people who 
aren’t elected to their position, or in fact lawyers, non-lawyers 
who are part of the process. So my suggestion would be that, as 
it relates to this particular legislation, there is a need to monitor 
that aspect of what’s being done. 
 
Now when the legislation was brought forward to our 



4560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

legislature, there are a number of other issues that are 
procedural issues. For example, one issue as it relates to 
eligibility to be a student-at-law, that provision is changed to 
allow for these committees that may include non-bencher 
lawyers and in fact non-lawyers to deal with any appeal around 
their time as a student-at-law. Those matters can be dealt with 
by these other committees. And once again, there may not be 
very many of those types of hearings, but I think it will be 
important to monitor what happens there and how the matter is 
dealt with. 
 
Now the other aspects of the legislation are quite specific. I 
think that I’ve ended up identifying most of the key points, but 
clearly the issue is, has the minister listened to what the 
benchers have requested? I have to say that my sense is that he 
has and that he’s then identified most of the issues. Does this 
mean that we won’t see legislation like this next year? I don’t 
think it means that, because quite often there are issues that 
arise within a year that will require further activity. 
 
But practically this legislation has clearly been vetted by many 
lawyers, both within the Law Society and outside the Law 
Society and within the Ministry of Justice and now here in the 
legislature. And so, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments 
on this legislation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate . . . Oh, committee? The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 106, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a third time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Second reading. Yes. Did I say third? Second 
reading. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 
of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 113, An Act to amend The Powers of 
Attorney Act, 2002. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, once again this legislation is responding to 
requests from the community that have come in various ways. I 
know as a former attorney general that legislation like this is 
under constant examination and review by various of the civil 
servants involved in this area, whether it’s a public trustee or 
public guardian and the various people involved there, or 
individual lawyers who have concerns or just individuals 
themselves who have questions that arise as it relates to the 
whole area of powers of attorney. Now the power of attorney is 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to ask leave of the Assembly 
for an introduction of a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 
asked for a leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve previously mentioned, we’re delighted to have 
a former parliamentarian, Monte Solberg, here. He’s joined this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery by Mr. David Sharpe 
who is the board Chair at First Nations University. 
 
And I’ve had the opportunity to work more closely with Mr. 
Sharpe. I know the significant contribution and also that real 
sense of dedication that he has to First Nations University but 
also to our First Nations and Métis scholars at First Nations 
University and, more broadly, First Nations and Métis students 
right across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to take this opportunity to say how much we 
appreciate his presence in the Saskatchewan legislature today, 
and I’d ask all members to help me welcome Mr. David Sharpe 
to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney 
Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant 

la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll take this 
opportunity to also welcome Mr. Sharpe to the legislature. It’s 
very clear that the role of First Nations University in 
Saskatchewan is crucial. I personally, my wife and I, have been 
supporters of First Nations University ever since we came to 
Regina in 1978. And all of us are proud of the good work that’s 
been done at that particular institution, and we look forward to 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4561 

many more years of growth and development and service to all 
the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going back to the Act to amend The Powers 
of Attorney Act which is Bill No. 113. Mr. Speaker, powers of 
attorney are documents that transfer powers from one individual 
to another for various reasons. And there are some fairly 
standard forms on how to do this, and most of the time they will 
follow quite carefully legislation like The Powers of Attorney 
Act. And so what happens as new issues arise or new problems 
arise, there are changes that are required. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it appears that this legislation is being 
brought forward as a result of consultations with vulnerable 
adults. We don’t have in our second reading speech exactly who 
these groups are. I assume the minister might provide more 
information about that at such time as we get to committee, but 
what I do know is that the legislation around power of attorney 
is legislation that is constantly being challenged, updated, and 
looked at in various ways. 
 
So what we have today here, Mr. Speaker, is legislation which 
makes some changes. So the questions for us here in the 
legislature are, what are these changes? Why are they being 
asked for? Who’s asking for the changes? And do the changes 
make sense in 21st century Saskatchewan? And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the best way to look at this is to then look at 
exactly what kinds of changes are being made to the legislation. 
And so if we go forward here, let’s take a look at what some of 
the changes are. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Often the easiest way to examine the changes is to go through 
the legislation section by section, and this particular legislation 
starts out with a definition section or an interpretation section, 
which is section 2. And there have been some changes here to 
make sure that some particular issues are dealt with. I think the 
first one relates to the definition of a dependant. And basically 
the definition of family member as it relates to dependants, as it 
relates to spouses, has been amended to reflect the new 
definition of spouse. What’s important here is that that 
definition in the legislation is that it’s very clear that spouse 
means a legally married spouse of the grantor or a person who 
is cohabiting or has cohabited with the grantor as spouses 
continuously for a period of not less than two years or 
continuously for a period of not less than one year if they are 
parents of a child. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is another place where legislation 
defines the responsibilities of marriage or marriage-like 
relationships in some very specific ways. And I think often 
members of the public don’t fully have all of the information 
available to them when they’re involved in relationships. Or it’s 
not specifically a concern until there’s a rift in that relationship 
and there then becomes a question of who’s responsible for 
what. 
 
But very clearly here, this legislation would allow for a property 
guardian to make sure they could pay money to a dependant 
who is . . . as defined in this legislation, or to a spouse which 
could be a man or a woman who’s legally married or living or 
cohabiting — and also it could be to a person who is caring for 

a child — and that these responsibilities are there very quickly. 
 
Now why would you need something like this? Now we don’t 
have a specific example from the minister here, but let’s have 
an example of a man and a woman were in a car accident and 
one spouse basically had some major difficulties with the ability 
of managing their money after the accident. And when the 
insurance money comes and is payable to that person who has 
responsibility for a spouse and possibly for some children, 
there’s been some difficulty in making sure that that money can 
be transferred to this spouse. So what we have here is some 
very specific definitions of what spouse means, what family 
member means, what dependent means so that there isn’t an 
issue as it relates to that. Now I’m not sure if that’s the specific 
example that’s triggered this change in the legislation, but 
clearly it’s the type of thing that I think is being anticipated. 
 
Another part that’s somewhat related to this is the whole issue 
of gifts. And when gifts are given in a situation where 
everybody’s competent and there’s no challenge to the 
competence to the individual, there’s really no question that can 
be raised. But if you have somebody whose assets are being 
managed under a power of attorney, there may be an 
appropriate spot for a gift to be given, but traditionally there 
hasn’t necessarily been direct authorization to give those kind 
of gifts. 
 
So what this legislation appears to be doing under section 16.1 
is to change the rules to allow for gifts to be given. And so this I 
think is a positive thing. It appears to have quite a number of 
fairly onerous rules to follow around these gifts, but it does 
allow for the possibility of a gift which is often important. And 
so here we have something that responds to a need in the public 
that appears to make sense. 
 
Now another aspect of this legislation relates to what kinds of 
fees can be charged by somebody who is acting in a power of 
attorney capacity. I think traditionally those kinds of fees have 
not been set out because usually the tasks are not too onerous 
and there isn’t a requirement for a fee or things are managed by 
somebody who is a close friend or a family member and those 
matters are dealt with. 
 
I think what this will allow for is specific fees for powers of 
attorney. And it does reflect the fact that quite often we’ll have 
people who are civil servants doing this role, and it’s part of a 
way of making sure that there’s appropriate compensation to the 
provincial treasury when activities are taken on behalf of 
somebody who has appointed a power of attorney that way or 
has been appointed by a court to do that kind of work. 
 
So practically some of those changes are right in the document 
itself. But what we know is that there will continue to be 
questions that arise around how some of these documents work. 
And once again I wouldn’t be surprised within a year or two 
that we’ll have more legislation coming forward to further 
define some of the things that we are looking at in the 
legislation today. 
 
Now the legislation also addresses some of the concerns around 
who has the ability to require an accounting by an attorney, 
somebody who’s been appointed under one of these documents, 
somebody who’s been appointed under a power of attorney. 



4562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

And so what this legislation does is it gives the Public Guardian 
and Trustee the power to carry out an investigation to ensure the 
accuracy of accounting. And it actually does, sort of copies 
exactly what’s in The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act, which we’ll be hearing about a little 
bit later today, and makes sure that there is a public ability to 
publicly account for how funds are being expended. And I think 
that’s appropriate. 
 
I think most people have assumed that there is that kind of 
power, and I guess technically there is that power if you wish to 
apply to a court. But what this will do is set out the form of the 
accounting in regulations, so we’ll be watching for those 
regulations to come. And it also sets out a simplified procedure, 
and it does save some substantial legal fees in actually getting 
the information that may be requested. 
 
I don’t think this happens that often, so I don’t think there’s 
going to be a huge loss of work for lawyers on this or for judges 
for that matter, but it does I think provide for a simplified 
procedure that will make sure that there is an accounting in 
situations where people are acting as an attorney under a power 
of attorney. And so I think that’s good, a good piece of 
legislation responding to a need from the public. 
 
And now the other change that’s coming forward here is — I’ll 
see what section it’s in — is the whole change around the 
section 18, which I guess is in section 7 of this legislation. And 
section 18.1 is being added to the legislation. It talks about how 
a final accounting is required when somebody terminates their 
role as an attorney under the power of attorney. And this is once 
again setting out a simplified procedure and a clear procedure 
so that when somebody ends their role as a power of attorney, 
whatever is passed over to the next person involved — often it’s 
when somebody dies, power of attorney is no longer valid — 
and obviously the executor or the administrator of the person’s 
estate takes over managing the funds involved. 
 
What this appears to do, and I think it does it in a fairly 
straightforward way, is to say at that point it’s important that 
there be an accounting, that there be a full rendering of all of the 
decisions that have been made around the assets of the party 
involved and that that particular information is then finalized 
and approved if necessary by a court I suppose, ultimately. But 
if the form is followed, it allows for an orderly transition to the 
next person who is to be managing these funds or if it’s maybe 
just a total termination of what’s going on. So I think once 
again that’s a positive thing, responding to requests by the 
public for some changes. 
 
The next change, which is section 8, relates to termination of 
authority under an enduring power of attorney. And there’s 
basically here a making sure that the word spouse is used 
appropriately as far as the new definition that we have in the 
legislation and also making sure that there’s a consistency and 
clarity in this legislation around the termination of a power of 
attorney, or the attorney’s authority under a power of attorney is 
when the assets are being transferred to a property guardian 
that’s appointed for a missing person or for a person that’s 
presumed dead. 
 
Once again, this is not a procedure that would happen very 
often, but it is a procedure where having very clear rules makes 

it easier for everyone involved. There’s enough difficulty for 
people when somebody’s missing or presumed dead. To add 
further legal complications is not helpful, and so what this tries 
to do is to make sure that there’s consistent rules, there’s clear 
rules and that those rules protect the assets of the person who’s 
missing or the person who’s presumed dead. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now the next provision that’s here is the regulation-making 
powers, and as we can see that in this legislation, they’ve 
expanded a number of areas. And so what section 9 does, which 
amends section 22 of the existing Act, gives further powers 
around the regulations and what can be done to deal with 
specific issues of this legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is bilingual legislation, so the 
Act itself has both French and English versions of the 
legislation. They both are equally valid obviously. And I think 
it’s important to acknowledge that we have an ongoing task to 
make sure that laws are available in both French and English. 
And I know that the task over many years has been to make 
sure especially those laws that relate to individuals and to the 
powers of individuals are in both official languages. 
 
And so The Powers of Attorney Act is a piece of legislation that 
has been part of the long-term process of having legislation in 
both official languages. As we all know, there is still quite a 
few bills that are only passed in English. And as the years go 
by, this number of bills that are only in English will decrease I 
guess as a percentage of the overall total and that’s an important 
task as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when this type of legislation comes to the 
legislature, it’s often important to understand the stories or the 
concerns that have arisen that have this legislation here on our 
agenda. And we don’t have that in the rather short speech from 
the minister on the second reading. I assume that he has much 
of this information available and he will be able to provide 
incidents or issues that have arisen over the years that require 
this legislation to be introduced. But at this point, we can only 
speculate on some of the issues that arise. 
 
I think one of the areas that isn’t as well known as we might 
think is how few people actually enter into powers of attorney 
or enduring powers of attorney to deal with their own financial 
affairs. Often people assume that they should wait until they’re 
a little bit older and maybe faculties are starting to fade a bit 
that they should enter into these types of arrangements. But 
practically some of the most difficult problems around the use 
of powers of attorney relate to younger people, our age if I 
could put it that way, Mr. Speaker, that we think we’re all 
capable of doing something, and something quite dramatic 
happens and all of a sudden your family members or friends or 
others are scrambling to figure out who has the authority to 
make decisions about various important issues. 
 
And it can be things like choices in a pension plan or choices 
around insurance policies. It can relate to sale of assets that are 
no longer necessary because a person’s not capable of using . . . 
And that could be somebody who has a vehicle but now can no 
longer drive. So how do you get rid of something like that? And 
so I guess what I would say is that there is an education 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4563 

campaign that may be necessary coming from the Ministry of 
Justice or from other parts of the government or just in the 
community in general around the role of a power of attorney or 
an enduring power of attorney and making sure that people look 
at this. 
 
It’s not dissimilar to the concern that one has when one prepares 
a will. And quite often the standard speech given by lawyers or 
trust people or others is that, do you want to write your own 
will, or do you want to have the state, the province, write your 
will? Because we in this legislature have passed legislation 
that’s quite clear about how assets are distributed upon death. 
And often it’s not the same as what you yourself would want. 
And so I encourage members of the public, if they don’t have a 
will or if they haven’t thought about that, start thinking about it 
because there may be certain of your close relatives that you 
don’t want to get certain assets, but they would get them if you 
let the province write your will. 
 
The same thing is true around these uses of the powers of 
attorney. There may be certain people in your family that you 
don’t want making decisions about your assets, but they may 
get that power if they apply under existing legislation. If you 
enter into or if you prepare an appropriate document, this power 
of attorney, you can eliminate those kinds of problems. 
 
Now the aspect of choices in this whole area is such that when 
people go after a problem has arisen, whether it’s, you know, 
like I say, a bad accident or a stroke or some other issue that’s 
arisen with the person involved who has the assets, it’s very 
easy to say, well you should have done this or you should have 
done that. But it doesn’t allow you to go back and do something 
nunc pro tunc was the term we always used in court. What it 
means, do something now for then. You can’t redo things that 
you should have done appropriately later, even though it would 
be easier for everyone. And so, Mr. Speaker, this kind of 
legislation, this powers of attorney legislation is legislation like 
that which gives all of our citizens the tools they need to make 
sure that their wishes are fulfilled. And so I encourage people to 
look at this legislation, the amendment legislation, but more 
importantly look at the Act itself which is being modified. 
 
Now we see that the legislation that’s being amended today is 
the 2002 version of this legislation. I know that that legislation 
when it came forward was as a result of quite an extensive 
review of all the legislation relating to vulnerable adults or 
adults who were in a situation where they couldn’t make 
decisions on their own. And what we know is that the 
provisions that have been brought forward here build on that 
previous work and I think build on them in mostly a positive 
way. But as I said earlier, we will appreciate getting on the 
record when we get in committee some of the very specific 
incidents that have arisen that have generated the changes that 
are being proposed here. 
 
Now what other pieces of legislation or what other institutions 
do we have in Saskatchewan that relate to this particular 
legislation? One of the positive institutions we have in 
Saskatchewan is the Public Guardian and Trustee. And I think 
people often don’t totally understand how much work the 
Public Guardian and Trustee does as it relates to individuals in 
the province. We often forget about a generation of people who 
didn’t have children or who have children who live long ways 

away from Saskatchewan who, as they get older, don’t have 
people locally who can help them take care of their affairs. And 
often the Public Guardian and Trustee steps in in that role and 
manages the assets of the neighbour down the street in a way 
that’s appropriate. And I think that experience in that particular 
office over the years as they’ve managed property of 
individuals is the reason that this particular legislation gives 
them new powers to actually investigate the accuracy of 
accounting around the powers of attorney. 
 
Now we also should acknowledge that there’s another type of 
document that relates not to guardianship of assets but to 
effectively guardianship of decisions, so that what this other 
area that complements this is that you could have one person 
who you trust deal with your assets and another person help you 
make decisions that are appropriate. And so this legislation is 
part of an overall suite of bills that provides lots of options for 
us in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this legislation responds to some very 
specific needs. It will be important to get some of those specific 
stories on the record when we get into committee. I think that 
there is also possible that some other issues may arise as we 
discuss this in committee that might require some minor 
amendments. But practically this is legislation that is of benefit 
for Saskatchewan citizens, and at this point I have no further 
comments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to offer a few additional comments as we look at this 
bill, Bill 114, the health care directives Act. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what the bill primarily entails, as I’ve spoken on this bill 
previously — and for those that may be watching and be 



4564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

watching this particular bill as it proceeds through the 
Assembly and it proceeds through the committee stage — is the 
bill allows and really recognizes the challenges when one is 
going through the health care system or has other challenges in 
which they’re not able, not capable of making certain decisions 
around their care, whether that be day-to-day care or whether 
it’d be placement of a special home or have special needs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the bill that we’re speaking about today, Bill 114, is 
primarily looking at some of those options. And I understand 
that in the case of a family or a spouse or a relative or 
somebody within their extended family, there’s a process in 
place to help the facility or the administrators of any facility to 
determine the course of treatment and the course of even a stay 
at a certain facility in concurrence with the family member that 
might be involved. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So a lot of times, as I mentioned at the outset, when you have 
senior citizens or any other citizen that gets to a stage in their 
life where they’re incapacitated or they’re unable to make 
certain choices for themselves for a number of reasons — it 
could be an accident; it could be the natural process of aging; it 
could be a number of factors, Mr. Speaker — oftentimes the 
health care system and the managers and the doctors and the 
nurses will approach a family member. 
 
And it’s fairly straightforward in the sense of there’s two 
particular areas that you’d have to have consultation. If it’s not 
a family member, it could be a next of kin, it could be an 
extended family member, or it could be two health care 
professionals. And what could happen, Mr. Speaker, in concert 
with the defined group of people, they can determine two things 
— the day-to-day care of that particular individual or the 
decision to put them in a special home or a special organization 
that could assist them in their day-to-day needs. 
 
So I think it’s important to note that if this is intended to assist 
the many people that are in this situation, to clarify the rules, 
and to offer as much advice and guidance and support to (a) the 
patient, of course, but (b) to often help the family along and (c) 
that if there is a process where no families are involved, then 
they can certainly talk to health care professional people that 
could give good advice to the administrators of the hospital or 
the special care homes. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to note that while the bill 
itself will have some impact on the elderly people, there are 
some other people in the province, through a number of issues 
that may have occurred in their lives, whether it’s a traumatic 
accident or whatever, they would also be able to be impacted by 
this bill. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, there are many challenges 
when we talk about seniors’ care in the province. And I go back 
to some of my statements that I’ve made earlier. In northern 
Saskatchewan where many elders are surviving on a meagre 
allowance of 1,100 or $1,200 a month, and at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, they certainly have a tough, tough job ahead 
of themselves. But they ought to be concerned that if something 
were to happen to them, an elderly aunt or an uncle or a parent, 

that where they’re unable to make certain choices on which 
medicine that they can take or to where they’re going to be 
placed, that at least they know that there is a process in place, 
that there is a bill that defines the rules and regulations as to 
how decisions are going to be made about their day-to-day care 
and certainly about their . . . or the decision to place them in a 
special home. 
 
So I think that’s important to note on this particular bill. So on 
that note, I think we’ve spoken about the bill extensively. We 
have had, a lot of my colleagues had the opportunity to have 
their input. And it’s all, of course, part of the process to put this 
bill through the Assembly. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, those 
are my very brief comments on Bill 114. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 
Minister of Justice that Bill No. 114, The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 
Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 115, An Act to amend The 
Public Guardian and Trustee Act, to repeal The Mentally 
Disordered Persons Act and to make a related amendment to 
another Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with a number of different issues in 
this particular bill that’s brought forward. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Justice once again provided some remarks about 
the purpose of this legislation on November 18th, 2013, and as 
he states quite succinctly, there’s some fairly straightforward 
changes that are being made. 
 
Unfortunately we don’t have on the record there what particular 
incidents or what particular stories that were brought forward 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4565 

by people who were affected by this legislation that has resulted 
in the amendments that we see here, and so I think to get at 
some of that we’ll have to ask questions in committee. 
 
But let’s look at this legislation in general. The Public Guardian 
and Trustee for Saskatchewan is Mr. Ron Kruzeniski. And Ron 
is a lawyer that I worked with at MacPherson, Leslie & 
Tyerman many years ago, in fact I think until he was appointed 
. . . well he went to work for the provincial government but then 
he was appointed as the provincial Guardian and Trustee, I 
think, in 1995. 
 
And Ron has had many years of experience in dealing with 
these particular issues, and I have to have some sense of 
confidence in what’s being proposed here that it’s come 
forward with his words of advice and his suggestions along 
with advice from lawyers within the Ministry of Justice. 
 
And so practically I’m not sure I have a lot of concerns directly 
about the kinds of changes that are here. But once again, as I 
stated in the legislation that I was looking at previously, 
sometimes the public doesn’t totally understand what powers 
there are, what powers the Public Guardian and Trustee has, or 
the necessity of taking some personal steps around getting a 
will or entering into a power of attorney or an enduring power 
of attorney as it relates to having their own personal wishes 
being fulfilled in the way that they want. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this legislation deals with the kinds of 
issues that have arisen for the Public Guardian and Trustee as it 
relates to people who need or require somebody else to make 
decisions for them. And so because of that we need to be very 
careful what we do and be very vigilant to make sure that any 
change that we make here does not put somebody in a spot 
where we have to try to correct it later by going through an 
expensive court process. 
 
So what is it that’s being done here? Well as the Minister of 
Justice has stated, there has been a consultation or a discussion 
around our vulnerable adults legislation. It’s legislation that 
relates to people who can’t make a lot of these decisions 
themselves. And so I think practically what we should do is go 
through a number of the provisions of this legislation. And I 
think most of them we can have a pretty good sense of why 
they’re being brought forward, but there may be some where we 
clearly need to have the story; we need to have the incident 
that’s arisen that’s triggered the particular changes that are in 
the legislation. 
 
Now once again the legislation starts out with a definition 
section or an interpretation section, and there have been a few 
changes that have been made. They’re fairly straightforward — 
defining business day, which is the same through all our 
legislation, and also the whole issue of capacity, which is a new 
term being used, is put into this legislation. And the term 
capacity does relate to the issue which we used to call 
incompetence or the inability to make a decision. That term has 
some fairly loaded aspects to it, that term incompetence. And so 
the term that we’re now using is either capacity or you are able 
to make decisions, or incapacity, you’re not able to make 
decisions. And I think that is a positive change that’s here in 
this legislation. It reflects, I think, how physicians who assess 
people’s capabilities would describe what happens and I think 

that’s appropriate. 
 
There’s also a change in the legislation in the definition part 
that updates the references to The Children’s Law Act to make 
sure it refers to the 1997 version of The Children’s Law Act, 
which is the one that’s presently being used. 
 
And then the next change is just a reference in a name. We used 
to have an Act called The Absentee Act. That’s been changed to 
The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act, so that’s 
the term that’s in the legislation in section 6 of the existing 
legislation, section 4 of this legislation. And we’ll continue to 
see throughout the legislation references to The Children’s Law 
Act, and so there are quite a number of references where that 
particular reference is changed to children’s law Act, 1997. 
 
There’s also a reference to The Dependants’ Relief Act. Once 
again that’s a situation where the Public Guardian and Trustee 
has the responsibility to care for an infant. That’s somebody 
under age 18 or somebody over age 18 that doesn’t have the 
capacity to make their own decisions. And that legislation is 
now . . . The present legislation is The Dependants’ Relief Act, 
1996, so there are references to that particular legislation. And 
so we continue to go through quite a few of the provisions in 
the legislation with just those kinds of changes. 
 
Now when we get into the whole issue of the capacity versus 
incapacity, it’s important to have definitions in this new 
legislation that are similar to or are the same as . . . Actually 
they’re exactly the same as the definitions that are found in The 
Mental Health Services Act. And what that means is that there’s 
definitions of things like the chief psychiatrist, facility, 
in-patient, nearest relative, physician, review panel. All of those 
kinds of definitions are important because there’s only certain 
places and ways that people’s civil rights can be limited when 
they’re bound to require the services under this legislation and 
give the Public Guardian and Trustee power over their 
decisions. 
 
Now we always used to have what was called the certificate of 
incompetence. That’s now the certificate of incapacity, and it’s 
the same definition. The same certificate is used if somebody’s 
been committed to a mental health facility. And there are 
provisions around notification of the Public Guardian and 
Trustee in the same way that when somebody’s committed to a 
mental health facility there’d be notification to next of kin, 
people who are concerned about somebody who has been 
committed into a hospital. And so practically there are a whole 
number of rules that have been changed, including making sure 
that there are review processes involved. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I always look at legislation like this pretty carefully 
because I guess it’s getting close to 40 years ago now when I 
was in law school, I spent a whole year sitting in on mental 
health review panel hearings. And these would take place in the 
evening at Riverview Hospital out in Coquitlam. Well actually I 
think it’s called Essondale. It had its own little municipality, but 
it’s basically Coquitlam, British Columbia. And what I was 
doing was to see whether the ordinary rules of law were being 
applied in how decisions were made on people’s capacity or 
incapacity. And after I think attending . . . I can’t remember if 



4566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

the number was 36 or 42 of these hearings which were often 
one or two or three hours long, I ended up writing a paper about 
that. 
 
But I mention that because in that process, I came to understand 
very clearly how people who appeared quite rational and quite 
able to make their own decisions often were not able to do that, 
and that the process used by the professionals, whether it’s the 
psychiatrists or the psychiatric nurses or others, or even the 
lawyers that were involved, or sometimes the judges that were 
involved, that process had many sort of rules and conditions 
with it. And this particular legislation that we have here adopts 
or adapts those kinds of rules which we have in The Mental 
Health Services Act to also apply to situations where the Public 
Guardian and Trustee steps in. 
 
So why would we need to do all this? Well I think it’s here 
because there are situations where the Public Guardian and 
Trustee takes over the management of the finances of an 
individual where there’s a strong objection for the person. I can 
think . . . In my legal career I was quite often called in by 
somebody who I hadn’t seen for quite a long time, and they 
were convinced that you as a lawyer could come and help them 
fight their case. And when you then heard the evidence that 
they’d been running through 2 or 5 or $10,000 a week on 
expenditures that their family and friends and other relatives 
thought were not appropriate, well then all of a sudden you 
ended up flipping into some of these kinds of rules that are here. 
Well it’s that kind of a situation where the Public Guardian and 
Trustee is called in. 
 
And so what this legislation is doing is making sure that the 
kinds of powers that are there to take away a person’s civil 
liberties by putting them into a mental health facility, that the 
same kinds of rules and the same kinds of definitions are used 
when the Public Guardian and Trustee steps in to take away a 
person’s ability to spend their own money or do things in an 
appropriate way. And so this legislation may sound sometimes 
a bit boring as you look at it, but practically it gets in to deal 
with some of the most difficult issues that any family can have 
or any community can have. 
 
And that’s why I think it’s good that we respond to the requests 
that come from the community, but that we also do it in a way 
that has some very clear rules. And as I mentioned earlier, I’ve 
worked a lot of years with Mr. Kruzeniski and I know I can see 
his hand in the legislation that we have here, and so that 
provides me some assurance. But there are provisions here that 
will respond to situations that haven’t existed before, and 
practically we need to have the whole situation dealt with. But 
now what other kinds of things are being done in this 
legislation? I think there are a couple of other smaller 
amendments that give new regulatory powers, but practically 
there aren’t many other changes that have drastic consequences. 
 
So in summary the main issue really is this bringing in the 
concept of capacity or incapacity and then adopting all of the 
rules from our mental health legislation into this legislation to 
allow for appropriate procedures and, like I said, appropriate 
appeal procedures for the individual who has been covered and 
then where there are objections that those can all be dealt with 
in a way that’s fair to everyone involved. 
 

So practically there’s a whole number of pieces of legislation 
that fit together here, and they all deal with a response to 
consultation around legislation related to vulnerable adults. And 
this is one of the crucial pieces that give some new powers to 
the Public Guardian and Trustee, but it complements the 
protections that have also been given to the individuals where 
this particular legislation may apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s a few things that we will be 
able to ask about in the committee. We’ll be able to get some 
stories around some specific things, but at this point I don’t 
have any further comments. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 115, The 
Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2013 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 116 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 
116 and give some clarification, I think what it’s trying to 
clarify is new municipal layers of governance. And they’re 
referring to it as the municipal districts and looking at I guess 
some of our urban-rural communities, our towns, our villages, 
whether it’s about population and maybe the numbers of 
population. So they’re trying to find ways to make sure we 
provide services, from what the amendments and the Act’s 
doing. 
 
It’s to make sure that residents that are living in our 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4567 

communities, and if there was an opportunity for . . . whether 
they’re both rural. And that’s what we’re wondering. Would it 
be urban, a town, a village . . . to come together. And there will 
be some clarification that’ll be asked. And when you look 
through the bill itself, there’s a lot of information. There’s 
going to be lots of questions that I know people are going to 
want. 
 
Now this may be something that the municipalities have been 
asking for, the municipalities, to allow them to come together to 
provide services to the residents. And when you talk about 
services to the residents, we’re talking about roads, garbage, 
grading, snow removal. There’s many areas where our residents 
ask our municipalities to provide the services. And at the end of 
the day, they want to make sure that their dollars are being 
taken . . . 
 
So there are provisions in here to allow a merger and to allow 
communities that . . . Maybe the population base is not there 
where it used to be, and maybe there’s a reason why it makes 
good sense. And I think what it’s allowing is for municipalities 
to volunteer rather than government saying, and this I what I 
think. And my understanding is rather than push it, saying no, 
it’s time that we start pushing. 
 
They’re trying to encourage ways for municipalities to come 
together is my understanding, volunteering to come together to 
say, can you work together? And we know our Saskatchewan 
people do work together to make sure they give the best 
services to the people that they represent. And I’ll give credit to 
many of our mayors and aldermen that work together in all the 
. . . whether it’s the North, the urban, the rural. They come 
together representing the people that have asked them to take 
care of their needs. Whether that’s paying the taxes for 
municipal taxes, at the end of the day it’s making sure services 
are being provided. 
 
So what I can get from some of this — and I know we will have 
lots of questions — is it’s looking at it. And I don’t know if it’s 
taking too . . . And I don’t think in the legislation it’s asking 
that it’s too rural. And I don’t know. You know, can two of 
them merge together? And I think we’re going to have to ask 
some questions to make clear in committee to find out exactly is 
that the case, or am I misinterpreting what I have read? And 
maybe, you know, I don’t have all the facts that are in here. But 
having said that, you know, we’ll ask those tough questions. 
 
And whether which way that these communities can come 
together to have a municipal district that will serve the people 
that they represent from, you know, a bigger area, and maybe 
there isn’t enough services being provided. And this is one way 
that they can. And I know there has been talk about our 
communities. And some of them, you know, unfortunately for 
whatever reason, people are moving out of our smaller 
communities, maybe for whatever reason — education, growing 
population, there are many reasons — rather than I guess 
government. 
 
And in this case maybe not ramming it down them, telling them 
they have to merge together, they’re giving them the 
opportunity to come together in a municipal district. And that’s 
a good thing I mean for those . . . [inaudible] . . . as long as at 
the end of the day I think we have clearly talked to the 

municipalities and if this is a recommendation and legislation 
that they’re asking for. And we have to make sure that their 
needs are being met. And when I say the needs are being met, 
it’s the residents. And I talked a little about that, services. 
 
And it also goes into if these I guess municipalities come 
together, whether they’re rural and they have a municipal 
district, residents and by a petition, or they can ask by one-third 
of the citizens that that municipal district represents can ask for 
financial accountability, can ask for some of those information 
that they want to make sure that their needs and their finances 
are being taken care of. And I’m not saying they’re not. But this 
gives them an opportunity to petition and ask. We’ve seen that 
as one of the areas where . . . So it takes one-third to ask. And 
that’s good. It’s showing accountability for the individuals that 
are providing governance in the municipal district, however 
they come together. 
 
We’re not sure how that will look. And I know there’s going to 
be some questions in committee that we’ll have to find out. 
How exactly will they be structured? How will they operate? 
How will they look? And I mean those are a lot of questions 
that will come out, and maybe there are some good suggestions 
that have been provided to government. But you know, at the 
end of the day there are some provisions, and I know there’s a 
lot of questions. There’s a number of different points in here 
that the legislation talks about, you know, in here, clearly 
saying where we go but giving the powers. 
 
And you know, in that provision to . . . And I know I’ll go 
further in the next bill, but at this point, I think from our point, I 
know more of my colleagues will have questions in committee, 
you know, you’re going to work out. And then there’ll be the 
regulations on how the municipal districts will be governed. 
And how will they operate? And how will they be regulated? 
And I’m sure they’re going to have the same responsibility as 
they do to the municipal Act that’s in there, and this just brings 
them in compliance and using the wording, you know, 
municipal district. 
 
So at the end of the day, they can come together in a positive 
way I hope, I hope in a positive way represent the individuals 
and residents of our good province and making sure that they 
get the services that, as residents of our province, we want our 
municipal governments to look after us. So it’s creating a 
governance, but also it’s changing some of the wording and 
making sure municipal districts are seen as . . . and have the 
authority the municipal Act does. So that does. So at this point, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further comments, so I’ll 
adjourn debate on Bill 116. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:45] 
 
 



4568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

Bill No. 117 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 117, the consequential amendment Act. I just want to 
give a brief . . . I talked about some of the changes. What’s 
going on here, of course this follows Bill 116. And it’s going to 
make the corporations non-profit Act so that not only is there 
where the provisions in the Act say municipalities, that protect 
municipalities within the corporation Act, it will now also 
recognize municipal districts will be recognized in there and 
will make those changes so that they have the same I guess 
authority and the same protections, responsibility that they do in 
The Municipalities Act. So this just makes the changing and 
changes some of the wording so that the municipal districts are 
covered as well. 
 
So at this point I know in committee we might have more 
questions on this one. At this point I have no further questions 
on Bill 117, so I adjourn debate on that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 118 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 118, An Act respecting the 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts and Regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that’s been brought forward by 
the minister of post-secondary education, and basically it’s a 
reflection of some changes that are happening within 
Saskatchewan as it relates to technical schools. And what we’re 
really talking about here, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. That’s SIAST in 
our regular discussions about it. 
 
And this is legislation that changes the name of SIAST to 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic. And so why change the name? 

What’s going on here? Well, Mr. Speaker, the whole concept of 
a polytechnic has developed in Canada to become a name for an 
educational institution that is one that provides technical 
training and many aspects of some of the most important jobs in 
our community. 
 
But what this legislation appears to do is to expand that 
definition to reflect the fact that institutes of technology are 
now institutes that do a lot of research, applied research. They 
raise funds. They grant degrees, certificates, and other kinds of 
things. And so this legislation is being brought forward to make 
some of these changes. 
 
Now this is part of a broader move across Canada for changes 
like this. And Saskatchewan is one of the early adopters of this 
term. SIAST I think has been part of something that’s called 
Polytechnics Canada, a fairly new member of that group. But 
effectively this group, as the minister states, includes the British 
Columbia Institute of Technology, the Southern Alberta 
Institute of Technology, the Northern Alberta Institute of 
Technology, as well as Red River College. Now I think there is 
some discussion that some of these other institutions will 
change their name to reflect the polytechnic term that we are 
using here in Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan is pretty early 
on in using this term. 
 
But effectively what it does is recognize the broader roles of the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 
And so what are some of those broader roles? Well I think what 
they are can be shown when you look at the legislation itself. 
The legislation is quite lengthy. It’s got 40 sections, and it 
effectively rewrites the legislation for SIAST by making some 
changes, but practically it incorporates most of what was there 
in the previous SIAST legislation. 
 
Let me identify some of the things that are new in the 
legislation and perhaps give some explanation of why I think 
they’re here. I think some of them will require discussion in 
committee to totally understand why some of the terms are here. 
But one section, section 3(3) is a new section, and effectively 
what it does is it protects the term polytechnic so that no 
educational institution can use that term unless it’s been 
approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And so 
practically that’s a new area. 
 
Then when you go to section 4, there are a couple of new 
paragraphs added to the types of things that SIAST can do, and 
those things are section (h), so it’s 4(h), and it says that it can 
provide “services to encourage and support scholarly activity 
related to programs of study provided by the polytechnic.” So 
effectively this is to encourage research, to encourage all kinds 
of things that I think institutions obviously do now. 
 
Another aspect of this is that the legislation will allow for other 
particular activities that are important in the work that they do. 
But I think it is important to encourage research. It is important 
to encourage the scholarly activities that one sees in our present 
institutions. 
 
Another part that’s changed is section 10, where right now we 
have a chief executive officer of SIAST, but the new legislation 
will have a president of the polytechnic. And so that’s a change 
that’s here as well. 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4569 

And then the other aspect is that under section 14, and it sets 
out the powers re property of Saskatchewan Polytechnic. And 
what’s new here is that the polytechnic will be able to receive 
gifts of real and personal property, so that if they get large 
grants like a recent grant they got from Husky, they will be able 
to receive them without . . . you know, with the power in the 
legislation. The difficulty has been that it wasn’t entirely clear 
what kind of fundraising they could do. 
 
The other new aspects are in part 16, which is additional 
powers. And those additional powers include granting honorary 
diplomas and granting of degrees under The Degree 
Authorization Act and also entering into any agreements for the 
purposes of performing applied research. 
 
But practically, the main part of this legislation is to give a new 
name to SIAST. And I think it’ll be a while before we are used 
to this, but it is something that appears to reflect a national 
movement. Now will this make a difference in how the 
institution is run? I think there are some pretty positive things 
that are there. Ultimately the SIAST or Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic can do the job that it’s supposed to do when it has 
sufficient resources. And in a couple of weeks we’ll see what 
kind of resources are available for our post-secondary 
institution. I hope that bringing forward legislation like this 
reflects the fact that there is going to be a commitment around 
this. 
 
I personally know from a long history here in Regina that many 
of us were extremely disappointed when SIAST eliminated a 
number of programs. The one that I’m specifically, was 
specifically concerned about was the photography program. We 
had produced many fine photographers for the province and for 
the country, and that whole program was wrapped up and 
effectively all of the equipment and all of the history of being a 
good teacher for photographers was lost to Saskatchewan. 
 
I sincerely hope that this legislation will not be authorization to 
make changes like that, where we lose something that’s really 
valuable for the province. And I think that sometimes the 
decisions that are made are not always made with the long-term 
thought involved, and so we need to be very careful when we 
pass legislation that does make some of these changes. 
 
I know some of my other colleagues have concerns about some 
of the things that this may allow the SIAST institution to do, 
and so I know that there will be other of my colleagues that will 
wish to comment about it so at this point I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 118. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 119 is An Act 
to make consequential amendments resulting from the 
enactment of The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a pretty straightforward piece of legislation. 
Effectively what it does is goes into a few other pieces of 
legislation and changes the name in the legislation from SIAST 
or Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
to the term Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
The first piece of legislation that’s amended is The Education 
Act, 1995. Also then it amends regulations, and these are The 
Teacher Certification and Classification Regulations, 2002 
where the term or the use of SIAST is replaced by the term 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic. Mr. Speaker, that’s the full extent of 
this bill. It does it both in French and in English as a bilingual 
bill. And I think that it’s relatively straightforward. 
 
It is kind of curious though that when the minister was making 
his comments about this bill, he talked almost as long about this 
short bill as he did about the previous bill, No. 118, because he 
was reacting to some of the comments made by one of my 
colleagues. And I think that normally the advice given to 
ministers by the Minister of Justice and by various officials in 
the department is to stick to the script when you’re making 
second reading speeches because what a minister says about a 
bill is crucial in later interpreting the legislation. And I think 
this example of the comments made on November, 25th, 2013 
by the minister in charge of Advanced Education is one where 
some of that advice was not followed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleagues will have further 
comments on this legislation, and especially on Bill No. 119 
even though it is quite short, and so I will adjourn debate. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 119, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried, sorry. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to rise this afternoon to enter into the debate on 
Bill No. 120, An Act respecting Lobbying. And of course this is 



4570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

a bill that’s long overdue and one that we were anxiously all 
waiting for. And in fact I know when we came back from the 
election in the fall of 2011, it was one that I know the 
government was most interested on getting right to work. And 
of course we appreciate that attitude from any government 
when they want to get right to work and get down to brass 
tacks. And this was one that they seemed pretty anxious to get 
moving on right, right away. And here we are in third session 
now debating this. 
 
And of course we don’t know whether it’ll actually be enforced 
even before the next election, ironically. Will the regulations be 
in place? Will the registrar be in place? All the pieces that need 
to make it happen, who knows? It could be the thing that they 
want to get right to work. Maybe, even hopefully, it’ll be us 
who will be getting right to work on putting this into force after 
the next election. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you heard it first 
here. This is the thing that we’ll be looking forward to putting 
into action. So put that . . . Write that down. Write that down. 
 
But seriously, it is an important piece. But it is amazing how 
when things are so critical and they seem to start off out of the 
gate so quickly, that something happens with the gas. I don’t 
know whether somebody put water in the gas or sugar in the gas 
or what happened, but something happened that caused the 
fizzle between the report . . . And I’ll get into the specifics, but I 
understand that the people did their work and we had a minority 
report. It was finished May 12th but we didn’t actually see it. It 
sat on the shelf for a year, a year, which was quite amazing. 
 
So with that, what we have . . . The debate is before us about 
this bill and what the content is and whether it’s effective, 
whether it will be a good start or a poor start, or whether it’s 
something that should go back to the drawing boards. You 
know, the big question is, what are the unintended 
consequences? And so with that, we need to make sure we 
examine this thoroughly. And when we’re in committee, we’ll 
have another go through it because I think the people of the 
province expect a high standard when we talk about 
transparency and accountability. This government, this party 
has come to power under that banner of transparency and 
accountability.  
 
And we think that’s an important piece, that’s an important 
piece of any government to make sure they’re transparent and 
accountable. And that means everybody, everybody, not just a 
select few. And this is one of the problems that we’ll talk a bit 
about in terms of those who were included, those who were 
excluded, and why would they be included and why would 
another group be excluded? It doesn’t seem to make a lot of 
sense. Because no matter what business you do with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, it’s all important and it all 
should be accountable and it all should be transparent. 
 
There’s nobody who gets a special key to the back door. That 
doesn’t happen. That’s not on, and we should not allow that to 
happen. And so everybody’s work — and I always start with 
the assumption that whoever comes to meet with the 
government or the opposition is doing their best for the 
province and the people of Saskatchewan — they may have a 
different perspective. We may not agree with them, but they 
think it’s in the best interests of whatever the cause that they are 
trying to promote. 

And with that I can’t see why anybody would want to be 
excluded from the registry. In fact I think it would be something 
they would feel would be an honourable thing to be part of. And 
so why would anybody want to be excluded? The only reason I 
could actually think that might make some sense is if it’s an 
overbearing amount of work to undertake. You know, I mean, is 
it writing a simple letter? Now in a sense that is lobbying, isn’t 
it? But should they then register within this process? That 
makes it a little absurd, doesn’t it? So there is some reasonable 
levels that we have to take into account. But with that, I think 
that this is one that we are glad to have before us for this 
discussion because I think that we need to have something in 
place regarding lobbying. 
 
And so with that I want to take a minute and review the 
minister’s comments because I think it’s always interesting that 
we can take a look at what they’ve done. And so he talks about 
how, and the reasons that are driving, the reasons behind the 
legislation before us. And I know as my colleague just 
remarked earlier, there’s a good reason to have a minister’s 
comments because we can look back and talk about the reasons 
why. And in fact it might actually serve as part . . . it is part of 
the public record, but a significant part of the public record in 
future years. 
 
And so he talks about how on December 7th, 2011, shortly 
thereafter — I think that’s almost a month after the election, the 
election being I think in November 7th, 2011 — one month 
later the Legislative Assembly passed a motion to refer the 
issue of lobbyist legislation to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice for review and to report 
back. And what they wanted to do was make recommendations 
on a legislative model for this new legislation, for new 
legislation in Saskatchewan that will ensure that the public is 
informed and aware of who’s lobbying the public office-holders 
in Saskatchewan while ensuring that free and open access to 
government decision makers is not unduly impeded. And I 
think that’s important. 
 
That’s what we were talking about before because we do want 
to engage the public. We do want to listen to the public. And in 
fact, that is one of the major concerns that we hear from 
organizations and the public, that we don’t seem to listen to 
them. We work really hard on this side to listen to them. I know 
that on that side the record is rather spotty in terms of how they 
engage the public and how they listen to them and how they 
hold public meetings and that type of thing. And I could go on 
at length about the changes in labour legislation, about whether 
or not they actually engage the public and how the people can 
have free and open access to government decision makers. We 
want to make sure that’s not duly impeded. 
 
And we have seen for example the refusal to hold public 
meetings, to meet with the public. But they’ve been told 
instead, please write a letter. That’s the only way that we’ll hear 
from you is via the Internet or via Canada Post. And that’s a 
problem because I think that people want to say, we want to 
have access to government decision makers that’s open and 
free. And I think this is an interesting comment from the 
minister to say that that’s our goal when often we see that not 
being the actual case when the rubber hits the road, that they are 
actually not open and it’s not a free access to government 
decision makers. But I digress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about that. 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4571 

That’s just part of this whole thing. 
 
But just a short few months later, five or six months later, the 
standing committee tabled the majority report. We had a 
minority objection, and I will refer to that in a minute because I 
think it’s a pretty key piece of the discussion today about this 
bill. 
 
So they talked about how there was considerable consensus 
around preparing an Act based largely on the Alberta and 
British Columbia legislation and further consultation with 
stakeholders was considered desirable before introducing a 
government bill. And so while it’s based on the 
recommendations, they went back to have more consultation 
with the stakeholders. And that showed up perhaps in this; we 
don’t know. 
 
And that’s the question we’ll have: who did they consult with? 
Did they listen to the recommendations? Did they not? If not, 
why not? And we will have questions about that because it just 
seemed rather odd that you would send out a committee, a 
standing committee of the legislature to do this work and then 
say, but we want to refine it further. So that is what happened 
though; that’s the case before us. 
 
And they talked about how the bill will do a number of things 
and establish types of lobbyists, and that makes sense. A 
registration requirement, a process, and that makes sense. We 
have to keep track of who the lobbyists are, what that will 
mean. It will be an interesting process to see how that plays out. 
 
And you know, we’ll have those kind of questions in 
committee. How are the registration processes? How is that 
done in Alberta, Ontario, the federal government? How 
effective is that? And how effective is it vis-à-vis this kind of 
legislation, particularly when we have some of the concerns 
about essentially how effective it will be and how many 
registrants, how many lobbyists will actually be on the registrar. 
You know, the concern is because some of the benchmarks are 
so high, that in fact there won’t be that many that will actually 
qualify for it. So this will be interesting.  
 
This will be an interesting process to see, appointing a registrar 
as an independent officer of the Assembly to oversee the Act, 
investigate the complaints and offences. So we have another 
officer of the Assembly, and how that will play out. And 
restricting lobbying by former public office holders, the MLAs 
here, that will be here, and some of the people who have 
worked for government, that will be interesting. 
 
It does talk a little bit about the exemption for local authorities, 
including universities, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association], and the School Boards 
Association. And I have some concerns about that. And I know 
particularly those people do really good work, and I think it’s 
really important that we keep in touch with them. 
 
And this is in no way . . . I don’t think, the Act respecting 
lobbying is meant to curtail lobbying. It’s just made to keep 
track of it. And in fact, that’s a good way of seeing so how 
does, who is the government talking to? Who are they listening 
to? And I think it’s important that they listen to all sorts of 

people and that’s registered. I don’t see a problem with that. 
 
And I think that that in fact, as I said, all of these organizations, 
part of their job is to inform and to talk to both the government 
and the opposition side so we can support their work and 
support the changes that they need to have done. If we don’t do 
that, then we’re not doing our job. And if they don’t do it, 
they’re not doing their job. And so it’s really critical that 
actually that be seen to be part of their role. They all work for 
the public, and the goal of this piece of legislation is something 
to help the public understand, so what’s happening? 
 
And I find it interesting in fact how we’ve done . . . worked 
really hard to make this legislature an efficient place. And it’s 
much more efficient than when I was first elected. And I think, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would remember those long days and 
long nights when we would all sit in here in Committee of the 
Whole, and we couldn’t do two committees at the same time. 
We had no idea of what the calendar was. We didn’t have the 
processes we have now, which are largely really effective 
getting the job done in a certain amount of time and making 
sure that we can be back in our constituencies, just a simple 
thing like having our Fridays as our day in our constituency 
office. And it’s really important to remember that’s not a day 
off. That’s a day back at our constituency office to meet with 
people. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So now we have this situation. People want to know, so what 
are you really doing? Who’s really talking to you, and what are 
they talking about? I think they’d be very happy to know that 
SUMA and SARM and the school boards and universities are 
talking to us. But now they won’t know, and they won’t know 
how much they’re talking to . . . They’re also being paid by the 
public. All of those groups of people are paid through tax 
dollars, and the taxpayers want to see an efficient and effective 
use of their money. And if they want to see these two levels or 
three levels getting together to talk about the issues of the day, 
they would like to see some evidence of that. And I don’t think 
that’s a bad thing. I think that’s a good thing and a thing that 
they can be proud of. 
 
But it’s sort of this exemption that I think has some concerns, 
concerns also about charities. And of course I need to take a 
look closely, and we’ll have this discussion in committee 
because there seems to be so many different levels of the term 
charities, whether you have NGOs [non-governmental 
organization] or CBOs [community-based organization] or you 
know, who’s funded by provincial dollars? Who’s funded by 
donations? Who are able to be run by foundations and therefore 
are exempt by the advocacy rules of the Canadian Revenue 
Agency? 
 
Those are all big differences, so I think that we kind of get into 
this trouble of when you exempt groups and not have a really 
good reason. There are some good reasons, and particularly 
when it comes to the size or the time of lobbying. Clearly, as I 
stated earlier, the idea of simply writing a letter or a 
letter-writing campaign, I think that’s fair enough that they’re 
not really in the ballpark of having what we call in-house 
consultants or lobbyists. Yes, in-house lobbyists, people who 
make it their business to make sure government and opposition 



4572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

are informed about the issues of the day because we are all busy 
people and we need to make sure we have that. So I will come 
back to this again because I think it’s very, very important. 
 
And talking about recommendations, the minister goes on and 
talks about recommendations on post-employment restrictions 
for cabinet members and to continue what’s already in place in 
the members’ conflict of interest, which only makes sense. 
 
So this reflects a focus on private sector and paid lobbyists’ 
activities. It’s where the risk of influence is most acute and 
there is limited public disclosure. And that may be all true and I 
understand that, and definitely . . . And we’ve seen this from the 
American experience. But clearly we are in a North American 
area and it’s important that we take a look at lessons from 
America in this. 
 
Where the risk of influence is most acute, and that’s fair 
enough, and you know, you have to talk about the issues around 
risk. And I would assume that we really do talk a lot about this 
and conflict of interest. And the unfortunate thing, and I think 
this is in some of the things some of the experts in this area 
have pointed out, that really there’s no lack of code of ethics 
related to this. 
 
There was some discussion around that. Why is there not 
something in place around code of ethics for lobbyists? And I 
think that’s an important area. But I don’t think that this really 
needed just to focus on private sector. I think there should not 
have been a distinction between private and public, that in fact 
it’s all about who we’re talking to, about who we’re listening to. 
And I think that’s important. I think that’s an important aspect. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the minister talks about when he’s 
first referenced, talked about free and open access to 
government decision makers, that’s an important matter of 
public interest and as I would say, that’s all sectors, not just one 
sector. And it’s a legitimate activity. And I couldn’t agree more, 
and it is one that has to be conducted appropriately. 
 
He goes on and talks about thanking the committee for their 
excellent work. And I sure would agree with that. And I would 
want to, at the same time, thank our member from Nutana for 
representing our points of view on that well. So thank you. My 
thanks to her for making sure that we were brought up to date 
and our points of view as the NDP opposition caucus were 
fairly reflected in that. 
 
But I do want to reflect on hers if I could now, on her minority 
objection. And I think that’s important to do because we don’t 
often do this. But we have done, and we have done that. In fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may remember that when I was first 
elected we had a chance to talk about farm land security. And I 
was a member of that committee and we actually, even within 
the government we had a minority report even though it was our 
side, which was a very unusual situation. We should have been 
all agreeing on this, but we didn’t. 
 
And I think it’s only fair in democracy that we have that 
freedom to say we have concerns about things going forward. 
And I think there’s absolutely nothing wrong with that. I think 
it’s important that committees . . . And this is something we’re 
striving for, I think, and it’s something that’s been a difficult 

challenge for us as a legislature to have our committees work 
more freely as a committee. And again reflecting that maybe 
that that sphere of influence from America where we could 
learn a bit from them, where their committees are much more 
. . . when they have standing committees they truly do stand 
with a lot of independence. 
 
And I think that’s something that our committee structure right 
now could learn a little bit about, where we could have a little 
bit more independence. You know, I mean I know the Canadian 
system really talks about party discipline and that type of thing. 
But I think that we could do with a little bit more rigour and a 
little bit more independence. 
 
But I do want to talk about the minority opinion that was 
registered by my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana. And she 
talks about, she wants her opinions to address concerns 
regarding the scope of the proposed legislation, and the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee’s 
recommendations on the report. The committee’s . . . And I 
quote. I’m quoting: 
 

The committee’s discussions have centered around the 
stated goal of the Assembly’s motion: “to ensure that the 
public is informed and aware of who is lobbying public 
office holders in Saskatchewan.” We recommend that the 
requirements for registration and reporting be as simple 
and easy as possible so that lobbyists who are included in 
the definition of “lobbyist”, [are] those who are not 
exempted for specific reasons, and the threshold of time 
are not onerous, and people who are encouraged to err on 
the side of registration and reporting when in doubt. 

 
So we’re actually being more cautious, and I think that’s a good 
principle to be on as opposed to being dismissing someone who 
probably should be included but there may be some doubt. She 
goes on to write, and I quote: 
 

On that basis, the committee looked at whether or not 
charities should be exempted and it was originally 
discussed that they should not, as the registration and 
reporting requirements would be minimal, and the stated 
goal of ensuring the public knows who is lobbying would 
be impacted if they were excluded. It is for that reason that 
I continue to recommend that charities NOT be exempted 
from the definition of lobbyist. Further to that, the 
threshold which is originally discussed to be 100 hours, 
including preparation and travel time, is now being 
reduced to 100 hours including travel time. It is my view 
that this watering down of the 100 hour content will 
effectively eliminate most lobbyists from the requirement 
to register and will emasculate the legislation, particularly 
in the light of exempting charities from the definition. It is 
my opinion that the legislation will be ineffective if the 
committee recommends to exempt charities and water 
down the 100 hour benchmark by excluding preparation 
time. 

 
So I think her points are very clear, and I really do want to say 
and be on the record of supporting the minority opinion. I think 
it is important, and it is not a problem if, and again and maybe 
this is a big if, but the question is we do not want to make the 
registration onerous, an undue hardship so that people are 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4573 

avoiding it just because it’s a red tape. We know this 
government, and it’s gone on a real offensive, and we enjoined 
that too. Reducing red tape is important if it’s just about making 
sure unnecessary steps can be eliminated. 
 
Sometimes you have to have some strong regulations, and I 
don’t call that red tape. I don’t call that red tape, but by, you 
know, the informal definition of red tape, we can always do 
with getting away with less of that. But I do feel that. And when 
she talks about “. . . the registration and reporting requirements 
would be minimal, and the stated goal of ensuring the public 
knows who is lobbying would be impacted if they were 
excluded.” And I think that’s a problem. 
 
I totally agree with her in terms of we want to make sure people 
know who’s been talking to the government, and that’s only fair 
and reasonable. That’s not an unreasonable request. And I 
would think that it’s in everyone’s best interests to show that 
they’re doing their work — particularly the voluntary sector, 
the charitable sector, the administrative government-public 
sector of SARM, SUMA, universities, the School Boards 
Association — that they all want to be. 
 
It should be relatively straightforward. You register and then 
you’re keeping track of those hours. I’m sure they’re keeping 
track of those hours anyways for their own efficiency. Now 
they may have their own sort of lean type of work models that 
they have to be, but somebody’s got to know when they come 
to Regina for the day and what did they do. And essentially, as 
many of these organizations know, I mean they have people 
who are working those jobs to make sure we’re up to date in 
terms of their own goals, their own initiatives, that type of 
thing, and their problems. 
 
So I think it’s a harmful omission and it’s one that will be 
interesting to see if we’re back. Now it will be interesting to see 
— and I don’t know the answer to this question; maybe this will 
come up in committee — what is it like across the country in 
terms of this omission? I know there’s different reasons for 
different provinces to have different standards, but I think this is 
one that we need to really consider. 
 
And we’ll probably be back, if this bill passes as it is now, 
talking about this later. Because I think the public expects it and 
the public will demand it and will ask why; why are we 
omitted? Why is there an omission like this? Because really I 
mean I can’t . . . Other than the undue hardship, which is a fair 
enough reason, if we’re making it so onerous that the school 
boards association says we cannot, we cannot provide that kind 
of information, you know, SARM and SUMA saying that we 
just don’t have the resources to do the red tape that this 
government would set up for lobbyists. But I have a funny 
feeling it’s not going to be that hard to do. And so I think that’s 
an important thing. 
 
I want to take a minute if I can. We all read with interest some 
of the commentary about this. And I think that it was insightful 
because, you know, when you have a piece of legislation come 
forward, it’s interesting to see what people across Canada think. 
And we were interested. So what do you think? You know, it’s 
our Saskatchewan, made-in-Saskatchewan model, and so how 
does it stand out against others? 
 

So there was a blog last year on November 22nd by Guy 
Giorno, if I’m saying that right — Giorno — talking about the 
bill. And in many ways he said that there were positive parts to 
it but there were some really questionable parts to it too. And I 
think it’s important that we take a minute to . . . And I know the 
people at home would be very interested in that. And of course 
he was talking about, and he quotes, he says: 
 

. . . if passed, would give the Province one of the most 
strongly enforced lobbying laws in the country, and 
lobbying conflict-of-interest rules among the toughest in 
Canada. [But, and I quote] The law would not, however, 
affect interest groups, many non-profit organizations and 
some businesses. 

 
[16:30] 
 
So clearly he sees that there is gaps in this legislation. And this 
is the problem when you’re trying to set something up. And it 
will be very interesting to see how those gaps will play out 
because in fact, you know, Saskatchewan is a unique province 
in the fact that we have so much of our work is done by public 
groups, different levels of government and CBOs and NGOs 
and that type of thing. 
 
But he was talking about that, you know, until now — and this 
is a good reason for us to be moving on this — “. . . the largest 
Canadian province that lacks a lobbying transparency law . . .” 
And that was often the subject of criticism. And I think that’s 
what drove the speed at which we got to work on this one 
month after the election, and now here we are like 30 months 
later, and we’re still counting. And so I think we need to get to 
work on it. 
 
He talks about “Despite warnings . . .” And I quote, and here 
are the gaps: 
 

Despite warnings that these provisions would probably 
exclude most lobbying in Saskatchewan, Bill 120 would 
exclude lobbying by employees, officers and directors of: 
 

Interest groups, lobby organizations and other non-profit 
entities, except those that represent businesses or 
management, union or professional interests. 
 
Businesses whose employees, officers and directors 
collectively lobby Saskatchewan public office holders 
less than 100 hours in a year. 

 
And so some of those might be, I mean we don’t know what the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation, how much time . . . I mean, 
would you know because we’re excluding preparation. So is a 
letter . . . And especially a lot of the work that we go into, and 
we can see the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, some of those 
that do some, it appears, a lot of preparation on their work that 
they give us. They don’t just drop by over a cup of coffee. And 
they don’t have any . . . They do have paper. They have charts 
and graphs. They have a lot of arguments. They spend a lot of 
time on this. 
 
And so if we’re not counting the preparation, I think this will be 
interesting to see who does register. And so it’s a bit of a, it’ll 
be an interesting thing when this actually gets going and we see 



4574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

who actually registers. You know, this is a really, really 
important thing. 
 
So we have a whole roll of different things here it talks about: 
 

Consistent with the approach of most Canadian 
jurisdictions, the Saskatchewan law would impose the 
registration filing requirements on: 
 

Each individual consultant lobbyist, in the case of 
consultant lobbying. 
 
The CEO (senior officer) of . . . [that group] . . . 

 
He goes on, that it does contain two strong conflict of interest 
provisions: 
 

Former Ministers would be banned for all lobbying for one 
year. 
 
Former MLAs and former Premier’s Office employees, 
and former deputy ministers, former associate deputy 
ministers and former assistant deputy ministers in the 
Office of the Executive Council would be banned from all 
lobbying for six months. 

 
And I want to talk a bit about that. Because you know, the fact 
is six months is not a long time in our cycle here. It may mean 
actually that they only sit out the spring session, or the last 
month of the spring session, or maybe the fall session. So I 
actually, you know when I first saw that, I thought well that 
seems like a reasonable length of time. Then I’m thinking about 
the time that we’re actually here because we’re here for 10 
weeks in the spring and I think it’s six or eight weeks in the fall. 
Actually when you take in the six-month window, it’s not 
hardly any time at all. 
 
And probably it should have been because the way our schedule 
is now set, we have our Throne Speech in October and then the 
rest of the year is supposed to play out from that Throne 
Speech. The budget follows the Throne Speech; it would have 
been logical to have that reflect that time period. So you set out 
one session and not one six-month period because you could 
actually be lobbying something that came up in the Throne 
Speech because it wasn’t six months later. So this is an 
important thing. 
 
But he does talk about one really important, significant 
omission. And this I’ll quote here: 
 

One significant omission from Bill 120 is a code of 
conduct for lobbyists. The federal, Quebec and 
Newfoundland and Labrador laws itemize specific ethical 
rules that lobbyists must follow. The Saskatchewan 
Government has declined to do likewise at this time, but 
will continue to review the possibility. 

 
And I think that’s really important, that we talk about that 
because we all work from a code of ethics. And people do have 
an expectation that there will be some sort of code of ethics, and 
I think this is really, really critical. So I think that you see that 
it’s a start, and the debate will be whether it’s a good start or a 
poor start. I think that it’s a start, but the question really 

becomes will we be back here and what will be the unintended 
consequences? 
 
And I know that we’ve seen the media respond to this, and I 
refer to a column that came out on November 23rd, 2013 by 
Murray Mandryk. And it’s “Sask’s lobby law needs to be 
improved.” So he asks, and the quote is, his opening line is: 
 

So the burning question in the wake of the Saskatchewan 
Party government’s new lobbyist registry law is this: Is it 
better to have a weak, potentially ineffectual law or no law 
at all? 

 
And so that’s sort of how he presents it, that this is potentially 
ineffective. But the other option is no law at all. And I think 
that’s where we have the question of the day. And I think that’s 
a critical question here.  
 
And so we need to talk about the quote, the blog that I was 
referring to, and you know, the fact that, and he refers to the 
fact that there will be large gaps in the legislation, and it would 
not affect the interest groups and many non-profit organizations 
and some businesses, particularly those organizations because 
of the exclusion of the preparation element. Because we know 
— and as I’ve said before and, Mr. Speaker, not that I want to 
repeat myself for you — but I think it’s critical that I think they 
be included. And this is what he says. And I quote that editorial, 
the column by Mr. Mandryk, and I quote: 
 

This seems a particularly bad oversight in a small province 
where everyone seems to know everyone else and where 
municipal lobbying interests like the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association (SUMA) and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities (SARM) carry a lot of 
weight. 
 
While some high-profile lobbyists like the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour (SFL), chambers of commerce and 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business (CFIB) 
should be captured by the bill’s broad definition of a 
“profit-seeking enterprise”, others with “individual” 
memberships, like the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, 
might argue the law does not apply to them. That this 
thinly veiled “non-profit” right-wing organization — one 
that doesn’t disclose its own membership — might be 
viewed differently under this law is troubling. 

 
So the key . . . And he goes on, and I think this is a very 
important quote. He says, “The key is for the public to be able 
to see what government is doing, said Giorno, likening the 
lobbyist Act to a flashlight rather than a hammer.” And I quote, 
‘“Right now, you (in Saskatchewan) don’t even have a two-watt 
flashlight,’ he said.” 
 
So maybe this goes further, and it can always be fixed in second 
reading with amendments. Laws too can always be later 
amended. But he says it’s a start. So the debate, is it a great start 
or can it be amended? I think that unfortunately it will be one of 
those things. 
 
And I think that, you know, once we see this, and it’s a big, big 
concern is when you have legislation, the cost of the legislation 
and how effective, and it’s particularly when we’re looking at, 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4575 

you know, creating a new officer of the legislature, what that 
cost will be and how effective will that be. How effective will 
that office be? Will it be more of an ornament to say that we 
have something up on the wall? Or will it be something that the 
public of Saskatchewan will say, you know what, we really can 
go to that office, like the Ombudsman or the Children’s 
Advocate, and they will engage with the public. And they will 
be straight shooters, and they will say this is what the reality of 
the lay of the land is. Or will that officer be saying . . . 
 
You know what, already we see big gaps. Already we see the 
kind of problems that we knew, that we knew, and nobody can 
say we didn’t see this coming. And so this government can’t 
say that they weren’t warned about this. We warned about it. 
We had a minority opinion about this, so clearly the writing was 
on the wall. Our speeches will reflect this, and I think they have 
to date. And we will speak at length about this and we will ask 
questions at length about this. So it’s pretty critical. Columnists 
have written about it. People across Canada have written about 
it. They have reflected on the good parts of it. There are good 
parts to it, but there are gaps. There are gaps and there is no 
reason for those gaps at all. 
 
I think, as I said, I think that public organizations should feel 
proud to be part of the registry. And the non-profits, as long as 
it’s not undue hardship to register — and that should not be an 
issue for a government that prides itself on cutting red tape — 
there should be a minimal amount of work just to make sure 
that it’s accurate, that we should be able to have this done. So it 
should be a piece that we’re all proud of. I can’t say that we’re 
all proud of it. We can all say it’s a start and whether it’s a good 
start or not is the question of the day. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s a lot of work that 
we want to get to today and a lot of speeches we want to hear. 
And so with that, I think this Bill No. 120, An Act respecting 
Lobbying I would adjourn. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter discussion as it relates to Bill No. 122, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. We have read 
through the minister’s comments here and taken a cursory 
glance at the legislation. We do look forward to following up in 
a more direct way with the minister at committee because, you 

know, there is a lot of questions that need to be asked directly to 
the minister as to the intent and purpose of the changes that 
have been brought forward here. 
 
Just a couple of the pieces that I would recognize here is that 
the minister is suggesting that one of the changes is that this 
provides authority for a First Nations gaming licensing 
authority to register on-reserve charitable gaming employees 
and suppliers. That’s one piece of the Act that the minister has 
laid out and that’s the First Nations licensing authority role 
here, the registration authority. That seems reasonable. 
Certainly we’ll be doing some consultation on that front. 
 
The second piece of this is establishing a subsidiary, I 
understand, or subsidiaries. And I think there’s some questions 
that we would have for the minister on that front as to the 
purpose of those subsidiaries, and making sure that the answers 
are practical and that they make sense and so we consider all the 
consequences of that decision. 
 
And then the third focus is I guess addressing regulations within 
the industry. And so there’s various changes on that front that 
have been identified by the minister. We’ll want to make sure 
we do a full review of all which is contained within the Act, and 
then of course consulting directly with industry, with 
stakeholders, with partners to make sure that the changes this 
government’s bringing forward make sense. 
 
We do know that, you know, far too often when this 
government pushes forward with legislation, they actually do so 
without the proper consultation, proper listening with 
Saskatchewan people. And we hope that’s not the case with this 
piece of legislation, but the fact that this government does that 
causes us to make sure we fulfill an important role in this 
process of consultation, due diligence, and making sure that all 
voices are heard and that those directly impacted are heard, and 
that all consequences intended and unintended are considered. 
Otherwise you end up with sloppy legislation that’s rammed 
through with impacts for many that could have been considered 
and addressed at another time. So that’s some of the focus we’ll 
be taking as an opposition. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I would, you know, there’s changes here to Liquor and Gaming 
within this. It didn’t do anything to address the shutdown that 
this government forced of West Meadows Raceway I noticed, 
here in Regina, standardbred racing here in Regina. And I find 
this important. This was a track that had established itself here 
just outside of Regina, west of Regina, out off of Pinkie Road 
and was set up by private sector partners, by investments, by 
shareholders, and had set up a avenue for prairie horse racing, 
for standardbred racing here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in fact it was quite the environment out there. I had the 
pleasure of going out for a tour and an experience out there, 
took my wife Stephanie. And we really enjoyed having that 
experience and realizing that there’s a range of gaming options 
that the province regulates and makes available. It seems to me 
that that’s a gaming option that, you know, shouldn’t have been 
shut out. 
 
And what I really don’t like about this whole thing is this is a 



4576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2014 

government that’s choosing winners and losers on this front, 
that it’s saying to a whole bunch of private sector investors, 
shareholders in this operation who have built out a business 
plan, that have skin in the game, that have made acquisition of 
land and have invested dollars into the assets and put forward a 
successful enterprise, they’ve been shut down by that 
government. 
 
And you know, it’s . . . As I say, I mean this is . . . When we 
talk about the range of gaming options that are made available 
by government, regulated by government, you know, I find it 
disappointing that, you know, their focus maybe seems to be on, 
you know, VLTs [video lottery terminal] with the exclusion of 
supporting the private sector here in Regina who had a really 
solid investment with their own dollars into ensuring 
standardbred racing for Saskatchewan people to enjoy. And 
certainly on the range and the spectrum of gaming options, like 
I say, it seemed like a reasonable and enjoyable environment. 
And, you know, I find it wrong that they’d shut down that 
activity. 
 
Certainly that activity itself generated tourism activity back to 
Regina as a whole. It also brought in horses and owners and 
teams from all over Saskatchewan, but also right across 
Western Canada and the United States. So generating all sorts 
of good activity, economic spinoffs, and something that was 
shut down by this government, and done so without any real 
listening or real considerations for that industry or for those 
partners, those individuals, those shareholders that had made an 
investment here in Regina. 
 
And as I say, we’ve raised this case. We’re disappointed with 
this government to have shut this investment down, private 
sector investment, the investment of shareholders at West 
Meadows Raceway, and disappointed by the fact that that 
minister and the Premier never cared, never cared to listen, 
forced them out of business. And the minister shouts across that 
she never shut them down . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member knows he’s not to refer to the 
absence of members in the House. So please withdraw that. I 
recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
shareholders of West Meadows, those that were operating it 
certainly know that this minister and this government are the 
cause for the closure of their facility. They forced the closure. 
They chose winners and losers, and that’s disappointing and it’s 
a loss for the region, as they say. It’s a loss for standardbred 
horse racing. It’s a loss for horse owners and horse teams, and it 
just isn’t something that sits well with many. 
 
The changes that are brought forward here in this Act around 
registration of on-reserve charitable gaming seem reasonable. 
To provide those responsibilities and those authorities to IGR, 
the Indigenous Gaming Regulators, seems like a reasonable, 
common sense sort of a change, something that we do want to 
follow up and make sure that it’s supported with those direct 
partners. But of course there are all sorts of raffles from a 
charitable perspective and lottery-type events on reserves. And 
certainly it’s important to ensure that there’s integrity in those 
events, which is certainly an important role that IGR has 
provided as well as the First Nations themselves who, I think, 

do a good job on this front. 
So we’ll continue to consult as it relates to government 
transferring that responsibility on to IGR. We want to make 
sure they have the resources they need to properly regulate, and 
we recognize the important events that are held on First Nations 
and making sure that they have the supports that they require. 
 
This will also allow the registry, of course, of gaming 
employees and as well suppliers. And we’ll learn more through 
our consultations with the sector on this front as to the value of 
these changes, and we’ll make sure we bring that voice to the 
Assembly. We will have questions about the subsidiary, the 
changes they’re bringing forward here, just specifically what 
the purpose of creating that subsidiary is on behalf of SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. What does this 
allow them to do that they can’t do otherwise? 
 
I sometimes do have some concern with a government like this 
that you just can’t trust with, say, our Crowns. Going out and 
creating subsidiaries that might be able to be broken apart more 
easily by a government that we know doesn’t believe in 
ownership of our Crown corporations. So we will be observing 
that. Of course we regularly identify and speak to the 
undermining of our Crown corporations by this government, the 
eroded financial position, the raided dividends that this 
government has taken, and the outright outsourcing and 
privatization that we’ve seen by this government. And it’s 
something that we’ll continue to observe. Certainly, you know, 
this government’s broken its promise as it relates to protecting 
the Crowns in its outsourcing, its privatization, in its sell-offs. 
And we see this as selling off opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. And we’ll be certainly fighting for a strong Crown 
sector along with a strong private sector in Saskatchewan. And 
we’ll stand opposed to moves, manoeuvres, tricks, and games 
by that government to sell off and outsource our Crown 
corporations. 
 
The other pieces of this legislation speak to regulation, Mr. 
Speaker. And some of these pieces just simply require more 
detail from the minister at a committee table and with the 
partners and stakeholders that are affected. I’ll give you an 
example. The minister states that some of the elimination, they 
eliminate: 
 

. . . the requirement for medical use, non-consumptive use, 
and educational use [of] . . . permits and removing 
provisions that grant SLGA authority to demand 
explanations from permittees when a person has been 
refused entry. 

 
Now those may be redundant as described by the minister. But 
it would be interesting to go back and just understand the full 
purpose of when those regulations were created, and look at the 
modern environment of these regulations, and just making sure 
that we’re not taking something out that still has purpose in the 
current environment. 
 
Of course, regulations themself should have purpose. We don’t 
oppose removal of regulations that are old, outdated, redundant, 
without purpose. But we do support regulations that protect 
people and protect industries and integrity of organizations. I 
mean, we’ll probably have some questions, or I have questions 
when I look at this as it relates to no longer having explanations 



March 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4577 

from permittees when a person has been refused entry. Be 
interested in learning a little bit more about that piece itself and 
what those changes mean, and what some of the unintended 
consequences of that regulation change or elimination could 
mean here in the province. 
 
I recognize they’ve taken out what I think the minister refers to 
are outdated legislation as it relates to the . . . something about a 
requirement of having some Saskatchewan content for beer 
manufactured here in Saskatchewan. You know, this is an area 
that I think we’ll want to examine. And if this is outdated, if this 
didn’t make sense or if this wasn’t enforced as I think the 
minister sort of relayed to us, I would like to hear a little bit 
more from this government about what they are doing to 
support and promote the Saskatchewan brewing industry or the 
Saskatchewan distillery industry, and all these, you know, 
opportunities to support some of the entrepreneurs in this 
province who are making investments and running operations 
and creating employment. 
 
And certainly when it comes to brewing itself, we certainly 
have many operations we can think of, but Great Western in 
Saskatoon is certainly a fine example and craft beer with 
Paddock Wood is another. There’s different operations across 
the province. I think of the District Brewing here in Regina as a 
newer operation as well. 
 
So I do think that, you know, if this regulation that was in place, 
as the minister says, is outdated and no longer fits what it was 
originally intended to do, you know, we’ll have questions about 
that. But what I’d like to hear more of from this minister is what 
are they doing to actively promote and encourage that 
Saskatchewan industry of brewing and distilling here in this 
province? And what are they doing to allow those entrepreneurs 
to thrive here in Saskatchewan? And there’s many of them, you 
know. I think of the new Last Mountain Distillery in Lumsden 
who are making fine product and they are providing 
employment. And certainly I think that there’s a consumer trend 
as well and an appreciation of Saskatchewan people for 
products that are local, and I think that extends as well to 
brewing and distilling. And there’s a sense of pride in being 
able to appreciate those local products. 
 
So I mean certainly there’s an economic case to be made about 
strengthening Saskatchewan and those entrepreneurs, as I say, 
that are placing their investment here in the province, 
expanding operations, creating employment. But there’s also a 
whole other piece about a bit of pride of where you are as a 
province and pride of those local products. And of course 
anyone who ever frequents a farmers’ market or has a garden or 
appreciates local product or appreciates where their meat is 
coming from or their products are coming from would 
understand this. So I would like to see a little more from this 
government on that end. 
 
There’s other pieces here that the minister suggests are about 
modernization, I believe. But we do want to make sure that, as 
these regulations are changed, that we fully understand what the 
purpose of the regulation was in the first place. Is that 
regulation effective in meeting that challenge or addressing that 
problem? If not, then certainly it’s the kind of regulation that 
could be considered for elimination. But does the problem 
persist or has the problem changed? Because there’s a place for 

public protection and regulation of industries to make sure that 
protection is in place. 
 
And when I think of the industry as it relates to gaming and 
alcohol in this province, certainly there is some safety 
considerations of community as a whole that we want to be 
considering and making sure that we’re fully understanding and 
making sure that, if regulations are needed, that they’re in place. 
You know I think of, you know, regulations and the place of 
laws and the importance of these. I think of that government. 
They’re doing some things here to change alcohol legislation 
here but, you know, they were unwilling at a time to address 
some of the safety challenges that we have on the roads related 
directly in a tragic way to drinking and driving. 
 
This government was too willing to simply brush off doing the 
meaningful work that was required to bring forward solutions 
that are proven in other jurisdictions. And the fact that they 
were unwilling to support the, I believe, a three-day 
impoundment of vehicles when driver is found to be over the 
limit of .04 was disappointing. And I think it was disappointing 
for all Saskatchewan people, because they will know the issues 
or have a connection to a story in some way or another, I’m 
sure, as it relates to tragic loss with drinking and driving. And 
they should have been following the lead of other provinces on 
that front like Alberta, like BC [British Columbia], who have 
effectively cut down deaths. 
 
At this point in time, though, as it relates to Bill 122, I’d like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The time being now after 5 p.m., this 
House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 
  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4558, 4560 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4550 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4550 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4550 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4550 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4551 
 Grain Transportation Solutions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4551 
 Volunteer Wins Community Futures Award 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4552 
 Saskatchewan Artists Nominated for Juno Award 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4552 
 2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4552 
 All-Star Night Fundraiser 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4553 
 Recognizing Constituency Assistant 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4553 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Standards in Care Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4553 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4553 
 Hospital Conditions 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4555 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4555 
 School Funding 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4556 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4556 
 Malfunction in Parks Reservation System 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4557 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4557 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4558 
  Wyant (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 4560 
 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4560 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4563 
 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4563 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4564 
 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4564 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4566 
 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4566 
 



 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4568 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4568 
 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4569 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4569 
 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4575 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


