






















































Hansard: November 27, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 20A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6111 
 November 27, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to table the library report pursuant to 
section 80(3) of The Legislative Assembly Act, 2007 in 
accordance with the rules and procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow . . . Moose Jaw North, sorry. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’ll be 
introducing the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow in a minute, 
but right now it’s my pleasure to stand here and welcome all the 
students from Moose Jaw that are in the west gallery this 
morning, Mr. Speaker. In particular on our left-hand side is the 
17 students from A.E. Peacock, if you want to just give us a 
wave. They’re the high school grade 12 students from Peacock. 
We’d like to welcome you here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’ll recall that earlier this week we recognized 
the Peacock boys for winning the 3A provincial football 
tournament. But I also know that the girls, the Peacock girls 
were in the medal contest for the volleyball last week as well, 
so you can see how active a school that Peacock is. And I’d ask 
all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 
this morning. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to introduce 21 grade 1 students — give us 
a wave — from Cornerstone Christian School in Moose Jaw. As 
well, they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Troy 
Breitkreuz, and their chaperones Ms. Christine Breitkreuz, Ms. 
Caroline Behrns, and Ms. Karlene Benallick. And I apologize if 
I butchered any of those names. And of course, they couldn’t 
get here today without the safe driving of their bus driver, Mr. 
Tom Goodhand. So I’d like all members of the legislature to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I would like to 
introduce three guests in your gallery: Carmen, Warren Hanson, 
and their son Seth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met these people just last night at the Premier’s 
Agribition reception here in the rotunda, and true to 
Saskatchewan, it took us about one minute to find out that we 
knew the same people. And when I found out that they were 
coming to the building to help Seth study some different forms 

of architecture, I invited them to join us. So I’d like to ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Carmen, Warren, and Seth to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And we know that in September this year this government 
walked away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable 
housing project in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and then rent the units at full market 
price. And when asked to explain how this government could 
allow the private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract 
without any penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and 
I quote, “You’re assuming there’s these desperate homeless 
people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 
realities within our community. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: cause the government to 
recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 
in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 
now allowing private developers with whom the 
government has close relationships to default on 
fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Prince 
Albert. I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government on 
Dewdney Avenue and to condemn the failure of their action to 
address this urgent safety concern. Certainly we continue to 
press that government to build that west bypass in a timely way, 
but there are important interim actions that are required to 
ensure safety for those on Dewdney to get those heavy-haul 
trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 



6112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents, many 
constituents, and those directly on Dewdney Avenue. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a basic 
need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting harder 
and harder for people to find adequate housing, especially 
families, seniors, women and children who face abusive 
situations. The problem is getting worse because of the rising 
level of poverty and the skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac La 
Ronge area to meet the needs of and addressing 
homelessness in the Lac La Ronge area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of La 
Ronge and area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in my place today to present a petition in reference 
to the Prince Albert bridge. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as the city 
of Prince Albert, will receive a serious commitment from 
senior government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from La Ronge, Air Ronge, and Langenburg. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term 
care are deteriorating under this government, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for 
safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents. They 
point out that the government is failing to fix the basics in 
long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent request 
from long-term care facilities for increased and needing staffing 
levels. 
 
The petitioners point out that the government has removed the 
regulations requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, 
resulting in neglect; and that chronic understaffing in long-term 
care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, including 

unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in 
physical violence amongst residents. They finally point out that 
fixing the basics and achieving real improvement in long-term 
care services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 
front-line health care workers, residents, and their families, as 
opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 
to act on readily available information about safety 
concerns with its smart meter program, including through 
the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 
concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 
safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. The 
folks that have signed this petition wanted to bring to the 
attention of the Legislative Assembly the following: emergency 
room wait times in Saskatchewan have doubled since 2010. The 
government’s own statistics show that patient safety is getting 
worse, and the government’s own surveys show that the 
majority of doctors, nurses and other front-line health care 
workers are frustrated with the quality of health care. And of 
course the government is spending untold millions of dollars on 
its lean project, including a $40 million contract with an 
American consultant and flying in Japanese senseis for $3,500 
per day. 
 
I’ll read the prayer. They: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to recognize health care is getting 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6113 

worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics by 
listening to health care workers, patients, and their 
families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 
and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 
spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by members of my 
constituency, Saskatoon Nutana. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Saskatchewan Powerlifters Excel at World Championships 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I’d like to 
correct. It was the grade 4 and 5 students from Cornerstone 
Christian School. Sorry about that. 
 
On another note though, on November 3rd to 8th, the 
International Powerlifting Federation World Open 
Championships were held in Aurora, Colorado. Six 
Saskatchewan athletes took part in the competition, which also 
included more than 200 lifters from 35 countries. 
 
Melanie Ziffle of Moose Jaw finished in sixth place overall, 
lifting a combined total weight of 43.75 kilograms which 
included a bronze winning medal 100-kilogram bench press. 
 
Shantelle Szuch of Moose Jaw finished eighth overall, lifting a 
combined total of 445 kilograms which included a 
national-record-setting 180-kilogram dead lift. 
 
Rhaea Stinn of Moose Jaw finished third overall, lifting a 
national-record-breaking combined total of 587.5 kilograms, 
including a silver-medal-winning 152.5-kilogram bench press 
and a bronze-medal-earning and national-record-setting 
212.5-kilogram dead lift. 
 
Aaron Ziffle of Moose Jaw finished in 14th place overall, lifting 
a combined total of 790 kilograms. 
 
Ryan Stinn of Moose Jaw finished in fifth place overall, lifting 
a national-record-setting 985 kilograms including a 
national-record-breaking 372.5 kilogram squat and a national 
record lifting 375 dead lift.  
 
Ryan Fowler of Weyburn finished in 10th place overall, lifting 
a combined total weight of 890 kilograms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the legislature to congratulate 
all these Saskatchewan athletes on their impressive 
performances in the powerlifting world championships. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Camp Hope Opens at Montreal Lake 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this Assembly today to 
recognize the opening of a new camp in the Cumberland 
constituency. On September 17th, Camp Hope officially opened 
on the Montreal Lake Cree Nation. It will help ensure that 

future generations will be able to learn and embrace their First 
Nation culture and heritage. Camp Hope is operated by 
Montreal Lake child and family services. 
 
The camp was built through the vision of community members 
who wanted to create a place to help at-risk youth by providing 
training outlets to develop family and community. This camp 
will help the community of Montreal Lake by keeping youth 
busy with sports, cultural activities all year round. This camp is 
now a site that the community can use to develop positive 
family units and build stronger, more vibrant community. 
 
The leadership of Montreal Cree Nation have stated that they 
see this camp as a means to build a stronger Cree Nation. 
Located in the traditional territory of Montreal Cree Nation, the 
camp facility will be offered year-round to both band members 
and to those who wish to rent the facility. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the board of CFS 
[child and family services], the volunteers, and all the 
community members whose hard work has made this exciting 
new program possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in recognition of Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week this week. 
This week showcases the people, the technology, and 
management tools that help promote manufacturing in our 
province. 
 
The manufacturing sector, along with agriculture and resource 
production, greatly contribute to making Saskatchewan’s 
economy diverse. This industry is keeping Saskatchewan as one 
of the growth leaders in Canada. The manufacturing sector is 
responsible for thousands of jobs, billions of dollars in exports, 
and establishing the made-in-Saskatchewan brand as a mark of 
quality around the world. 
 
Manufacturing Week is profiled with events around the 
province. Some events include the Business Opportunity Expo, 
Saskatchewan manufacturers safety leadership summit, and 
school tours and speakers in our major centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this sector employs more than 28,000 people in 
highly skilled jobs throughout Saskatchewan and generates over 
$15 billion in shipments last year. Our government is 
continuing to help this sector stay strong. The manufacturing 
sector received a major boost earlier this week with the launch 
of the Manufacturing Centre of Excellence. Our government 
has committed a total of $1.5 million over three years to this 
centre. This investment is important in sustaining and 
increasing the competitiveness and innovation of Saskatchewan 
manufacturers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
Manufacturing Week and to thank the numerous organizations 
that help make this week a huge success. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 



6114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Fundraiser Puts Faith and Values to Action 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 
15th I had the pleasure to attend a fundraiser for the Anglican 
diocese of Regina’s Living the Mission project at St. James the 
Apostle Church. 
 
The project raises funds from parishes and community to help 
address inequality in our city. One of the great projects 
supported by St. James the Apostle is the REACH [Regina 
Education and Action on Child Hunger Inc. (Regina)] program 
which helps to ensure that everyone in our city has access to 
healthy and nutritious food. St. James the Apostle has made 
their kitchen available to REACH as well as raising dollars for 
their important work in feeding the hungry in our city. 
 
Another important aspect of the fundraiser was the celebration 
of an important milestone. It was 30 years ago that the priest at 
St. James the Apostle, Malcolm French, was ordained. Since 
coming to St. James the Apostle, Malcolm has been a leader in 
the congregation and for the broader community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope all members will join with me in 
congratulating Archdeacon Malcolm French on the 30th 
anniversary of his ordination and to thank all members of the St 
James the Apostle community for putting their faith and values 
to action to make our city a better place. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Sod Turned for Habitat for Humanity 
Builds in Prince Albert 

 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
announce that on November 14th I had the privilege of 
attending a Habitat for Humanity home dedication and a 
sod-turning in Prince Albert. These homes will enable two 
hard-working families to experience home ownership for the 
first time. I’m also pleased to announce that our government 
was able to assist Habitat for Humanity and these families by 
contributing a total of $115,000 to the building of both homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out that both homes are 
being constructed for Habitat through CORCAN, a special 
operating agency of Correctional Service Canada. Through 
certified vocational training programs, inmates learn skills in 
the home construction industry by building homes for Habitat 
partner families in need. This is an outstanding example of how 
communities can work together to make affordable housing a 
reality for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, partnerships with organizations like Habitat for 
Humanity are critical as we strive to meet our province’s 
housing challenges and to help families share in the rewards of 
our growing economy. Our government will continue to do our 
best to keep Saskatchewan strong and to make life more 
affordable for everyone. 
 
I ask all members to join me in celebrating the work of Habitat 

for Humanity in Prince Albert and across Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Pimâcihowin 4Success Project 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise today to recognize an important project that was recently 
launched on the Beardy’s and Okemasis Willow Cree First 
Nation. The innovative project is called Pimâcihowin 4Success. 
 
It provides training opportunities to high school students at the 
Constable Robin Cameron Education Centre on the Beardy’s 
and Okemasis First Nation. The educational trades technology 
initiative was first launched in September of this year and is 
intended to be a long-term program which will educate students 
in non-academic areas. Pimâcihowin 4Success combines 
classroom instruction with hands-on experience building and 
repairing homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the many goals of the program is for 
students to develop knowledge and skills which will help them 
find employment after graduation. It is also hoped that the 
students who complete the program will be able to contribute to 
the First Nation by repairing and maintaining the homes of their 
families and neighbours. 
 
Pimâcihowin 4Success also teaches students important life 
skills, helping to improve high school graduation rates on the 
First Nation. The first class of students to be accepted into the 
program included 15 students in grades 11 and 12. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
teachers, staff, and students at Beardy’s and Okemasis Willow 
Cree First Nation who helped to start the Pimâcihowin 4Success 
project and wishing them continued success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] recently stated their position that 
“The reality is that poor quality of care is the norm . . .” in our 
province’s long-term care facilities. Well, Mr. Speaker, under 
the NDP government, my mom and dad both spent time in 
residence in long-term care. When my mom first went in, she 
was in respite for two weeks but because no bed was available 
in the Lakeside Manor care home in Saltcoats, she was put in 
Foam Lake for a month. And I might add, the care was good 
there. But to say the least, she wasn’t impressed. But that’s how 
the system worked then and that’s how the system works now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t give this statement to disparage the 
long-term care system under the NDP, but simply to highlight 
how the system works. And, Mr. Speaker, from what my family 
witnessed, the long-term care providers working with our 
seniors are truly special individuals, hard-working and 
compassionate. That was the norm then, and on this side of the 
House, we firmly believe this is the norm now. 
 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6115 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we understand that there’s still more work 
to do. And if there are specific issues that need to be brought to 
light, this government welcomes them. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
think it’s completely inappropriate that the members opposite 
blame the front-line staff by saying poor quality is the norm. 
Mr. Speaker, we know that these employees are dedicated to the 
best care for our seniors and so do we. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Expenses Incurred by Lean Initiative Consultant 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Health minister 
has repeatedly claimed that the contracts the ministry has 
entered into with John Black will span three years and a quarter, 
and cost $35 million all-in. But my question is for the Premier. 
Why did the Minister of Health have a separate contract with 
John Black before that, in which the key deliverable was simply 
to pitch himself for the massive cash cow contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly as I’ve indicated 
in the past, what was initially going to be a four-year contract is 
going to be exited sooner than that. The contract will end June 
of 2015. It will see the government spending $35.5 million over 
that time frame, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure what the member 
opposite is, the Leader of the Opposition is referring to. Mr. 
Speaker, frankly I don’t think his question made a lot of sense. 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the way the contract will run and it will 
end June of 2015. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister doesn’t even know 
about the contracts that he entered into with John Black before 
the whopper that we’re facing right now. In April 2011, the 
Health minister signed a $35,000 contract with John Black for 
him to pitch himself. Just two months later the Health minister 
upped that same contract to $85,000. And this was still just for 
John Black to pitch himself. But now it also included, it also 
included John Black hosting senior government leaders in 
Seattle as part of the big pitch. So again to the Premier: how on 
earth can he justify Saskatchewan taxpayers having to pay for 
John Black to pitch himself for a massive cash cow contract? 
Why couldn’t he have at least done that on his own dime? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly prior to entering into a four-year contract, we 
had engaged with outside consultants including John Black and 
Associates as well as other consultants, Mr. Speaker — not 
unlike what the members opposite did in Five Hills Health 
Region in 2006 when they entered into an agreement for, I 
believe a two-year period with an outside consultant, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of individual 
contracts that were signed with several different contractors, 
consultants, over a number of periods that spanned the NDP in 
Five Hills in 2006, 2007, and early in this government before 
we finally did decide to commit to a four-year contract with 

JBA [John Black and Associates]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over and above the initial 
$85,000, the Health minister gave John Black an additional 
$50,000 for a presentation and an interactive workshop back in 
the spring of 2011. So now that is $135,000 plus expenses, Mr. 
Speaker, handed to John Black just so he could make the case 
with a fat cash cow contract. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to 
the Premier. How on earth can he justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly what we had done in this province . . . And 
I’ll remind the members opposite that part of this started in 
2006 under the NDP government when the minister of the day 
gave approval for Five Hills Health Region to enter into a 
two-year contract that would see Five Hills Health Region 
spend about point two per cent of their budget on lean 
initiatives in that health region. Something about Christmas 
trees. I think the members opposite might remember that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then when this government was formed in 2007 
we further looked at lean, used lean as a part of transforming 
how we do blood inventory in the province and other small, 
one-off initiatives. We engaged with a number of consultants, 
including JBA, and then made the decision, Mr. Speaker — 
because of the good work that we’d seen, because of the 
significant savings and the improvements in the system — that 
we should investigate and move forward with a four-year 
contract, which now essentially will be a three-and-a-half-year 
contract with JBA. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these are contracts from the 
minister’s own ministry. He should know what he has signed 
and what he has paid for, Mr. Speaker. But it just gets worse. In 
early 2012, the Health minister entered into yet another contract 
with John Black worth $500,000 to do the initial planning for 
the full $40-million contract. 
 
Then the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t satisfied with 
that. He upped it to $800,000, still just for the initial planning. 
But then, Mr. Speaker, internal documents that we’ve obtained 
show the minister upped that amount yet again, this time to a 
whopping $2.5 million, still just for the initial planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and he could 
answer this. Why was John Black paid for initial planning for 
the major lean contract several months before, before the RFP 
[request for proposal] for that contract was even tendered? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. But 
as I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, that the province of 
Saskatchewan, the Ministry of Health had engaged with a 
number of consultants going back to 2006, 2007 under the NDP 
for some one-off specific projects, Mr. Speaker. We had done 
the same after 2007 in engaging the work of consultants on 



6116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

some projects such as blood inventory, Mr. Speaker. But then 
we also made the decision that we wanted to implement a 
further plan to deploy lean across the entire health care system, 
Mr. Speaker. We looked for advice from other consultants, Mr. 
Speaker, in how that would look, what that approach would 
look like, before doing a full RFP to find the consultant that 
would eventually deliver that for the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at the different 
versions of the contracts, the contracts from the minister’s 
ministry, if you look at them, which jump from $800,000 to 
$2.5 million, the only difference, the only difference is that 
on-site Japan kanban training was changed to off-site Japan 
kanban training. Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that on-site Japan 
kanban training happens here in Saskatchewan. So my question, 
Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. Where was this off-site Japan 
kanban training and why did it cost $1.7 million? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have 
engaged services for specific projects with other consultants 
like the blood inventory project, but also with JBA for projects 
such as the children’s hospital and the 3P [production 
preparation process] planning that did take place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also did planning around strategic deployment of lean 
throughout the system, how we would ensure that the system 
was thinking and acting as one, Mr. Speaker, as we were going 
to deploy lean throughout the entire health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, which eventually did lead us to tendering the project 
out. Mr. Speaker, that will see us, through this contract, spend 
$25 million with this particular consultant. 
 
But I will remind the members opposite that this began in 2006 
with a $400,000 contract in Five Hills to begin some lean work 
— something about Christmas trees that members opposite will 
remember, Mr. Speaker. And we decided to proceed down a 
similar path initially and then expand it out provincial wide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, zero answer to the question. My 
question is to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. He should know this. 
It’s his government signing the cheques, Mr. Speaker. For the 
1.7 million extra dollars taking kanban training from on-site to 
off-site, where was the off-site Japan kanban training and why 
did it cost so much more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we had engaged with the work of JBA 
initially, at the outset of embarking down the four-year contract. 
We’d also used JBA and other contractors, consultants for other 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that early on in this work, we 
did send officials to Seattle to visit places like the Seattle 

Children’s Hospital as well as Virginia Mason, Mr. Speaker. 
That is my understanding of where those meetings would have 
taken place. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: was 
Seattle the only place where Japan kanban off-site training took 
place, Mr. Speaker? Who went on that training, and why did it 
cost $1.7 million? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can 
tell the members of the House that this government, when we 
looked to further deploy lean throughout the entire system, we 
wanted to look at other high-performing systems, health 
systems and other industries, Mr. Speaker. That’s been a part of 
the learning opportunity that we’ve had in places like Seattle, 
Mr. Speaker, but as well as the Mayo Clinic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m now pleased to be able to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Mayo 
Clinic has signed on to our fellowship. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
have an opportunity to learn best practices from organizations, 
Mr. Speaker, that I think are highly regarded in not only health 
care but other sectors in terms of their work on quality 
improvement, reducing errors, reducing waste, and finding 
efficiencies within the system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answers are not clear. 
But this is what we know so far, Mr. Speaker. This government 
paid John Black a whole lot of money in the lead-up to handing 
him a $40 million cash cow contract. The RFP for that massive 
four-year contract was tendered in July of 2012. The contract 
between the Health minister and John Black was signed at the 
end of August 2012, but they backdated it, Mr. Speaker, to May 
1st, two months before the RFP was even tendered. My 
question to the Premier: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we, as I’ve indicated before, had worked with JBA, 
John Black and Associates, Mr. Speaker, in looking at how to 
deploy lean throughout the entire health care system, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there was individual projects signed in 
2011-2012 that would’ve related specifically, for example, to 
the children’s hospital 3P projects, that would allow us to move 
that project forward, Mr. Speaker, in a more efficient and 
effective way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also the contract to look to how to 
deploy strategic deployment throughout the entire health 
system, Mr. Speaker, something that obviously JBA had 
experience with in other organizations, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why we, Mr. Speaker, wanted to deploy this throughout the 
entire health system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to date, Mr. Speaker, I think what this has shown us is that 
this has shown us a path for improving quality, improving 
efficiency within the system, Mr. Speaker, and focusing on 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6117 

patient safety, which I think all people of this province should 
expect from government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the Premier. 
They signed the contract at the end of August, Mr. Speaker, but 
then they backdated the contract to May 1st, two months before 
the RFP was tendered. My question to the Premier: why was the 
contract backdated? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
this was what we chose to do in terms of wanting to deploy lean 
throughout the entire health care system, knowing, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will be the first to admit, that lean wasn’t first, in fact, 
brought to the province by this government. In fact a $400,000 
contract was signed by the NDP government in the Five Hills 
Health Region in 2006. That continued on in 2007. 
 
We then looked, Mr. Speaker . . . When we formed government 
we saw, Mr. Speaker, that there was a lot of benefit to this. Mr. 
Speaker, we thought that this was something that we wanted to 
improve upon and see if we could further find some efficiencies 
within the health care system, knowing, Mr. Speaker, like all 
jurisdictions, that we need to come to terms with what I think 
will be lower increases in terms of the health budget as what we 
are being used to in Canada, Mr. Speaker. But that means that 
we need to find a more efficient system. We need to focus on 
patient quality and patient safety, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what 
lean is bringing to the system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these answers do not make sense, 
and the Premier’s unwilling to state why they backdated the 
contract. 
 
The government entered into a massive contract with the 
American lean consultant, a consultant that even senior 
administrators say lacks respect, tattles on leaders if they dare 
question, gossips, and undermines, Mr. Speaker, and an 
American lean consultant whose quality of training has been 
blasted by front-line health care workers as well as senior 
administrators, Mr. Speaker, because they say the training isn’t 
even based on adult teaching and learning principles. 
 
And now we find out, Mr. Speaker, that this government — it’s 
a bit of a surprise to the minister, it sounds like — but this 
government paid the same toxic consultant to pitch himself and 
do the initial planning. Now this government, Mr. Speaker, they 
tailor made their lean contract for John Black, even though the 
Health minister has admitted John Black doesn’t even tailor his 
approach for Saskatchewan’s needs. It’s absolutely ridiculous 
and it is an absolute waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. If government 
desperately needed a high-priced lean consultant, why wasn’t 
there an actual competition? Why did they pay John Black fat 
stacks of cash before they gave him the fat cash cow contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there 
was a competitive process that did lead us to hiring John Black 
and Associates, Mr. Speaker. But there were initial work that 
was done using other consultants, but as well including JBA, 
prior to entering into a four-year contract, Mr. Speaker. That 
was all work that we had contracted, Mr. Speaker, using JBA, 
as members opposite had used other consultants, including the 
$400,000 that they agreed to in 2006. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I can say is when we look to improve 
the health care system in this province, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
looking at ways of making a more efficient system, making 
improvements in quality care and in the service that we deliver, 
Mr. Speaker, not unlike what leading organizations such as the 
Mayo Clinic are trying to do, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had an 
opportunity to have a conversation with the Mayo Clinic, Mr. 
Speaker. They are on this path, Mr. Speaker. I think if it’s 
between, choosing between the path of the Mayo Clinic and the 
path of the NDP, I think the people in this province know the 
path that this government’s going to take. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Standards in Care Facilities 
 

Ms. Chartier: — It’s so frustrating, Mr. Speaker, to keep 
finding out about even more money shovelled into the pockets 
of this government’s toxic American lean consultant, especially 
when we keep hearing shocking and heartbreaking stories about 
what’s happening to seniors in care facilities. Talk about 
misplaced priorities. 
 
This week the Premier was asked about restoring specific, 
regulated minimum care standards and he said, “This might be a 
change across the country. The pendulum might swing back to 
more specific standards.” My question is for the Health 
minister. Why is this government so concerned about what it 
perceives to be the trend across the country? Why isn’t it 
listening to the stories that are coming forward here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly I am listening to those stories, and when I have an 
opportunity to meet with families, Mr. Speaker, when I have the 
opportunity to hear first-hand from them, certainly this is 
something that we take very seriously. 
 
I can tell the members opposite we do look at this issue very 
seriously. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in long-term care facilities in 
this province, we monitor, I can tell the public that we monitor 
seven quality indicators. As a comparison, Mr. Speaker, Ontario 
monitors only six. Alberta monitors only one, and in fact the 
ministry has recently been contacted by Alberta Health to look 
at what in fact we do monitor and how we monitor that 
information. 
 
So I will say, Mr. Speaker, while there is more work that we 
need to do to improve the care that we provide in long-term care 
and to address, Mr. Speaker, some of the concerns that have 
been raised, Mr. Speaker, I think in part it is important for me to 



6118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

say that there are in fact other provinces that are looking at what 
Saskatchewan does in terms of monitoring in long-term care, 
Mr. Speaker. And we are pleased to share that information with 
those provinces. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Here’s what the BC [British Columbia] 
Seniors Advocate has to say: “It is vital that we have care 
standards, that we have regulations. And if you look across 
Canada, Saskatchewan is a bit unique in the approach that it has 
taken.” The BC Seniors Advocate says Saskatchewan is an 
outlier in that we have only extremely general guidelines for 
seniors’ care. So the Premier and the Health minister should 
stop waiting around for some pendulum to swing. They should 
realize that we are far behind other provinces. 
 
To the minister: why is it so hard for this government to admit it 
made a mistake when it got rid of regulated minimum care 
standards in 2011, and why won’t it bring regulations back? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I haven’t had an opportunity to speak with the BC 
Seniors Advocate. In fact from the coverage that I’ve seen, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not exactly sure what she’s referring to. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we have looked at a copy of BC’s home and 
community care policy manual and, Mr. Speaker, my opinion 
— and I believe the ministry’s opinion as well on this — is 
when you compare our special care home standards, our 
guideline policy document, and the BC home and community 
care policy manual, in fact, Mr. Speaker, ours is in fact more 
detailed than what is in place in British Columbia. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure exactly what BC’s advocate is referring 
to. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, what’s more important is in terms of 
monitoring in long-term care, it’s not just monitoring that’s 
important. It’s the action that needs to take place, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in 2006-2007, 
5,623 seniors in care fell while in care. What was done at that 
time, Mr. Speaker? I can’t find anything. What took place 
though was in 2011 we put forward a falls collaborative, and 
since that time we’ve seen a 25 per cent reduction in the number 
of seniors that have fallen in long-term care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Internal documents show that the Health 
minister’s own chief of staff said this government’s guidelines 
for seniors’ care are “good but extremely general.” The internal 
documents show that he kept asking officials if there was 
anything more specific. A senior official wrote back, “I do not 
believe there are more specifics unless that is done at a regional 
level.” 
 
But this week the Premier says the government would only 
consider more specifics if the pendulum across the country 
would swing in that direction. Well, other jurisdictions already 
have specific regulations in place. To the minister: what’s this 

government’s next excuse going to be? Why won’t it just 
regulate minimum quality of care standards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member opposite 
from Saskatoon, when he sat at the cabinet table, I wonder what 
the excuse was when in 2006 the province of Saskatchewan 
reported that 5,623 seniors in care fell. What was the response 
at that time from the government opposite? There was no 
response, Mr. Speaker. Not an enhancement in terms of 
front-line staff, not a falls collaborative, not a policy that was 
put in place, Mr. Speaker. And the numbers show that. 
 
The average was 5,600 a year, year after year after year. In 
2011 this government took this seriously. The minister put in 
place a falls collaborative, and since that time that number 
averages 4,400 — 1,200 less a year than when the members 
opposite were the government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
approach that we take. Unlike the members opposite that do a 
lot of talk, this government’s about action. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that cut 
minimum quality of care standards. We had them until 2011. 
 
The BC Seniors Advocate also says that it’s important for the 
government to be able to monitor how care is being delivered. 
But we know that is not happening here in Saskatchewan. An 
internal email from a senior official to the minister’s office 
says: 
 

We typically don’t receive specific reports from regions 
regarding how they are managing the day-to-day care that 
they provide. To some degree, even if we did, we really 
don’t have the internal capacity to manage all that 
information and to analyze it. 

 
So not only do we have just extremely general guidelines in 
place, but this government isn’t even paying attention to the 
day-to-day reality in care facilities. To the minister: how is that 
acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 
know that the NDP removed from the Act the ability for the 
ministry to inspect long-term care homes in 2002. Why? 
Because they stopped inspecting homes back in 1996, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the record of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
record of closing 1,200 beds, of not properly staffing long-term 
care facilities, of closing 19 facilities across this province. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. I recognize the minister. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what this government has 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6119 

done in its approach is look to renew long-term care facilities, 
Mr. Speaker, 15 across this province. We’ve added front-line 
staff, 750 full-time equivalent for the same number of residents 
as were when the government changed in 2007. We’ve added 
funding, $10 million, Mr. Speaker, that will add over 700 pieces 
of desperately needed equipment for beds, for mattresses, for 
lifts and slings and tubs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is work that we have engaged on on this side 
of the House. This is where, Mr. Speaker, I think it shows a 
greater priority on seniors’ matters. And that is just what we’ve 
done on long-term care, Mr. Speaker, not to mention what 
we’ve done on personal care home subsidies, on the seniors’ 
income plan, Mr. Speaker, on a whole host of areas which were 
ignored by the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — After hearing from Margaret Warholm’s 
family, from Emily Krushelnicki’s family, from Jessie 
Sellwood’s family, and from the Santa Maria care aids, all just 
in the last several days, it is shocking that this government still 
has its head in the sand when it comes to the seniors’ care crisis. 
These are not isolated stories. 
 
To the minister: how many heartbreaking, tragic stories does he 
need to hear before he will finally recognize that we need 
regulated minimum quality-of-care standards? We need 
appropriate number of staff that are actually on the front lines, 
and we need a seniors’ advocate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
well again I will just, I think, point out the record of this 
government as a comparison to the members opposite when 
they had the chance to fix these problems. While we will say 
that there’s more work to be done, I think what it shows on this 
side of the House is that we’ve put in place actions, Mr. 
Speaker, to improve this, opposed to what the members 
opposite proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look back when the members opposite were the 
government of the day, and the only thing that I can tangibly 
point to, what they thought was a fix for seniors’ care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, was to dramatically increase the rates 
seniors were paying in long-term care to the point where a 
senior would have to go on welfare to be able to afford 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. That’s the approach of the NDP. 
 
That’s not the approach that we take on this side of the House. 
We’re building more long-term care facilities. We’re adding 
new capacity to the system in terms of staff, in terms of 
equipment, Mr. Speaker, and in terms of the support that seniors 
that don’t reside in long-term care, the support that they deserve 
and receive from this government. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 

Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 
2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 166, 
The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 167, 
The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments 



6120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations 
Administration Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 168, 
The Government Relations Administration Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 168, The Government Relations Administration Act, 2014. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before orders of the day it is my pleasure to submit 
supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for a message from the 
Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 
estimates November of certain sums required for the 
service of the province for the 12 months ending March 
31st, 2015, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. Hon. Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Please be seated. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to questions 522 through 527. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 522 to 527. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Support for Local Businesses 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my honour to be here this Thursday to start off this week’s 
75-minute debate. Today’s topic is about buying local and 
supporting our local Saskatchewan manufacturers. There’s a 
couple, you will know, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve brought in a 
couple of bills or the opposition has brought in a couple of bills 
in this session, and we’re really hoping that the . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The member isn’t sitting that far from me, 
and I cannot hear a word she is saying. If you have 
conversations, please take them outside of the Assembly. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much again, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you for trying to listen carefully to what I’m talking about 
today. We know this is an important topic and is something that 
is worthy of consideration. 
 
As I indicated in my opening comments, our opposition has 
introduced two bills in the House, private members’ bills that 
we think are very worthy of supporting, and we’re really 
hopeful that this government will see fit to support these bills. 
There isn’t really anything controversial about them at all. 
 
The first bill is our buy-local day bill and the second bill is a 
bill entitled the procurement bill. I should get the right name for 
it, Mr. Speaker. It’s An Act to encourage the Patronage of 
Local Businesses, Suppliers and Services. That’s Bill 607. And 
Bill 608 is An Act respecting Fairness for Saskatchewan 
Businesses in Government Procurement. 
 
And certainly we heard some interesting ways this government 
does procurement this morning, Mr. Speaker, when we hear that 
they would produce an RFP for a massive contract for 
efficiency programs in health care, and they already had 
decided who the recipient of that RFP would be and actually 
backdated the contract to prior to the RFP process. So that just 
shows kind of a concern about how this government is doing 
procurement, and certainly we’ll have more to say about that in 
this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just a few points initially about the buy-local bill. It’s Bill 607. 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6121 

We’re encouraging government members to support this. What 
it does is it just says the first Saturday of every month is Buy 
Local Day. Nothing controversial, nothing threatening, nothing 
scary, and I think it just really means that we support our local 
businesses and we show that local business is important. 
 
There’s a number of reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that for every $100 spent at a local business, $73 stays in the 
province. That just makes good sense, Mr. Speaker, and it 
shows that we should be encouraging our local businesses and 
encouraging people to shop local. Now we know that for every 
$100 spent in an out-of-province business, only 43 stays in the 
province. So less than half stays in the province. We know that 
our leader went out, he consulted, he talked to local business 
groups and he’s actually listening to their concerns, and unlike a 
government here that just listens to their friends and insiders. 
 
I just want to share with the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 
things that are going on, actually this weekend, on November 
29th. As you know, our neighbours to the south are celebrating 
Thanksgiving this weekend and there’s a new trend happening 
in the United States and it’s called Shop Small. And there’s a 
hashtag if anybody wants to check it out on Twitter. It’s called 
#ShopSmall. And this is . . . Actually I’m having difficulty with 
the loud voice of the member from Walsh Acres. So it’s 
difficult to make my point, Mr. Speaker, when he’s hollering at 
one of my colleagues. But at any rate, I guess he needs to get 
something off his system so we’ll let him continue to beller 
over there. 
 
But what I would like to talk about is what’s happening in 
America on Saturday, and it’s also happening here in Canada. 
In the United States of America it’s a program called Shop 
Small. It’s sponsored by a large, large corporation called 
American Express which is I think somewhat ironic, but I guess 
they accept American Express cards in small stores in 
neighbourhoods in the United States. But the byline of this is: 
 

Be Part of An American Story, shop small in your 
neighbourhood on November 29th. 
 
[It says] The story of America is written in every small 
business. It’s written in the cafes where we meet our first 
loves. And in the boutiques where we buy our babies’ 
clothes. On Nov 29, be there for the businesses that are 
there for you to help write the next chapter. 

 
So I think that’s a good approach that the United States has for 
an annual event on November 29th. 
 
We also have a corporation here in Canada who has started their 
own version of the Shop Small and it’s called Shop The 
Neighbourhood, and this is sponsored by the Yellow Pages 
Group. So what it says here on some of the information that I 
found online: 
 

Shop The Neighbourhood is a Yellow Pages Group 
initiative, a campaign to encourage local shopping and 
support for small businesses culminating in a local 
shopping day on November 29th [2014]. 

 
[11:00] 
 

It’s taking place obviously during the busiest shopping weekend 
of the year in the States and the busiest shopping season of the 
year. Shop The Neighbourhood raises awareness of the 
large-scale push from retailers online across the borders which 
moves dollars away from the small businesses, which directly 
impacts the health of our neighbourhoods and our communities. 
 
So these are some really interesting initiatives, I think. And 
certainly the shop local bill that we’ve introduced supports that 
and just merely asks that we, as a Legislative Assembly, 
recognize the importance that small businesses play in the 
economies of our towns and of our cities and of our 
communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I live . . . In my riding is 
one of the best shopping districts probably in the province, if 
not in Canada, and it’s the Broadway district. The Broadway 
Business Improvement District works very hard to promote the 
local businesses, and there’s several dozen local businesses 
about a block and a half from my home in Saskatoon. And it 
certainly is one of the reasons why I chose to live in that part of 
the city, Mr. Speaker. I can walk. I can walk to the grocery 
store. I can walk to cafes. I can walk to clothing stores. And I 
can walk to shoe stores and coffee shops. 
 
So it’s something that’s really important to the people that live 
in my neighbourhood in Saskatoon Nutana, and it’s certainly a 
lifestyle choice that we make when we purchase property there. 
And I’ll have to say, Mr. Speaker, the property prices are not 
cheap and a large part of that is because it’s such a desirable 
location to live — the proximity of a wonderful shopping 
district of local businesses, interesting businesses. I talked last 
week, when I made a few comments on the bill, I talked about 
The Better Good which is a good example of a store on 
Broadway Avenue that really makes an effort to purchase and 
retail locally made products and also products that are green, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if you go on the Facebook page for Shop The 
Neighbourhood Saskatoon, it’s hosted by the Broadway district, 
and it talks about why they’re doing this. And they said this is 
“an event to promote local commerce . . .” “Shop The 
Neighbourhood is a free national initiative of Yellow Pages 
which supports small businesses and reminds Canadians how 
local shopping makes a difference in all of our lives.” They go 
on to say, “Small businesses are our economic backbone, they 
create jobs, funnel funds back into the community, keep 
decision-making power localized, and generally contribute to 
building healthy, striving neighbourhoods.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members and all people 
who are going shopping this weekend to go on Twitter and take 
advantage of these buy-local, Shop The Neighbourhood days. 
In Saskatoon the hashtag is #shopthehood. The United States 
hashtag is #ShopSmall. And this is all happening right here this 
weekend, on November 29th, across Canada and across the 
United States of America. 
 
So again this kind of bill is one that really helps as a Legislative 
Assembly, as a government to tell local businesses that they 
matter, to tell local businesses and local consumers that 
supporting local stores and businesses is something that should 
be honoured, something that should be respected, and that we’re 



6122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

encouraging people at least once a month, on the first Saturday 
of each month, to think about it ahead of time and maybe shop 
local. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, when I grew up in a small town, there was 
some key institutions in a lot of small towns that really make a 
difference to the lifeblood and economy of that town. In my 
hometown, you know, when I grew up, there were at least two 
banks, maybe three; there was at least two grocery stores, 
maybe three. And the ones that are left — and you will see this 
throughout the communities throughout Saskatchewan — we 
still see the credit union is there and the Co-op. And these are 
locally owned, community-owned businesses that support the 
people in their banking needs and also in their grocery store and 
hardware and gasoline needs. 
 
That’s a story that’s repeated across Saskatchewan. People are 
proud of those local institutions and they support them and they 
buy local, and I think that’s something that we want to continue 
to encourage. And there’s nothing wrong with the Legislative 
Assembly like this encouraging that by just setting aside the 
first Saturday of every month as a Buy Local Day — simple, 
easy, encouraging, positive. And there’s absolutely no reason 
for this government to not support this bill. 
 
I went on the Internet and found some information about why 
buying local is important. And it’s from the TIME magazine 
actually, from 2009. It says: 
 

At the . . . basic level, when you buy local more money 
stays in the community . . . “That means those purchases 
are twice as efficient in . . . keeping the local economy 
alive.” 

 
There’s an interesting quote here from David Boyle who is the 
New Economics Foundation researcher, and he says, “Money is 
like blood. It needs to keep moving around to keep the economy 
going.” And that’s the end of the quote. 
 
The article goes on to say when money is spent somewhere else 
— at the big supermarkets or non-locally owned services like 
online retailers, he says, “It flows out, like a wound.” 
 
So certainly this article in TIME magazine supports why 
buy-local campaigns are very, very important functions. And 
when we have a campaign . . . I mean people buy local. I’m sure 
all the members make an effort to buy local in their 
communities. That’s what we do. We’re community-minded 
people, and I think on both sides of the House that’s something 
we take very seriously. But when you have a campaign or 
elevate the discussion at the level of a piece of law, then what it 
does is it brings the . . . It’s like a reminder to the community. It 
alerts the community that there may be gaps in the local market 
and that if you want to keep your economy alive and thriving, 
that you should make an effort to support those local 
businesses. 
 
And certainly I mean, I remember that discussion growing up as 
my small town was starting to lose stores and lose banks and 
lose grocery stores. And you know, the idea of supporting your 
local economy is something that’s critical in a lot of smaller 
communities here in Saskatchewan and, I would think, across 
Canada. 

And of course, shop local is not just limited to small 
communities. It’s also important in places like Saskatoon on the 
Broadway district where we support those local stores and, you 
know, go to Jimmy’s coffee place, Museo, on Broadway 
Avenue where he selects the beans himself from a buyer that he 
has a personal relationship. He goes and visits the farms where 
he buys the coffee beans, Mr. Speaker, and he actually roasts 
them right locally in his store. And it’s some of the best coffee 
in Saskatoon for sure. Although, to be fair to the other 
Broadway merchants, there’s a number of fabulous coffee 
shops, including the Roastery with Vince and Aileen Barilla. 
And their kids grew up with my kids and played soccer 
together. Their manager, Jennifer Lee, is a good friend and now 
through the relationships we built, we go skiing together. 
 
So there’s all kinds of benefits to shopping locally that go way 
beyond the economics of it as well, you know. And it’s like, 
you think of the TV show King of Kensington where the lead 
star was known by everybody in the community and those 
relationships get built up. 
 
Just to touch very briefly, Mr. Speaker, on the second bill, and I 
know other of my colleagues will talk about it as well. It’s 
about procurement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the concerns that 
have been raised to our leader by business communities here in 
Saskatchewan about being shut out of contracts. This is 
something that’s very concerning, and many of them are being 
forced to lay off workers now as a result of being shut out of 
these contracts. 
 
In my own experience, Mr. Speaker, for many years — well a 
long time ago now, 25 years ago — I was a seasonal worker. I 
worked as a tree planter. And a friend of mine runs a tree 
planting company. He’s been in the business for 30 years now. 
And the current procurement policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan has significantly damaged his business in Big 
River. 
 
And as we know, Big River is a community that has suffered a 
lot through the downturns of the softwood lumber industry, and 
there’s a lot of difficulties in that community. People are having 
to go work out of the community in places like Fort McMurray, 
and there’s a shortage of good labour positions in the Big River 
community. 
 
And when we see the procurement policy enabling large-scale 
tree planting companies from Ontario come in and snap up all 
the work simply because they had the lowest bid, there’s no 
account being taken in by this government of the impact on the 
local economies where these small businesses have operated for 
decades, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s shameful and I think it’s 
concerning. And I think it shows that when this government 
says Saskatchewan first, I don’t think they really mean it, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s an easy slogan to throw up on a billboard, 
and it’s an easy way to sort of try and tell people that they care 
about Saskatchewan. But when you see these kinds of 
procurement policies, you know Mr. Speaker, that this is not 
helping Saskatchewan people. 
 
This procurement process that they have right now, it’s lazy. 
All they do is they open the bids, look for the lowest bid, and 
that’s the end of it. It doesn’t take into any account other things, 
other factors that are important. We know that Saskatchewan 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6123 

businesses need a level playing field. And we know that other 
provinces do the same. 
 
So why is this Premier so excited to be the champion of free 
trade when it isn’t working and other provinces aren’t getting 
behind him in that parade? He’s a cheerleader, but there’s 
nobody behind him, Mr. Speaker. And I think Saskatchewan 
businesses are hurting. And I think at this point, I’m running out 
of time, so I want to make sure that I make the motion. And I 
would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to support The 
Buy Local Day Act and The Fairness for Saskatchewan 
Businesses in Government Procurement Act as tangible 
steps to support local businesses and put Saskatchewan 
first. 

 
I make that motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly calls on the government to support The 
Buy Local Day Act and The Fairness for Saskatchewan 
Businesses in Government Procurement Act as tangible 
steps to support the local businesses and put Saskatchewan 
first. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is an interesting 
debate to be part of because we know and we’ve heard from the 
member opposite some interesting information for sure. 
However, I would have to propose that what’s happening in this 
province already, clearly from what we’re hearing from CFIB 
[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] and from our 
own statistics, is that this government is in fact recognizing that 
the economic engine in this province is small business. 
 
And we’re also looking at the fact that as the province is 
growing, we are taking these small businesses, their products. 
They’ve increased their capacity to provide services and goods 
to this province not just at the local level, but we’re talking 
about through the government procurement process as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, one thing that should be focused on, and we started 
back in 2006 during the campaign and 2007 after we got 
elected, is that those people who take the risk — the small 
business, the ones who are medium-sized businesses to expand 
to large-sized businesses — they wouldn’t make those 
commitments unless they felt that this province was ready to 
take that leap of faith. 
 
And the government of the day in 2006, we know for a fact was 
driving business out of this province through high taxation 
rates, through not looking at and listening to those men and 
women who were working in this province to make a 
sustainable living for themselves and their families by 
providing goods and services, taking those risks to start up and 
then to expand. 
 

One thing we do know, Mr. Speaker, is that this government 
saw that there was a need to consult, broad-based consultations, 
talking through the chamber of commerce and CFIB as to what 
we could do to ensure that those businesses already in place 
could not just survive but could thrive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one thing we heard loud and clear is that, through the 
chamber of commerce and CFIB, is that the status quo on 
business taxation for small and medium businesses wasn’t 
going to happen, shouldn’t happen, wasn’t going to make this 
sustainability possible. Because if we were to lower taxes, those 
same dollars could be reinvested into those small companies, 
medium-sized companies to expand at their own risk. I might 
add, Mr. Speaker, so they could in fact gain the potential 
opportunity to then procure or be part of the procurement 
process for the province. And one thing we do know is that we 
see that we have businesses already supplying to Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? The member from Athabasca sits in his 
seat and chirps, talking about that we haven’t done enough for 
this province now that we have all this, all this growth. Well I’ll 
tell you what, Mr. Speaker: it takes a lot of gall to say that, 
knowing full well he was part of the government, part of the 
cabinet table that discussed taxation, discussed what they could 
do to keep, you know, nickel-and-diming the small businesses 
in this province, the mom-and-pop operations who had saw 
their families, their sons and daughters leaving this province at 
record numbers to do business in Alberta because there was not 
a favourable environment in this province at the time. You 
know what? Which is really disappointing that he would now, 
you know, sit in his seat and tell us that we’re not doing enough 
when clearly he had the opportunity at the cabinet table before 
the 2007 election to do that. 
 
So what this government has done, Mr. Speaker, is we have 
taken the consultation. We have taken the advice from CFIB 
and from chambers of commerce, from municipalities as well, 
talking about how to make this particular part of our, you know, 
economic engine even better. So what did we do? You know 
what? We looked at the red tape that this province had through 
legislation regulations that was hindering, hampering, tying the 
hands of those businesses, those same Saskatchewan-grown 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, that wanted to take part in the new 
economic prosperity that was started in 2007. So to do that, we 
were able to look to them for advice. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, things like the taxation rate 
of small, medium businesses, dropping that from 4.5 per cent to 
2 per cent, I can say for a fact that in Prince Albert when myself 
and the local MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] met 
with our chamber of commerce, that was the best thing we did 
to drive local businesses: their expansion rates, the opportunity 
to in fact reinvest those dollars, to hire more women and men, 
hire more of the students that were in our city as well, and area, 
Mr. Speaker, to again take part in what was happening in the 
economy in our province, not just local but provincial as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And you know what? We heard that from members of the 
chamber of commerce who were business people, who were 



6124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

chartered accountants, who told us that it was about time, 
because they saw their businesses that they were working for as 
accounting businesses reinvesting those dollars clearly because 
they saved money. It wasn’t just going in their pockets for their 
own profit; they were putting money back in businesses to 
expand and hire more staff, Mr. Speaker. And that was very 
important. 
 
So those are the kind of things that a government should do: 
take advice, take direction from those women and men on the 
front lines in this particular economy who are talking about 
being able to provide more jobs and increase the economic 
engines that are already there and driving the economies locally 
and provincially. 
 
So yes, Mr. Speaker, a government listened. The government 
listened and took steps to make those things happen. So what 
happens now is we’re seeing in fact that, you know what? We 
have the highest concentration of small businesses in the nation, 
with 97 small businesses per 1,000 people. And I would like to 
think, in fact I can make a bold statement today that I would 
believe that none of those businesses would take those chances 
unless they knew that they could benefit from buy local already, 
Mr. Speaker. Clearly that’s opportunity for them. They 
wouldn’t risk that at all to get into a business and then to think 
to themselves, well how are we going to make our living? We 
have buy local already, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For a government to have to support or put in an Act, a law, to 
demand that is ludicrous. We’re taking away the basic common 
sense principle of the women and men in this province — 
myself, my family, my friends — who at every opportunity buy 
local. Yes, they do, Mr. Speaker. I do that all the time. And we 
see those local businesses again giving back to communities 
through charitable donations. 
 
I was just at a ribbon-cutting ceremony along with the members 
from Prince Albert Northcote, Rosthern-Shellbrook, Sask 
Rivers as well, talking about the Pineview Terrace Lodge and 
care facility, and the Minister from Rural and Remote Health 
was there as well. Clearly we saw local donations not just meet 
but exceed what was asked in a very, very short time frame — 
just a number of weeks, Mr. Speaker. That tells you that these 
businesses that gave that money and families who own 
businesses saw that it was a good thing to give back to the 
community. But they did so because they are seeing that they in 
fact can make a living, make profit in this province as 
locally-run businesses, and that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
We should never just simply think that we have to put a law in 
place demanding that people spend money locally when in fact 
we’re seeing that happen, not just in my riding or in my city of 
Prince Albert but in other cities and communities large and 
small alike in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, one other thing we should look at is that, the 
procurement piece that the members opposite talk about. That 
seems to be the driver for this impetus, this need for this 
legislation for some reason. You know, in 2013-14, the 
three-year procurement average of goods and services tendered 
to executive government by Sask businesses was 81 per cent. It 
was a 12 per cent increase compared to the three-year average 
from 2006-07. Interestingly that is when that opposition party 
was in government. So clearly we’re seeing evidence to the fact 

that we in fact are seeing procurement in this province for local 
businesses is rising. And again to the point, we’re seeing, CFIB 
tells us in their reports that there is a new positive outlook: 
businesses are not just only, are starting in this province, they’re 
actually expanding. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, and there’s an interesting survey that 
was done back in February of 2014. One of the questions was, 
how confident are you that your provincial government has a 
vision that supports small business? Sask ranked first, Mr. 
Speaker, out of all the provinces in this country. 
 
Businesses in Saskatchewan are most likely to report 
confidence that their provincial government has a 
small-business-friendly vision. Get out of the way — that’s our 
motto. Let businesses thrive. We will remove red tape; we’ll get 
out of the way. We’re not going to put in more laws to demand 
that we have a buy-local day. Clearly we want to support 
business generation, start-ups, and expansion. 
 
You know what? How likely would you be to recommend 
starting a business in your province, from current members of 
CFIB to new people. If I was to . . . and I’m going to be leaving 
government in the future . . . You know what, Mr. Speaker? The 
trick is, how likely would it be for me to maybe start a business 
in this province, again, first again, Mr. Speaker, first amongst 
all the other provinces in this country? That tells you this 
government has the policies in place, has the rules in place, 
removes red tape. And so we can in fact see businesses start, 
thrive, survive, and make themselves committed to this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s actually . . . I’m really 
pleased to enter this debate here today. And this is a good one 
for the people of Saskatchewan and I know it’s sort of a 
encouraging sort of discussion. You know, we all need to 
recognize that there’s tremendous strength in our province by 
way of our resource economy, by the incredible entrepreneurs 
of this province, by those that invest and create jobs in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, and the hardworking people of our 
province. And if we look at the period of time for which we’ve 
experienced a boom, Mr. Speaker, we see a lot of opportunity in 
this province. 
 
But this debate here today is about talking about, how do we 
further strengthen and diversify that economy, and how do we 
extend that opportunity for the long haul? How do we make 
sure that we can take the current position and build from some 
of the strength and extend that opportunity and make sure that 
we’re stronger over the long haul, balancing and providing 
strength to that economy? And these are really important 
pieces. 
 
I thought the comments from the member from Nutana as it 
related to the Buy Local Day and that initiative and the 
importance of it and that culture of buying and supporting local 
were really, really good points. I thought her conversation about 
how she interacts with the main street businesses of her 
community and our province, and those entrepreneurs who are 
innovative, who are making investments and really creating 
vibrancy to our communities as well . . . I always think that the 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6125 

main streets in many ways, of a community, create the — fixing 
my collar here, Mr. Speaker — create a sense of vibrancy and 
quality of life that’s important to all of us. 
 
And I know, whether you’re in a small town or whether you’re 
in the downtown or whether you’re in those pockets of 
commerce within each of our communities, it’s those people 
that build relationships with the community and bring forward 
products that we should really be doing our best to celebrate 
and to support. And you know, I really never want to be within 
a community for which you didn’t have that strength of main 
street small business, those entrepreneurs who are providing 
opportunity. And we know it’s good economics as well because 
we know that when you put a dollar into a small business, the 
return back to the broader community is significant. 
 
So I’m really proud of the piece of legislation that was put 
forward on the buy-local legislation. I want to recognize 
Sasklandia and their leadership, a really impressive group of 
entrepreneurs who are speaking to ways that we, as a province, 
can be stronger for tomorrow and, quite frankly, more vibrant 
as well. And I think in many ways it’s these small businesses, 
these entrepreneurs who create a point of pride for our 
community, a quality of life that will assist us to be as strong as 
we can be over the long haul and to retain many of those people 
that might have located and moved to Saskatchewan over the 
course of the last decade, for example, because it’s those quality 
of life factors that are so important. 
 
So the buy-local piece is common sense. It’s good economics. 
It’s a good celebration of the impressive entrepreneurs, the 
small businesses in our province, and it’s something that 
certainly we should all be supporting. And really, one day is 
symbolic and important, but it’s in many ways what you’d want 
to drive is a culture of change in some fronts and a recognition 
of how important it is to support those local entrepreneurs and 
to build thriving main streets and hubs in our cities and our 
towns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m also really pleased that we’ve entered the discussion in a 
meaningful way as it relates to the flawed procurement policy 
of this government, the flawed trade policy of this government, 
to make sure that we’re levelling the playing field for 
Saskatchewan businesses and, importantly, ensuring better 
value for taxpayers. And right now as you would know, Mr. 
Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is really out of line with 
the rest of the provinces or most other provinces who have 
different sorts of policies that level that playing field and 
recognize the importance of those local companies. 
 
And you know, when you look up at the manufacturers in this 
province, when you look at the construction companies in this 
province, what you need to recognize is not only that that 
company that’s here, which is very important, and the 
leadership and the ownership that’s here and investing in 
Saskatchewan, but they’re also investing in capital, investing in 
land, investing in infrastructure, and hiring people, Mr. Speaker. 
And when they’re hiring people and creating that employment, 
that’s incredibly meaningful within our communities. It’s the 
fabric of our neighbourhoods in many ways, those individuals, 
those workers then that have employment here in 
Saskatchewan, who are paying property taxes, who are paying 
income taxes, and who are also probably doing some buying 

locally, Mr. Speaker, and doing all the other things they are 
within the community, whether that’s being involved in the 
sports, culture, and activities from all other fronts. 
 
So it’s about making sure that we build on opportunity as a 
province. The current process that the province follows is 
simplistic. It’s naive. It’s out of line with the other provinces, 
and it puts Saskatchewan companies at a disadvantage. And it 
just doesn’t make any sense to have steel manufacturers in 
Saskatchewan in layoff mode, reducing workers when there’s 
this unlevel playing field and a door that’s open to the rest of 
the world to come in and take those contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all we’re calling for is a levelling of that playing field with 
a more sophisticated process, a process that would certainly put 
Saskatchewan people first, that would also level the playing 
field for those businesses but also put some protections in place 
on these processes. For example, when we’re talking about the 
legislation that we’ve put forward, there’d be a better analysis 
as well. It wouldn’t just be the simplistic initial price that the 
current government’s looking at. There’d be better recognition 
of the quality of that good or service, the product history, the 
supplier experience, the warranty, the delivery schedule. 
 
And I think of even something that maybe, you know, this will 
improve things, not just to ensure better local participation but 
better protection for taxpayers. And I think of this whole 
wasteful debacle with the smart meters through this Sensus 
outfit from the United States, Mr. Speaker, where millions of 
dollars have been wasted and where people’s lives and property 
have been put at risk. Had these simple measures of this 
procurement policy, this legislation we’re putting forward here 
today been in place, I suspect that government would have 
never been able to go forward with a manufacturer that had fire 
issues going on at that same very time in Philadelphia. 
 
These are very important issues, Mr. Speaker. And when we’re 
talking about procurement, it’s most important of course that 
you’re deriving best value for your taxpayer, for the public, but 
it’s very important that we have a level playing field and 
recognition that it makes a heck of a lot of sense to have local 
companies engaged in the delivery of our infrastructure. It’s one 
of the reasons as well that we’re concerned with the approach of 
this government when it comes to these bundled P3s 
[public-private partnership], and we listen to the Saskatchewan 
construction industry when they state concerns with the 
potential impact or likely impact of shutting out Saskatchewan 
construction companies. 
 
So when we’re using public dollars and public projects through 
our Crown corporations and through the government, it makes 
sense that we make sure we derive better value for taxpayers, 
and it makes sense that we level that playing field and 
strengthen ourselves economically. Because as I say, we have 
tremendous strength as a province through our resource 
industry, through our resource revenues, through the 
exceptional entrepreneurs and leaders in this province in small, 
mid-size, and large businesses in this province, and very 
importantly by the incredibly hard-working people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s where the strength of our province comes 
from. 
 
But we should be taking this opportunity of strength, this boom 



6126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

we’ve had, and not just simply be hands off and cheerlead as we 
see with this current government in selling out the interests of 
Saskatchewan people. We should be taking that strength and 
actually building, building strength, building diversity for the 
long haul, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s going to allow us to 
maximize the opportunity that we have before us as a province. 
 
Far too often I see this government far too willing to sell out the 
interests of Saskatchewan people and businesses, this complete 
hands-off, laissez-faire approach with a bunch of cheerleading 
over things that typically they’re not directly involved with, Mr. 
Speaker. What I think we need to rightfully do is put the credit 
where it’s deserved, some of which is totally outside our 
control, our resource wealth, Mr. Speaker, and then the 
exceptional business leaders, entrepreneurs in this province, and 
the hard-working families. And then for government, their role 
and responsibility is to build from those circumstances, in this 
case build on those opportunities and build a better future for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And this is very critical on the economic front. These bills are 
very much about building a stronger, more balanced, more 
diversified economic future for Saskatchewan with vibrant main 
streets and strong, thriving local businesses. It’s also a matter of 
acting in the interests of Saskatchewan people and companies 
and not selling out, not acting like Boy Scouts when it comes to 
trade, Mr. Speaker, but acting in a way that puts the interests of 
Saskatchewan people and businesses first. 
 
It’s my pleasure to enter the debate here today, and I hope that 
we have the support of . . . 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Next speaker, please. I recognize the member 
for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
certainly is an opportunity to stand up and talk on this particular 
bill. And I find it rather ironic that this is presented by an NDP 
opposition that actually drove out more business out of this 
province than they ever attracted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who 
introduced the bill and started speaking on this is a proponent of 
it, and yet she’s talking about this shopping program that’s in 
the United States. She’s talking about the local shopping in the 
’hood in Saskatoon. Well I would like to encourage local 
shopping too, as long as it’s all in Moose Jaw because that’s my 
local area. 
 
We have to be very careful when we start talking about local 
shopping because local can be a variety of different things. 
Local for a manufacturer is much different than local for the 
local coffee shop. So I think the whole premise is rather a 
misunderstanding on their part and a lack of understanding on 
what we are doing as a government in the business sense, and it 
really reeks of ignorance on what’s happening in this new 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course we want to encourage local purchasing and shopping 
locally, but we have to define what local really means because it 
could be municipal community or it could be provincial. It 

could be even nationally across the nation as far as local, 
depending on the product, depending on what the market is 
asking for. 
 
But supporting local shopping really is talking about building 
an economy, and that’s where everybody wins. When you’ve 
got an economy that is performing well, that’s when the local 
initiatives in all aspects of business are doing well. 
 
And our government is strong in building our economy. 
Building an economy is supporting business. It eliminates the 
barriers for any kind of growth. Lowering taxes — business 
taxes, corporate business taxes, all small business taxes — is 
part of building economy. Hiring more people, bringing more 
people into the province, building economy — that creates 
more local business and supports local businesses. 
 
When you have more people investing in the province, more 
businesses being formed, more businesses being expanded, 
you’re hiring more people. More employees are having 
families. They’re shopping for groceries, for clothing. They’re 
building schools. That’s all part of the economy. It’s all part of 
local. And in every point in Saskatchewan, every location in 
Saskatchewan has seen some benefits from a stronger economy. 
And that’s really what this should be all about is, how do we 
keep the economy of Saskatchewan moving forward for the 
growth of all people concerned? 
 
The NDP’s idea of economy growth is let the children grow up 
and then have them move out of the province. At least that was 
their policy for decades when they were in power. It’s hard to 
sustain economy or local businesses if you have no people 
coming in. And that’s exactly what . . . But our government 
certainly supports the local businesses. This government 
supports local growth. Businesses investing in business is really 
what it’s all about. 
 
We encourage the growth through our population. We’ve 
attracted expats to come back to Saskatchewan. We’ve engaged 
in the foreign workers recruitment. One of the biggest things is 
the graduation retention where we keep young people in the 
province working, growing businesses, and moving in that 
respect, to think of business opportunities and consequently 
developing businesses and hiring more people. We promote job 
creation. We have created a business atmosphere for employees 
to be attracted into our province. The lower personal income tax 
helps those that not only own business but the workers 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the local economy, local buying, 
that’s what chambers of commerce do. They encourage local, 
encourage business developed in their own communities. They 
promote business through networking and different resources 
that they may have. And they make recommendations to us as 
government as what is good for business. And we listen to that 
because that’s the essence of all Saskatchewan is small 
business. They may talk about Christmas store-hours or offer 
business-related presentations to their members. This is part of 
building their community, but this is not what our government, 
what government, the provincial government is about. 
 
The place of government is not to look at telling people where 
to make local purchases. It’s develop that atmosphere of 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6127 

business development and encourage business to promote here, 
and it grows the economy, thereby helping smaller businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at, even just in Moose Jaw, by just 
attracting K+S to set up a new potash mine just north of the city 
has been a tremendous benefit to Moose Jaw and the entire area, 
Regina as well. K+S was one of the businesses that was drove 
out of this province by the NDP government when they took 
over the potash industry, but they’re back, Mr. Speaker, and the 
president of K+S says they’re back to stay. Why? It’s because 
we’ve got an atmosphere for business development, to 
encourage business in this province, and they’re there. 
 
What does it mean? Well it means bigger housing developments 
in Moose Jaw as well as Regina and Bethune and all the area 
around there. We’ve got other places like Lynco that have 
started businesses in support the potash industry. And there are 
numerous other benefits as far as stores, expansions, schools, all 
those kinds of things that we have to do because there’s a 
bigger population. And it all comes from developing that 
economic base in our province and obviously leads out into the 
business sector. 
 
This government supports local businesses and purchasing 
business with our Small Business Week. We have the Red Tape 
Awareness Week, Women Entrepreneurs Week, Co-op Week. 
There’s challenges for sure, absolutely, but that’s why we try 
and promote business. One of those aspects is Priority 
Saskatchewan. It was brought in just to protect the interest of 
our Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the Saskatchewan business and 
continue to work with them on a variety of avenues. One of 
those is what’s happening this very week with Manufacturing 
Week. This week we focus on manufacturers in Saskatchewan 
and celebrate Saskatchewan’s manufacturing expertise. The 
success of businesses in our communities throughout the 
province is achieved, and we celebrate them with the training 
opportunities, the career opportunities that are presented in 
Saskatchewan simply through one sector in the manufacture 
area, and that’s only one sector. 
 
Manufacturing has become a key component to Saskatchewan’s 
unprecedented economic growth. And that’s just part of what 
we want to promote in Saskatchewan, part of building an 
economy, part of the purchasing powers that the people of 
Saskatchewan have, and they do a lot of it right here locally. 
 
When we talk about manufacturing, in 2013 the shipments of 
manufacturing was $13 billion to the Saskatchewan economy, a 
great influx of business which employs a lot of people. Between 
2003 and 2013, Saskatchewan manufacturing exports grew 
from 2.5 billion to 5.5 billion. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
unprecedented across Canada but we should encourage that. So 
that’s some of the things that this government is doing just 
supporting manufacturing. 
 
We’re doing more for the farming sector. We’re doing more for 
the resource sector, all to build an economy that supports 
everyone in the province. And we, to define it and specify that 
we have to have a local business, a promotion day, really takes 
away from the whole aspect of an entire province doing well. 
 

And when you’re talking about buying locally, the other thing 
you have to remember that if somebody from another town 
comes over and buys something from your store, are you going 
to tell him, you can’t because this is buy locally day; you have 
to go back to your own? I don’t think so. The whole idea is to 
build the economy and build it on every aspect. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Another thing that’s happening this very week is Agribition is 
on. And that attracts 800 foreign buyers from all across the 
world to come into Saskatchewan. Do we tell them that, well 
we’re buy locally, we don’t want to sell you, to sell to you? No, 
I don’t think so. We want to encourage everybody. We want to 
build this economy. And that’s really what this whole thing is 
about, building a strong economy where everybody can grow, 
can participate and benefit from the growth that we see in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t support the motion that was 
made by the opposition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to offer my support to the 
motion that is being proposed. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important 
that the motion itself, in terms of suggesting and promoting a 
buy-local day, I think that some of the issues that are really 
important and near and dear to some of the small businesses in 
our communities would really appreciate this kind of 
recognition and of course this kind of support. 
 
The other thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, is the sound procurement policy that we’ve been 
advocating as an opposition. I think our leader and our deputy 
leader have done a tremendous job in reaching out to these 
organizations that are promoting Saskatchewan. And they’re 
doing their very best to make sure that they get advice from 
them and they get direction, and that they bring forward a 
legislative agenda that makes sense and a plan that really 
supports local businesses throughout all of our communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I find amazing in some of the stats, 
some of the stats that were shared in our caucus room, Mr. 
Speaker, is that for every $100 that is spent locally, for every 
$100 that is spent locally, $73 stays here. And that’s a really 
important fact that people out there ought to know, Mr. 
Speaker, and something that the Saskatchewan Party 
government should know. And for every $100 that is awarded 
to out-of-province contracts, Mr. Speaker, a paltry $43 stay 
within our local economies. So it’s really important to note, Mr. 
Speaker, that it makes sense, it makes sense to really promote 
and to strengthen a buy-local effort, really important to promote 
and strengthen the whole procurement practice so that 
Saskatchewan-based businesses can benefit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we often talk about the importance of 
strengthening Saskatchewan’s economy for years and years to 
come. We in the opposition clearly know that the Saskatchewan 
Party government inherited all the boom and the growing 
population and this great economic time. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows that, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not the point. 
The point is everybody knows that what we’re advocating on 
this side here is to ensure that governments do the right thing. 



6128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

The basic principle and tenet of a good, solid government is to 
make sure that they recognize three important factors that I 
think need to be recognized here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Number one is we have to have an exciting private sector 
opportunity provided in the province, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
to invite corporations, large corporations. We have to invite 
small businesses, Mr. Speaker. And some of these efforts, 
procurement policies and the shop-local day, Mr. Speaker, 
being proposed by the opposition through this motion, does 
exactly that, Mr. Speaker. We think we have to make sure that 
they continue spurring on economic activity, investment, Mr. 
Speaker, and really make Saskatchewan a safe place for many 
people to invest, large or small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you look at some of the stats, Mr. Speaker, that 98 
per cent, 98 per cent of Saskatchewan’s businesses have less 
than 50 employees, Mr. Speaker, so they make up for a 
tremendous economic opportunity for Saskatchewan. And from 
our perspective as an opposition, the buy-local day taps into that 
sentiment and encourages the small local businesses that are out 
there that are working hard each day. And sometimes they don’t 
get the recognition of the large corporations, Mr. Speaker, but 
certainly they’ve done their part. And, Mr. Speaker, small 
businesses throughout our province really, really do a lot of 
work, not only in creating jobs but paying taxes and vitalizing 
our communities all throughout our land. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we look at the notion of 
how shop locally is valuable to the local industries, Mr. 
Speaker. You can see the fact that 98 per cent of our businesses 
in Saskatchewan have less than 50 employees, and they do offer 
a tremendous value to our economy overall and to our 
communities and of course to their employees in the service 
that they provide. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So it’s important to note that within the opposition we believe, 
to build on this economy, you have to focus on local and small 
businesses as well. You cannot be negligent in some of their 
efforts. And, Mr. Speaker, between having an exciting private 
sector, an exciting private sector that invites investment from all 
throughout the world, Mr. Speaker, you also have to have a 
focus on the small-business community as well. We understand 
that, and that’s the reason why today we’re proposing this 
motion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also have to make sure that the 
Saskatchewan Party government sticks up for 
Saskatchewan-based businesses. And that’s one of the reasons 
why our deputy leader has been critical of the government’s 
lazy process, the government’s non-visionary effort on their 
procurement policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have heard from a company called Weldfab. They’ve been 
in the news a number of months ago, and they’re talking about 
the fact that they’re losing jobs because the Saskatchewan Party 
government can’t find the time to figure out how best to protect 
their interests when it comes to providing service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we have leadership from the 
government to protect Saskatchewan’s interests, Mr. Speaker, 

as opposed to just appearing to do so. That’s exactly the point 
that we find when you look at the buy-local day that’s being 
proposed in this bill, and also the fact that we think we have to 
have some sound procurement policy that take into account 
Saskatchewan-based businesses, that someone has to defend 
them, Mr. Speaker. And somebody that should defend them 
should be their own government, Mr. Speaker, but we see that 
the Saskatchewan government has failed. The Saskatchewan 
Party government has failed miserably on that front. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing 
this particular company in the news decrying the fact that the 
government has not done enough to support their local 
businesses. And they don’t want special treatment. Nobody 
wants any special treatment, Mr. Speaker. But this particular 
company, they want to be able to be on the level playing field, 
to be able to compete for Saskatchewan-based contracts as 
opposed to be thrown under the bus because the government 
could not figure out how to do the procurement policies 
properly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why we look at, when you talk about an exciting 
private sector, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have that in 
Saskatchewan. We New Democrats understand that. That’s the 
reason why we’re proposing this bill today. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to have sound 
procurement policies that is focused on and that our companies 
can depend on when it comes to awarding contracts for 
Saskatchewan opportunities. And that’s what’s really important, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we see these particular areas that are 
lacking from the Saskatchewan Party side, and that’s why, as an 
opposition, we consult, we ask for advice, and we bring forward 
ideas of this sort. And, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the notion 
that’s, why should we have buy-local day, Mr. Speaker? As I 
mentioned, for every $100 we shop locally, 73 stays right at the 
local level as opposed to $43 when it’s a 
non-Saskatchewan-based company that we give the business to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s also really important is that if you 
look at the notion when we talk about the three components that 
I often mention, and the fact that having an exciting private 
sector, having sound Crown corporations that provide good, 
affordable service to families and to businesses and, Mr. 
Speaker, having a professional, dedicated labour force that 
we’ve had throughout the province, those three pillars, Mr. 
Speaker, those three pillars of having an exciting private sector, 
of having functioning Crown corporations that provide 
affordable service to people, and of course having the dedicated 
and professional labour force, those are really important aspects 
of a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. And on all three fronts we 
see the Saskatchewan Party again failing miserably, and it’s a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons as the opposition when we think 
about the history of the people that brought in all the investment 
— and I’m talking about some great leaders like Eldon 
Lautermilch, like Maynard Sonntag, like Lorne Calvert, Roy 
Romanow, Eric Cline; the list goes on, Mr. Speaker — as to 
how those people worked very hard to bringing about a good, 
sound investment policy for Saskatchewan. And today, Mr. 
Speaker, we see that investment pay off in dividends. And 
that’s why it’s important that we in the opposition continue 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6129 

telling the people of Saskatchewan, we need to make sure the 
economy stays strong for years to come and every single effort, 
whether it’s a solid procurement policy design or whether it’s a 
buy-local day effort, all adds to the net sum of making sure we 
strengthen Saskatchewan’s economy for years and years to 
come. Every effort must be undertaken. Every stone must not 
be left unturned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again I’ll point out in my closing comments that one of the 
biggest challenges we’re going to face, Mr. Speaker, is the 
growing tax bill being created by the Premier’s pricey projects, 
their triple P attitude, Mr. Speaker. That’s going to hurt 
businesses because you’re . . . [inaudible] . . . going to be 
paying more taxes for all these projects that are being 
announced, and that increases debt. So increased taxes, 
increased debt is going to hurt our economy for years and years 
to come. And that’s thanks to the Premier who likes to have all 
the attention showered on him. And guess what? Somebody 
else is paying that bill. And, Mr. Speaker, that is also a 
challenge to the economy of Saskatchewan, and we really need 
to do something to address that particular issue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll wrap up my comments by saying I applaud 
the effort by our leadership on this side to talk about local 
businesses, buy local, and get the procurement process figured 
out. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into debate on this important motion in front of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Give you a little bit of background: I 
come from a business-minded family. We had a small business 
growing up in Esterhazy. It was a plumbing and heating shop. 
So I’ve been kind of exposed to, growing up, what it was like to 
be in business under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to prepare for this debate I thought — you know what? — 
probably one of the best indicators of future behaviour is past 
behaviour, and I’d like to hear a little bit more from actual 
business owners what it was like to be operating a business 
under the NDP. So, Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to talk to a 
friend of mine up in Saskatoon, Rick, and he had this to say 
about just . . . We talked about the motion, but I preambled it 
with him as that the NDP wants to help small business. And he 
kind of had a double take and he said, “I don’t trust them. They 
will never change their ways. You’re kidding me. That the NDP 
thinks things were better for small business under their 
government. I don’t trust them.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was the sentiment when they started talking 
about what the NDP did to small business in this province. He 
continued, “How do they think we will believe them now? They 
chased all the business owners away in the ’90s. Now they want 
us to believe they want to help? Forget about it.” Mr. Speaker, 
that is the experience of actual business owners in 
Saskatchewan that had to compete against the government in 
business. 
 
I also talked to Rodney. After explaining the motion, that the 
NDP would like people in Saskatchewan to buy 12 times a year 
locally, it was pretty profound what he said. And so this is what 

the NDP wants: that you buy locally once a month, so 12 times 
a year. He said, “What about the other 354 days of the year?” 
Mr. Speaker, think about that. Why isn’t the member from 
Regina Rosemont shopping more than just 12 times a year 
locally? 
 
He went on to say, he went on to talk about, the NDP wants to 
help small business. Rodney was, you know — not to get too 
partisan into this debate — but he kind of wanted a context 
thing. You know, how did the NDP do in other parts of 
government? And he wanted to ask, you know, how do they 
help in health care in this province? And the question is, you 
know, poorly, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately what we inherited in 
health care was a pretty good indicator of how the NDP 
managed this province. We had the longest wait times in 
Saskatchewan’s history. We had shortages of nurses and 
doctors. 
 
Rodney went on to ask, you know, how did they manage the 
debt in this province? They drove it up, Mr. Speaker. Rodney 
went on to ask, how did they manage with taxes? Well we all 
know that we paid the highest taxes in the Dominion of Canada 
under the NDP. They starved the highways budgets. They drove 
mass exodus of people out of the province. They left a 
destructive infrastructure deficit that we’re still dealing with, 
Mr. Speaker. This is how the NDP managed things in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, the leopards can’t change their spots. 
The last place you want the NDP is anywhere near the policy of 
the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This was a dark time in our province. A lot of people had to 
leave, and one of the people that had to leave was my brother. 
He graduated from engineering from the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan]. He’s out in Calgary right now, and he’s doing 
pretty well for himself. He’s an engineer. He’s a partner in a 
junior oil company. 
 
And I gave him a call last night and I said, you know, got this 
speech coming up, a debate about how the NDP would manage 
things if they ever got back in power. And he said, don’t let it 
happen. And it was like, it was bad, and it drove him away. And 
my brother was like, you know what? In their shop they were 
talking to some of the senior members of that company and they 
said . . . You know, I asked him how did they view 
Saskatchewan? And he said, you know what? They used to 
think that, “Abandon hope, all ye who enter here.” That is what 
business thought of investing in Saskatchewan under the NDP. 
I’ll re-quote that, “Abandon hope, all ye who enter here.” That 
is what outside interests thought of investing in Saskatchewan 
under the NDP. 
 
And you know what? That’s not that long ago, Mr. Speaker. 
That was in the ’90s. Once again, best indicator of future 
behaviour is past behaviour, Mr. Speaker. And we all know 
what happens when the NDP forms policy. It’s bad for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The second part of the motion is on procurement, and this is 
important, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province need to 
understand the hole in infrastructure that we inherited under the 
NDP. They starved every part of this province for 16 long 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

We’re making those investments in the capital across the 
boards, and we’re starting to see some improvements. But let’s 
look at what the brain trust of the NDP and the cabinet of the 
day . . . It included the member from Saskatoon Centre, Regina 
Lakeview. They were members of that cabinet. And how did 
they look at procurement? Mr. Speaker, they introduced the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. Well what did that 
do to the province? It drove up cost. It drove business away. 
 
And that was an interesting one. I had the chance to talk to my 
dad about that. And being a small shop in town, he wasn’t 
unionized, and he couldn’t bid on any of the work because of 
the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went on to talk to my dad about how business 
was in the ’90s under the NDP, and he said it was stark. He 
talked about working long hours. And it wasn’t to provide for 
the family; it was to provide to the government. That’s a sea 
change philosophy over here as we don’t think business should 
be out there working so hard and investing in and growing their 
business for the benefit of governments. They should be doing 
it for themselves, their ownerships, and the investors in their 
company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talked to another business owner from Yorkton and he said, 
“For 16 years I hated competing against my own tax dollars.” 
Mr. Speaker, we have a long list of failed NDP investments 
from NST [NST Network Services of Chicago] Chicago to . . . 
My favourite one is Clickabid, a failed Internet auction 
business, $3 million. That’s their local policy. Coachman 
Insurance, an Ontario company, lost 17.2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to look. How the NDP really feels on 
business can be summed up in one sentence, “I liked the 
product so much, I bought the company.” Look no further than 
the failed nationalization of the potash industry. They liked 
business so much locally that they took companies away from 
their owners. That’s the ultimate buy-local NDP campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s local businesses that drive this economy, and 
if they would like to learn a little bit more about the NDP 
policy, all they have to do is go into their website and find out 
everything that they would like to know about the NDP. 
Unfortunately there’s no real policy on that website. 
 
You spend a little time, you’ll be able to . . . Search real hard, 
you’ll be able find, however, the Regina Manifesto. This is the 
heart and breathing document of what the NDP are. What was 
the prime goal of that document? Was to eradicate the system of 
capitalism and replace it with a planned economy of socialism, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the NDP. They would eradicate capitalism 
in this province. And somehow the voters of Saskatchewan are 
supposed to believe right now the leopards changed their spots. 
Now they’re all for local business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately I believe this province is smarter. We saw it in 
the 2011 election. I think we’ll soon hear from the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in less than two years, what they think about 
this leopard that has not changed their spots, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, if you want to look at . . . 
 
[12:00] 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Manufacturing has become an important part of our economy. 
The total value of Saskatchewan’s manufacturing shipments for 
2013 was approximately 15.2 billion, a new record for the 
province, up from 14.2 billion in 2012. On this side of the 
House we recognize the value of manufacturing industry and 
see the highly skilled workers that it has brought to our 
province. 
 
The NDP has no plans about how to help the manufacturing 
sector because they have no plans for the economy. In fact they 
have no plans and no policies on anything. To the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana: Saskatchewan’s economy is strong. Our 
province has a plan to keep the momentum growing. Why 
should the people of Saskatchewan trust a party too timid to 
present its plan to the province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks to the member for her question. We know how important 
it is to support local businesses. I’m very proud of the work that 
our leader has done in this area, coming forward with positive 
proposals in this Assembly, positive ways to support 
Saskatchewan business and to truly make Saskatchewan first, 
not like what we see this government doing at all. 
 
I think it’s shameful what we see this government doing, when 
you look at manufacturers themselves coming forward and 
saying, we’re getting killed here. And it’s because of the 
policies of this government. Also we know that we have people 
like Marilyn Braun-Pollon, on November 5th was tweeting in 
favour of the legislation. And are they telling us that this is 
something that they’re opposed to? How can they not support 
these bills, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, really pleased to have two 
positive initiatives on the table here today to increase the 
strength of our economy and support the local entrepreneurs 
and companies in this province who make such important 
investments in this province. My question to the member from 
Eastview is: does he support the Buy Local Day? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the member 
for the question. What I believe is we should support local 
business every day of the year, Mr. Speaker, not 12 times a 
year, Mr. Speaker. I believe we should lower small business 
tax, and that’s exactly what we did in 2011, from 4.5 to 2 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s how you support local business. And 
I say, I’m ashamed the member would allude that we don’t 
support local business. 
 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6131 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, our government will not be taking 
lessons from the members opposite when it comes to helping 
out local businesses on proper procurement and tendering 
practices. When the NDP were in government, they adopted the 
Crown corporation tendering agreement. This agreement 
required companies working on contracts with Crown 
corporations to hire 75 per cent unionized employees. That 
meant that non-union contractors would have to toss aside their 
own people and hire from a union-approved list in order to 
make a bid. This alienated many Saskatchewan workers and 
builders in small and rural areas, who were not able to work on 
their own local projects. That is the shameful record of the 
NDP. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why should the people 
of Saskatchewan trust a bill centred on business procurement 
from a government that went out of their way to cripple local 
business in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as the members of the Assembly 
know, the current procurement policy is not helping 
Saskatchewan businesses. We’ve had story after story after 
story where it’s failing Saskatchewan businesses, and it’s 
definitely not putting Saskatchewan first. The bill that we 
propose is a fair bill that will avoid the lazy procurement policy 
that this government currently has and take into account all of 
the things that are necessary to truly put Saskatchewan first. 
These people should be ashamed of not supporting this bill, and 
I do hope that they will turn around their attitude and support 
these two bills. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen all 
across the province the Texas-plated trucks with SaskPower 
stickers on the side, and then the whole debacle that ensued in 
this province with the smart meter mess, Mr. Speaker, and the 
wasted money and the safety that was put at risk. We know that 
there’s steel manufacturers that are in layoff mode instead of 
being able to have a level playing field for government and 
Crown contracts. My question to the member from Moose Jaw 
North: how could he not support an improvement to the 
procurement policy? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity 
to speak again because there’s a couple of things, and I’ve 
pointed it out. Mr. Speaker, in the last four months I’ve been 
traveling to different parts of the province talking to a number 
of manufacturers. Seventy-six, as a matter of fact, is the number 
that I have talked to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all that time, there wasn’t one manufacturer that 
had anything negative to say about the government. They have 
concerns. They have issues, and they’ll tell them to us. But at 

the end of all of their list of concerns, they will say, but we 
really appreciate the position of the Saskatchewan government. 
The Sask Party government is going . . . We like what they’re 
doing. It’s much better than what was being done under the 
NDP. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing better. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would be 
interested to hear what the NDP’s plan is for the economy 
instead of just getting piecemeal of proposed bills and 
fearmongering. Maybe they don’t have an economic plan for 
Saskatchewan because the past NDP government was so 
terrible at managing their own investments. They lost over 90 
million in Navigata Communications, over 40 million in Allstar 
Communications, 35 million in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company], and the list goes on and on. 
 
The total amount of taxpayers’ dollars that the NDP wasted was 
over 329 million. The NDP has a shameful track record of 
failed investments and wasted money. To the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana: can the people of Saskatchewan expect you 
to revert back to your old practice of competing, competing 
with local businesses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thanks to the member for his question. 
 
What I’m really interested in finding out is how many of these 
individuals will have the courage to support these two very 
important bills? They’re valuable bills. They’re positive bills. 
They’re feel-good bills. There’s no reason for these members 
not to support it. 
 
And certainly, we’ll want to let our colleagues in Saskatoon 
know and perhaps the member from Saskatoon Eastview that 
when I can tell his constituents that he does not support Buy 
Local Day, how bad is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think it’s 
shameful that he is not going to be able to support local 
businesses by supporting this bill, and I’m embarrassed to be in 
the constituency next to him. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s been interesting listening to some of the debates here, and 
it’s interesting one voice was not present in the debates. There’s 
an individual over on the other side that’s been appointed to be 
the czar or the wizard or the Mr. Fix It on procurement here in 
Saskatchewan. And so it was interesting that the member from 
Meewasin was not part of this debate, given that this is very 
much in his wheelhouse. I guess my question is to the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview. Why not? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. And 



6132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

when we’re talking about procurement, I’m going to look at 
what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got Priority 
Saskatchewan has now passed through over 90 meetings 
representing a broad spectrum of stakeholders including 
construction industries, trade associations, chambers of 
commerce, municipalities, and public sector organizations. 
 
Our colleague has been having those meetings. We’re working 
towards improving the procurement in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. But you know what? The best thing that we . . . We 
look at what the NDP has put forward and what we’re talking 
about. We’d also like to talk about the CFIB, and our colleague 
from P.A. [Prince Albert] spoke about how Saskatchewan did 
— so the same stakeholders and businesses that the NDP 
believe that are so against it. 
 
Right now in Manitoba, an NDP Manitoba, how likely would 
you recommend starting a business in your province? The NDP 
Manitoba — dead last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
member from Athabasca noted on March 26th, 2014, and I 
quote: 
 

Well of course the NDP want to make to sure that we 
manage our money well, Mr. Speaker. We want to make 
sure we manage our money well and not have any tax 
increases. That’s one of the fundamental points of building 
a good . . . economy . . . 

 
Yet at the most recent NDP campaign, they passed a resolution 
that states: “. . . an NDP government would ensure fair taxation 
on business and high income earners by increasing their amount 
of income tax.” Clearly your party still supports business-killing 
practices. 
 
To the member from Regina Rosemont: is the NDP prepared to 
release their plan on growing the economy today, or will they 
just continue to hurt small businesses through their tired and 
true method of overtaxation? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a bunch of 
bombastic sort of questions, revisionist history from members 
on serious matters to Saskatchewan companies. We need to 
build an education system that works for Saskatchewan people. 
We need to level the playing field for Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired. Time for the 
75-minute debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon 
Capture and Sequestration Project 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Eagles.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I am honoured to follow up on this proposed 
motion by my good friend, the member from Estevan, is putting 
through. And I’ll read it through here again as to what it is. This 
motion says: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 
commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 
capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 
is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 
the production of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further, its 
innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource 
industry which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very good motion, and I can tell you 
something about it. Back when this was originally announced, 
originally announced by the NDP, they thought it was a great 
idea to have it. But then in 2007, what did they do, Mr. 
Speaker? They cancelled it. They scrapped it. Their 
Environment minister sits there and talks about what a great job 
that they would do if they were in power. They actually went 
and scrapped it, Mr. Speaker.  
 
You know, and that’s the difference between the people on that 
side of the House and the people on this side of the House. Mr. 
Speaker, they talk lots, but when there’s action to be taken, 
what happens? It’s done by this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a government that plans and a Premier that plans on 
moving this province forward. 
 
Let’s go back and take a look at this, Mr. Speaker, back when 
Lorne Calvert was premier. Now this is according to the NDP’s 
own numbers: Saskatchewan’s emissions were 62 per cent 
above the 1990 levels. And Lorne Calvert is quoted as saying, 
“We have both a record we can not be proud of in terms of our 
emissions . . .” That was in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on April 
the 5th, 2007. So what did they do? They shut down their 
project for carbon capture at the Boundary dam. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great project. It’s known worldwide. I had 
the opportunity, I’ve had the opportunity actually to visit the 
project two times. I went there this spring when The Energy 
Council was here and the executive of The Energy Council 
went out. There was a senator from Wyoming was absolutely 
amazed. Now we all know that Wyoming produces close to 50 
per cent of the coal for the US [United States] power plants. 
And this senator was absolutely amazed that there was 
something there. He even said they were actually going to be 
appropriating money to look at some way of carbon capture for 
coal-burning power plants. And the catch was he said, we don’t 
have to reinvent the wheel. You’re doing it here. 
 
And at the grand opening, Mr. Speaker, there were people there 
from 20 countries, 20 countries to come and take a look at what 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6133 

is a world leader on carbon capture and sequestration. Mr. 
Speaker, it was amazing. Like, I mean, the Chinese were there. 
The Chinese are building a coal-fired power plants, one a week. 
They’re very interested in this, along with all the rest of the 
people all over the world. And that kind of a project the NDP 
shut down. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Now they’ve got four people over there that were cabinet 
members at that time, that are still on that side of the House that 
were cabinet members. What was their cabinet thinking? Here 
was a great project for Saskatchewan, and they went and shut it 
down . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . This thing, I think my 
partner here has said a problem. Probably right; they weren’t 
thinking because they don’t have a plan. And they’ve proved all 
along that they haven’t followed a plan. 
 
Saskatchewan is due to growth, is growing, is growing very 
quickly, Mr. Speaker, faster than it ever has, growing the 
population, growing the industries that are here. And we need 
constant, stable power. And most of our power, Mr. Speaker, 
comes from coal, and that’s a well-known fact. So the federal 
government is putting down regulations on, that are going to be 
coming up in 2015. And it’s going to be the maximum CO2 you 
can emit is 420 tonnes per gigawatt hour. 
 
This plant, this plant, Mr. Speaker, is going to produce only 140 
tonnes of CO2 per gigawatt hour. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
world-setting plant, and it’s right here in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s why it’s proving that the Saskatchewan Party government 
is literally light years ahead in things that the NDP could never 
even think of. Well, let’s put it this way. They would think of it; 
they just wouldn’t act on it. But that’s standard procedure for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but they did do some things. You know, they 
wanted to talk about the environment, how they’re going to 
protect the environment. I want to go back to what they did. 
They decided to get Al Gore to come up and talk about the 
environment. Yes, they got Al Gore, multi-millionaire, coming 
up here to talk about the environment. And SaskTel, our great 
telephone company here in Saskatchewan, the NDP decided 
that they should put in $208,000 to the cost of that event. Those 
four members that were sitting in cabinet, what were they 
thinking to have Al Gore come over here and tell us we should 
be shutting down all of our power? 
 
I’ve got news for you, Mr. Speaker: we have to have that 
baseload power. We had a group in here one time talking about 
how we should go all renewables. And I’m not going to say that 
we shouldn’t have renewables in the mix. But, Mr. Speaker, 
you know after the fellow was done talking, and talking about 
how they, you know, everything should be on renewables — in 
other words, wind and solar — I questioned him. I said, you 
know, California has a problem with power. And they have a lot 
of brownouts in California. But California’s actually relatively 
warm, so you know, if they get a brownout it’s not a real big 
issue. But you know something, in Saskatchewan in February 
when it gets down to 40 below, and we don’t have hardly any 
sunlight at that particular time, and when it gets to 40 below, 
the wind doesn’t blow. I asked him which rotating power 
outage would he want at his house? Because, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan needs baseload power . And they don’t only need 
baseload power for the households, it’s also for industry. 
 
One of the mining companies came and talked to us. And they 
said they lost $20 million, $20 million in productivity because 
of the simple fact that SaskPower had to call them up to tell 
them to slow down. They couldn’t, they did not have the power 
to operate in the middle of the winter at full bore. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we definitely need this power in this growing 
province which is moving forward. Going back to various 
different things such as the wind object which seems to be one 
of the biggest things that their Environment critic is coming 
forward with, you know, yes it can fit into the mix. But I can 
tell you right now that if you wanted to get rid of all of your 
coal-fired power electricity it would be disastrous. Your wind 
turbines would not cover hundreds of acres. It would not cover 
thousands of acres. It would actually cover hundreds of 
thousands of acres to have up wind turbines to run our province. 
And that is not a very good use of the land in Saskatchewan. 
And not only that, we have no way of really storing the power. 
That has not been developed yet. And people can sit there and 
say, well you can have batteries. Well, I’m sorry, the batteries 
have not been developed yet that you could possibly use. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana who is 
the Environment critic criticized the Boundary dam project 
because it was too expensive and unproven. Well I’ve got news 
for you. It is proven and it actually came in, Mr. Speaker, on 
budget. 
 
So when you go back and look at all these different things that 
have been done, this is a great project. Now you know I could 
sit there . . . The NDP wants to criticize everything, period. 
Like, I mean, they looked at lean and they said, ho, this isn’t 
working. Let’s just keep doing the same thing we were doing 
before. Well the same thing they were doing before, Mr. 
Speaker, was firing nurses, firing doctors, shutting down 
hospitals — just 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan plus the 
Plains. And there’s an acronym for that and it’s called CAVE, 
and it’s citizens against virtually everything. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know I wouldn’t want to be that critical 
of them — well maybe I would — but I’d rather call them 
de-growthers. Now de-growthers is a word, and I don’t know if 
many people have heard about that before, but de-grow is when 
you don’t want to have things move forward. And Eldon 
Lautermilch was a great one for that because he didn’t want to 
see any growth in Saskatchewan. You know, he claimed that 
the more people that left, then there’s more left for the rest of us 
here. Mr. Speaker, that is de-growth. 
 
When we are seeing this industry move forward, when we are 
seeing all of the things happening here in this province, the 
amount of manufacturing, new mines — you know, mines that 
the former NDP or mining companies the former NDP kicked 
out of Saskatchewan — now they’re coming back here again. 
They’re going to need power and they’re going to need power 
24-7. And the way that we can produce power 24-7 is with our 
coal-fired power plants. And with that technology, we also turn 
around and we can enhance our heavy oil recovery. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a win-win situation for this whole 



6134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2014 

province of Saskatchewan and Canada in general. Let’s face it; 
those poor people down east need our equalization payments. 
So consequently, you know, Quebec and Ontario, they’re kind 
of in a little bit of a bind now. 
 
But speaking of Ontario, they decided to shut down a bunch of 
their power plants and now they’ve got themselves in a real 
bind, Mr. Speaker. That’s fine. We don’t mind seeing the 
manufacturing moving out here to Saskatchewan. Who knows? 
Maybe some day we’ll have a car plant out here too. The one 
thing we won’t have is we won’t have box plants and we won’t 
have shoe plants like the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] government tried to run a number of years ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ve got, you know, there’s 
some of the earth muffins out there that don’t really like 
coal-fired power plants. We’ve got Greenpeace and the David 
Suzuki Foundation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sierra Club. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes, Sierra Club, various ones . . . Well I 
had to kind of chuckle here. I just happened to be watching on 
Sun News the other day and anyway they . . . David Suzuki 
flew all the way back from Malaysia just so he could go and 
support the sit-in over the pipeline over in Burnaby, British 
Columbia. Mr. Speaker, what a joke. Like I’ve got news for 
you. Jet planes don’t fly on solar. Well actually they do fly on 
wind in a sense but they’ve got to use power to get there. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the thing is about all these wind-fire power plants 
. . . And I actually was just reading a book on wind power, and 
in the US just to stop, just to hold what the CO2 is at the present 
time from power plants, they would actually have to build — 
without shutting a power plant down — they would have to put 
up wind turbines on an area the size of Germany every single 
year just because of the increase of power the people need in the 
US. 
 
And this is . . . Actually the member across the way is asking, 
which book? I could certainly give it to him to read if he’d 
really want it. I just can’t think of the name of it offhand but it’s 
a very good book and very interesting. And if the member’s 
interested, I think it would change his tune quite a bit. Mind 
you, I have to admit, the book doesn’t have any pictures in it so 
I don’t know how he would figure it out. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have to have this baseload power. And the 
way that we have baseload power within Saskatchewan is 
coal-fired power plants. This is innovative. It’s fantastic, and 
this is number one in the world. This government and this 
Premier have moved this province forward to innovation that 
has never been seen before in Saskatchewan since the days of 
probably Walter Scott. But, Mr. Speaker, when you look 
through all of these different things that are happening here, 
when you take the so-called environmental end of it coming or 
the rhetoric coming from that side how we can just operate on 
wind and solar, it does not work, Mr. Speaker, and it will not 
work in this province. 
 
You know, there’s an old saying. If the Internet goes down, 
you’re back to 1975 because the Internet is a great thing. But 
you know something, if the power goes down — which it 
would with wind and solar if we relied strictly on that — if the 

power goes down, you’re back to 1875, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
not a scene that I want to go to, and I don’t think anybody else 
in this province really wants to go and see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know what happens when the power goes 
out for only a matter of a few hours. And I can tell you right 
now that just even a few hours in the middle of our 
Saskatchewan winter is not good. I remember one time it went 
out back in Carrot River for a day when it was about 40 below 
— of course this was back when the NDP was in power — and 
it froze up. It froze up waterlines in a bunch of the houses. The 
cattlemen had all their stock troughs freeze up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, baseload power is what we need. We’ve got 300 
years coal supply within this province. Let’s find a good way to 
use it. We’ve got the cleanest power plant, the cleanest power 
plant in the whole world sitting right here in Saskatchewan, put 
in and invested into by this government. And I give the federal 
government some credit too because they invested in some of 
that. 
 
Not only that, since we’re using the CO2 for enhanced oil 
recovery, we’re turning around and we’re getting taxes out of 
that end of it too, making Saskatchewan a growing province, 
something that obviously the NDP never thought of. And 
especially . . . I had to kind of chuckle. The member from 
Athabasca was talking about Eldon Lautermilch and being, 
being one of the top people in Saskatchewan. And to come up 
with a statement such as what he did, you know, it’s got to be 
pretty embarrassing for them. 
 
And it’s got to be pretty embarrassing for them when they look 
across over here and see all these innovations happening, 
whether it’s lean in our hospitals, moving our hospitals forward, 
whether it’s, you know, actually building hospitals, building 
schools, building . . . hiring more nurses, hiring more positions. 
It’s got to be, it’s got to be pretty embarrassing for them to look 
across here. And I think the jealousy is probably even there the 
way they whoop and holler at times. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I guess I actually can’t speak for too long 
today because I’m going to be cut off, so we have an agreement. 
But I will, I do want to speak on this again in the spring sitting 
because there’s all sorts of things I can talk about, about the 
fantastic things that are happening in Saskatchewan, and 
especially with the Boundary dam project. So, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on motion no. 1. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



November 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6135 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. on 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6111 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6111 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6111 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6111 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6111 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6111 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6112 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6112 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6112 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6112 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6112 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Powerlifters Excel at World Championships 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6113 
 Camp Hope Opens at Montreal Lake 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6113 
 Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6113 
 Fundraiser Puts Faith and Values to Action 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6114 
 Sod Turned for Habitat for Humanity Builds in Prince Albert 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6114 
 Pimâcihowin 4Success Project 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6114 
 Seniors’ Care 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6114 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Expenses Incurred by Lean Initiative Consultant 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6115 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6115 
 Standards in Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6117 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6117 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6119 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6119 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6119 
 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6120 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Local Businesses 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6120, 6130 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6123 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 6124, 6130 
  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6126, 6131 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6127 
  Tochor ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6129, 6130 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6130 



 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6132 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6132 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project
	fix141127Debates.pdf
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project

	fix141127Debates.pdf
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project


