




















































Hansard: November 17, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 13B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5889 

 November 17, 2014 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume on 

Bill No. 147. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 

Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — All right, here we go. We’re getting revved up. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to welcome all of the 

people back, especially those who are tuning in who were at 

work this afternoon, who are watching this evening. It’s 

adjourned debates and we’re resuming debate on Bill 147, An 

Act to amend The Class Actions Act. 

 

And this is a very interesting piece of legislation. I started just 

prior to 5 o’clock. I just had a few minutes in before 5 o’clock 

talking about this. And so I have been taking a look at the 

Internet, looking for novel points of law. I really couldn’t find 

any novel points of law, so I don’t know what the lawyers are 

looking for with that. 

 

But I do want to take a minute and talk about this piece of 

legislation, and I do want to review just for a minute for those 

people who are just tuning in and for the folks up in the gallery 

as well. I know we have visitors in the gallery from the 

reception earlier; I want to welcome them as well to their 

House, their legislature. 

 

It’s an important piece of legislation that we have before us 

when it reflects on class actions. My colleague from Saskatoon 

Nutana gave a very learned, very thorough discussion about the 

history of class actions and how they were the norm starting in 

our British history of law back in the 1100s, 1200s when they 

were trying to figure out a way to have an effective, efficient 

way of delivering justice because we all know that justice 

delayed is justice denied. And if you have that kind of 

circumstance then that can lead to civil unrest, when we know 

that there’s common groups of people out there who are facing 

injustice and they look for redress from, at that time in England 

it would have been from the king or his representative. Because 

of this situation where there would be poor transportation, poor 

roads, poor communication, they had to make sure decisions 

were quick, effective and affected as many people as possible 

so they didn’t have to keep repeating the same type of decisions 

over and over and over again. 

 

This was the way to do it, was group law. And it was an 

interesting process I was not familiar with because of course we 

are more used to thinking about individual or independent law, 

individual law. 

And of course, interestingly, that came about through, whether 

it would be the industrial revolution in Britain; the rise of much 

more of the middle class, but independent individuals who 

wanted not to be grouped with others; the War of Independence 

in the States; and all of that kind of thing where maybe law 

became a little bit more sophisticated, and this kind of fell into 

not as much use as it had in the past. 

 

So here we are taking a look at class actions. And I think it’s a 

good discussion and we will have lots of questions for the 

minister. And I will take a minute in a few minutes to review 

his notes because, as I was saying, this Act only really talks 

about repealing section 40 of the old class actions Act and 

which, where we’re really talking about costs and how the court 

or the Court of Appeal will decide on cost. And it talks about 

four benchmarks: public interest, whether the action involved a 

novel point of view, whether the action was a test case, and 

whether access to justice for members of the public using class 

action proceedings . . . [inaudible] . . . and they needed a way to 

have access, and then the catch-all clause, any other factor. 

 

Interestingly it does talk about, the section applies to 

proceedings commenced and costs incurred before, on, or after 

the section comes into force. And so that is sort of the 

retroactive aspect. And we asked about why and we will want 

to know why is that in there and are there any limitations, 

because at this point, it doesn’t look like there’s limitations and 

that could be quite costly. What are the consequences of having 

no limitations on legislation like that? So we have a lot of 

questions about that. 

 

But I just want to take a minute to review what the minister had 

said and because it’s always very instructive to take a minute to 

review what he had said. And sometimes ministers can be quite 

thorough in their second reading speeches and sometimes not. 

And sometimes when they’re not, we have some real questions. 

And what they say or don’t say leaves a lot of room for us to 

have questions about this. 

 

And so of course he talks about and he stood on November 5th 

to introduce The Class Actions Amendment Act. And he talks 

about how it’s going to serve “. . . several important functions 

in our justice system . . . for more efficient use of court 

resources by consolidating similar matters.” And that’s true and 

that goes back hundreds of years. “Defendants can also benefit 

from class actions by defending multiple claims through a 

single set.” So it works for both sides, whether you are making 

a claim or you are defending against a claim, and then you can 

be dealt with quickly. 

 

Now he talks about when it was first introduced: “This was 

done out of concern that the threat of large cost awards could 

deter legitimate claimants from participating in class action 

matters.” It talks about how “Alberta and Nova Scotia class 

action legislation has demonstrated that a more balanced 

approach can be taken . . .” and how that’s important. It talks 

about balance and “. . . provides courts authority to award cost 

and class actions and appropriate circumstances.” 

 

And talks about the factors “. . . whether to award costs: the 

public interest, whether the action involves a novel point of law 

. . . [or that] the action is a test case, [and for sure allowing] 



5890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

access to justice for members of public using class action 

proceedings . . .” 

 

So he reviews those but doesn’t really illuminate or gives any 

more definition to what is the public interest, doesn’t really talk 

about what kind of actions are we talking . . . that might involve 

a novel point of law here in Saskatchewan, and whether the 

action is a test case. It would have been interesting if he had 

some examples because, as we know, in Saskatchewan we’ve 

had many instances of people coming together and demanding 

more justice. And we can just think of the residential schools as 

an example of people banding together and demanding justice. 

And that’s one example, but I think it would have been 

interesting to hear more from the minister on that. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, he talks about that the amendments “. . . 

will restore the discretion to the courts to control their own 

processes . . . while still addressing the unique access-to-justice 

concerns that arise with class action litigation.” So that was the 

extent of his comments. He doesn’t really add more to it. He 

doesn’t talk about who they consulted with and what were their 

concerns, doesn’t give any sort of grounding in what’s 

happening out there in Saskatchewan, what would cause these 

amendments to come forward. 

 

Now is this part of a national plan? He references Alberta and 

Nova Scotia but doesn’t say it’s part of the 

federal-territorial-provincial tables on law that might be driving 

this so things are uniform across Canada. If that’s the case, that 

would be helpful to know and then we might see some of those 

documents. So we don’t know, and there’s lots of questions that 

we’ll have about this. 

 

But I want to take a minute, I did talk about why this is a 

one-page Act. It’s pretty straightforward, repealing section 40. 

But in the old Act on page 20 is section 40, and I’ll talk about 

what is being changed that I think has some, causes further 

questions, for example when . . . It’s structured pretty much the 

same with 40(1) or section 1 and section 2. I’m not seeing, but 

I’m a non-lawyer, so maybe there are significant differences, 

but I’m not seeing a big thing. But one thing I’m noticing here 

that “A court mentioned . . .” And this is the old Act, in section 

40(2): 

 

A court mentioned in subsection (1) may award costs to a 

party respecting an application for certification or 

respecting all or any part of a class action or an appeal 

from a class action if the court considers that: 

 

(a) there has been vexatious, frivolous or abusive 

conduct on the part of . . . [the] party; 

 

(b) an improper or unnecessary application or other step 

has been made or taken for the purpose of delay or 

increasing costs or for any other improper purpose; or 

 

(c) there are exceptional circumstances that make it 

unjust to deprive the successful party of costs. 

 

So there are those three sub-parts, but they’re not anything like 

these five that are in the new one. So the old one talks about 

vexatious, frivolous, or abusive conduct. That’s not mentioned 

in the new legislation, so it will be lost. And I don’t know 

whether that’s a gain or a loss, if that’s negative or a positive. 

So I would be interested to hear from the minister about why 

the turnaround here, going from a negative to a positive. This 

one seems to be much more supportive of the claimant who’s 

making a case or the class action when they talk about public 

interest or novel point of law or a test case. That’s the new stuff, 

but the old stuff was saying that they take into account 

“vexatious, frivolous or abusive conduct.” So why, why the 

change about it? I’m not sure. 

 

Or: 

 

(b) an improper or unnecessary application or other step 

has been made or taken for the purpose of delay or 

increasing costs or for any other improper purpose.  

 

So those are the two. And then (c) is sort of the catch-all clause, 

there are: 

 

exceptional circumstances that make it unjust to deprive 

the successful party of costs. 

 

So it’s a significant change. It’s, you know, a bit of a 180 I 

think, in the sense of here we’re seeing the new Act as positive. 

And I agree with that, I think that seems reasonable, but it’s 

taking out some of the other stuff and I’m not sure why. 

 

So we have a lot of questions here, Mr. Speaker, about why the 

change? What caused it? Who were the groups that were 

consulted? What was the case law behind this that caused them 

not to worry anymore and to drop the issue of frivolous or 

vexatious claims? Maybe there’s a reason for that and now 

they’re moving towards more of a concern about the public 

interest and the novel point of law and the idea of a test case. I 

think those things are important. And access to justice of course 

is very, very important. 

 

But there’s questions because none of these things are defined. 

We don’t have the public interest defined, and we don’t have 

the novel point of law defined. We are pretty familiar what a 

test case is. We see that often at the Supreme Court and what 

that means because it’s establishing or clarifying points of law. 

So we have some real questions about that. And as I said, that 

this will be an interesting one to understand more fully because, 

as we see and as I mentioned, in terms of our new world, in 

terms of issues — whether it be environmental issues, consumer 

issues whether you’re buying a new car, a new house, that type 

of thing — these are huge, huge issues. 

 

And if this is going to help the delivery of justice, which is very 

important and that’s what the minister has said, we’re for that. 

But will it have unintended consequences because, for example, 

that section that talks about: 

 

. . . applies to proceedings commenced and costs incurred 

before, on or after this section comes into force”. 

 

So a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, on this piece of legislation. 

And I know that many of my colleagues will want to speak 

more fully on this because of the impact it has. We’ve had one 

of our colleagues give quite a good, thorough history of what it 

means in terms of class actions in the British law system. So I 

think this will be one that we’ll be paying a lot of attention to.  



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5891 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many other people will want to get 

into this debate and will want to have their thoughts recorded. 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to now move 

adjournment of Bill No. 147, An Act to amend The Class 

Actions Act. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter into debate here today as it relates to The Residential 

Tenancies Act, of course a very important piece of legislation to 

balance the rights of tenants and landlords and make sure those 

are . . . that all Saskatchewan people are served. 

 

And certainly this speaks directly to a very important area of the 

province, that being housing in this province. And I know that, 

you know, all members in this Assembly recognize the pressure 

and the need for housing within . . . right across our province, 

but certainly in certain parts of the province it’s even more 

exacerbated than others such as, you know, Weyburn, down in 

Weyburn for example or down in Estevan, Mr. Speaker, where 

actually there’s really an overheated housing market and a lot of 

pressure to find adequate housing for many. 

 

It’s a pleasure to have some of the regional college leadership in 

the Assembly here tonight. We had the chance to sit down with 

some of these leaders within our regional colleges here today 

just in the recess between the afternoon sitting and the evening. 

And certainly they’re leaders that run very important programs 

and colleges that are very nimble and responsive to both 

community and economic needs in this province. And I thank 

them for joining us here tonight in the Assembly and I thank 

them for the leadership they provide across our province in 

certainly allowing us to be all we can be from an economic 

perspective and a social perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact drawing on some of those conversations I had up there 

tonight with some of the regional college leaders, it was noted 

by some of them that one of the very important pieces that 

requires action is a focus on making sure that there’s housing 

within the communities — both for students but also for 

communities as a whole — to make sure that communities can 

be as whole as they can be, to make sure they have the ability to 

attract and retain individuals to provide the services and the 

roles right across the spectrum, and recognizing the big 

challenge that it is for many students to pay for housing or find 

housing in some markets across our province. 

 

When I look at this Act and the changes that have been brought 

forward, some of them look reasonable. What’s been mentioned 

is that the changes have been brought about as a result of 

consultation with both landlords and with tenants, and that’s 

important, and the Office of Residential Tenancies. This is 

important. 

 

But we know well enough with this government that when they 

say they’ve consulted, it’s not good enough to take them at their 

word. Because often what we see them do is introduce 

legislation, claim that they’ve consulted, but in the end bring 

forward flawed legislation that in fact stakeholders and those 

that they’ve said they’ve consulted actually take issue with. So 

what’s going to be important on our side to fulfill our role to the 

people of Saskatchewan as the official opposition and to make 

sure we’re advancing the needs around housing in a 

constructive fashion is for us to have our ears open and to listen 

to those stakeholders across our province when it comes to 

housing, and for us to engage directly, to listen to some of their 

perspective on both this piece of legislation but also to make 

sure that, given that this an opportunity to open up this Act, that 

government has acted in a way that is as impactful as possible, 

recognizing the unique opportunity to open up an Act and make 

changes. 

 

Some of the changes that are there, certainly the extension of 

the period of time for which a tenant can pursue their security 

deposit seems reasonable and a reasonable support back to the 

tenant to extend that period of time. It’s important of course to 

not look at that extension of time as some sort of a period that 

should be the common practice. Really when you’re talking 

about these dollars, that if they’re entitled to them as a renter or 

as a tenant, then they should be provided in an incredibly timely 

way. Because these are big sums of money that are tied up in 

housing at times and really can be a challenge for families to 

come up with those security deposits. But also if they’re out a 

security deposit, they deserve to receive those back in a timely 

fashion. 

 

Some of the other changes that I see here change the eviction, 

the period for which somebody could be evicted, changing it 

from one month to two. And there’s a host of reasons for that 

change and a host of circumstances for which that eviction 

could occur. Certainly the extension there at first blush would 

seem to be a positive piece and one that would make sense. The 

question is, is two months the appropriate length of time? Is that 

enough time for someone in this housing market — a very 

difficult one — in this case a renter? Does two months really 

provide enough time for a person or a family to organize their 

next step? 

 

And I’m not sure that it is when I look at it and when I think 

about it. Because certainly the one month was entirely 

inadequate. But if you think of some of the housing markets and 

challenges to actually find housing, whether it be in Regina or 

Saskatoon or Estevan or Weyburn, it is extremely difficult at 

times to find a place that’s safe, that’s secure, that’s dignified, 

and that’s affordable, Mr. Speaker. And many of these folks 

that we’re talking about that could be evicted would be, you 

know, this is the case that they might be evicted because the 

landlord might be choosing a different use for that property. 



5892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

And that’s fine. But I’m not sure that two months is sufficient 

for a family, if you will, Mr. Speaker. If you think of a family 

that might access day care within the area or might have a 

relationship with the school and might be trying to keep those 

important supports in play for a loved one or for a child, I’m not 

sure that that’s a sufficient period of time. 

 

And I’d like to engage directly with some of our tenants’ 

associations and with renters across the province to hear a little 

bit more on that front. But I certainly know and I hear it all the 

time, how difficult it is to find and secure adequate, safe, 

affordable housing. And as I say, in these overheated housing 

markets, I’m just not sure that two months is sufficient. And 

that’s a big change in the lives of a family. 

 

And if you think about it . . . You know, I used to teach before I 

was elected to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I keep 

relationships with many educators. And one of the big 

challenges is transiency for families and for students. And a 

change in school can be very difficult and traumatic for students 

and in fact can contribute to many, many, many learning gaps 

but also social pressures and challenges for students. 

 

So I think when we’re looking at this measure here, what I 

would want to think about is just how difficult it is sometimes 

for one to locate housing within a specific region while 

maintaining some of those important supports to a family, like a 

day care or like the school that one might rely on. And knowing 

that, you know, in all of our interests it’s important for us to 

make sure that the children of today are able to engage in their 

learning program in their school, do so effectively, and that 

those relationships they build in those schools can be incredibly 

powerful for them to find the success that they so deserve.  

 

And that transiency in itself is an issue that many attribute to 

the challenges and pressures in our housing market, the 

shortage of quality, affordable housing. And it’s in that lens that 

I look to that two-month eviction and I question and I doubt that 

two months is sufficient for families to make those plans. 

 

And if I think of so many, so many constituents that are in the 

position where they’ve secured housing and they have a place 

to rent that they deem to be safe and maybe works within their 

budget — although pretty much all the places to rent are 

incredibly expensive for families — the disruption maybe for a 

young mom, for example, who often is working one or two jobs 

as well to make ends meet, can be significant. And the 

importance of creating some stability with their ability to 

maintain relationships and friendships within the community 

and as well the school is something that certainly should be 

considered. So that’s one of the pieces that stands out to me as 

being important. 

 

I recognize there’s been some changes here that bring about 

what’s called by the minister, reasonable rules that can be put in 

place by the landlord, and there’s examples put forward of pets 

or smoking. And those might be quite reasonable, but what I 

notice, at least in the minister’s description on this front, is that 

it doesn’t clearly define whether it’s pets they’re talking about 

or whether it’s smoking. They actually just simply use the 

language of, that landlords are able to put in place reasonable 

rules. Well reasonable is a rather subjective word, and I’m not 

sure that this legislation, being that vague, that it may not create 

a real, real challenge for enforceability and for a clear 

understanding to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, clearly you don’t want to create a bottleneck or 

a mess of appeals in a bunch of areas for which are subjective 

and not clearly defined. So I would urge the government on this 

front to maybe better understand what it is they’re trying to 

achieve, what it is they’re trying to allow, and maybe more 

specifically lay out what’s permitted by way of areas for 

reasonable rules and what aren’t. Because certainly we want to 

make sure that we have clear understandings between tenants 

and landlords and that we don’t create, as I say, a real 

cumbersome process or a bottleneck process for appeal. And of 

course we also need to make sure that this is clearly understood 

that, you know, there’s very specific human rights that simply 

can never be compromised when we’re talking about something 

such as housing. 

 

Other measures in here speak to ability to evict somebody 

through violations of municipal bylaws, and certainly we’ll get 

a better understanding in the days and weeks to come exactly 

what examples that would pertain to and what circumstances 

that would pertain to. And it also talks about making changes to 

allow, I guess, better enforcement of . . . if someone no longer 

qualifies to be part of an affordable housing program, then an 

ability to address that circumstance.  

 

And certainly that seems reasonable, but I would just urge 

proceeding with a level of caution in respect to circumstance 

and to making sure that decisions that are made are really 

reflective of the realities that people and families are facing. 

Because of course housing through this period of special growth 

within our province, something, the growth for which we’re all 

proud to celebrate, the housing itself simply hasn’t been 

addressed appropriately by this government. And in fact it’s a 

failure to adequately respond and invest back into communities 

to make sure that, from that growth we’re balancing off other 

responsibilities to one another on the social infrastructure side 

of the equation and of course basic needs around housing. And 

because of that, there’s a specific pressure that’s been placed on 

many households across this province. 

 

And we just haven’t seen the action from this government in 

creating real, true, social and affordable housing spaces, 

something that we believe as New Democrats are an important 

part of the complement of housing options that assist in 

balancing off a market and serving those who aren’t going to be 

able to be served by the markets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this government really dropping the ball as well 

when they . . . You know, their approach to going at this has 

been to ignore it for a long time. And then what they did is they 

entered into a private P3 [public-private partnership] 

partnership, Mr. Speaker, on housing. And they had a supposed 

fixed price, and they touted it. They let the balloons go many 

times, Mr. Speaker. They, I think, cut the ribbons on the project.  

 

And many families were depending on those units coming 

online, insufficient in the number that they were, but something 

certainly meaningful to those that were going to access them. 

And instead of having a contract that had the rigor it required or 

instead of having the backbone that government required, they 

simply allowed the private sector partner to pull out of that deal 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5893 

and leaving many high and dry. And you know, there’s many of 

course disappointed with what was touted for so long and all the 

balloons that are so far up now, Mr. Speaker, somewhere, but 

no action on the actual housing. 

 

And I think, often when I think of this sort of P3 partnership 

where you have government sort of back patting itself and 

thinking they had a real great solution, sort of thinking they had 

a shortcut maybe, Mr. Speaker, and then not being able to 

deliver to Saskatchewan people, should be a fair warning. I 

know I’ve heard many Saskatchewan people say to me, well if 

they can’t manage a very basic P3 partnership for some 

affordable housing, how the heck are they going to manage 

schools over the lifespan of 20 or 30 years, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And of course we know all the hosts of concerns around the P3 

schools, around the excess costs, and the concerns around the 

forfeiture of community control or school board control or the 

shutting out of the local builders, the local construction industry 

in the province, Mr. Speaker. But this is also a very valid one, is 

just that, you know, if this is the government’s best effort when 

they engage into a P3 and this is the best they could muster up 

when trouble hit the fan, Mr. Speaker, is that they simply, you 

know, cut their losses and gift the project to the developer, it’s 

just simply not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I say, I think that, you know, just the government’s 

approach to housing has been weak and inadequate. It is. 

There’s a lot of things we can celebrate in Saskatchewan, a lot 

of good things that we’re all equally proud of, but the failure of 

this government to address housing and to ensure options for 

families is something that’s certainly placed a significant strain 

on many. And it’s an area which needs to be addressed because 

it’s important to many young people, many seniors, many 

families across this province, but ultimately it’s important to the 

long-term social and economic well-being of our province. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I take it back to those conversations tonight that I had with 

some from the regional colleges who are suggesting to me that 

if they aren’t able to address some of the housing pressures in 

their part of the province, that that part of the province and that 

community won’t be as strong as it can be and won’t extend the 

opportunity that they should be, economically and socially, to 

the young people in the region, but as well for all within the 

region, and in fact describe it as a limitation to the economic 

activity and growth potential of the area. So it’s certainly 

something that on many fronts we should all care about. 

 

And I know I just, I look regularly at the circumstances that 

many of my constituents face on the housing side of the 

equation. I look at the rent they’re paying, and I look at the 

income they’re earning and the month-to-month circumstances 

that they’re left in, and the vulnerability of not knowing, you 

know, when that next increase is coming or when that eviction 

might come, and then where they can locate next. It’s a real 

impact on those that are in that difficult market, and we need to 

all do a better job in pressuring this government to look at this 

issue. And certainly as New Democrats we’ll continue to put 

forward solutions on this front. 

 

But as it relates to Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Act, 

this is a bill that seems to have some reasonable measures. It 

has some that I’ve questioned here tonight specifically around 

periods of eviction, and also questions as to whether this bill 

has all the elements that it should because, given that this is an 

opportunity to open up an Act and provide better protection to 

Saskatchewan people, it seems to me to be a bit wanting or 

more than a bit wanting, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll engage with our 

tenants’ associations, with renters across the province, with 

landlords too. And let’s make sure that, with this opportunity 

here before us, that we get it right. And if there’s the possibility 

to suggest amendments or opportunities to strengthen this piece 

of legislation, certainly the opposition New Democrats will be 

ready and willing to do so. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of 

Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 151 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 

Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to introduce 

a guest if I could. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Oh, there you go. There you go. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what? I thank you, but the gentleman has 

left the building. There you go. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — There you go. Yes. Yes. I’ll introduce the 

minister. How’s that sound? But anyway, Mr. Speaker, to join 

on Bill 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014, just to give I 

guess some comments. And I realize at the time that this 

amendment and the bill was introduced, we had individuals that 

were from the pharmacy association, and they were here. And I 

guess this request has come forward from themselves who, you 

know, deal with some changes. And they’ve asked for some 

amendments. 

 

And I know at the end of the day my colleagues, myself, and as 

government we have to do the due diligence. And hopefully we 

will do that as we go through debating this bill and the 



5894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

amendments that this bill will bring into effect once it’s passed 

and goes through the process. 

 

But before it goes through that process, there’s some things 

need to be done, make sure, clarification. And I know on this 

side of the House we’ll talk to individuals. I know government 

has its obligation; government does say it does consult. And we 

hope sometimes that they’ve, you know, made sure they’ve 

consulted with as many as they can to make sure they get the 

information, to make sure if they’re going to introduce changes 

and legislation to this bill, they’ll introduce that the way it’s 

expressed to them and making sure the changes are what’s 

being asked and to make sure . . . And I guess at the end of the 

day when we see the changes being asked here, we want to 

make sure. Again it’s always about public safety, making sure 

the right questions are asked and making sure that the 

provisions, you know, and this legislation, this amendment will 

give certain powers and maybe change the way pharmacists are 

carrying on their business. 

 

And I know that they’re asking, you know, to do some 

injections, flu shots. There’s a number of things the minister has 

referred to and we’ve asked . . . I believe vitamin B12 and stuff 

like that where they would give flu shots as well, and that’s in 

vaccinations. So if that’s what they’re looking for and asking, 

there needs to be some questions and clarification and on what 

role they will play in that. 

 

And then you go further to that, I know the minister referred to 

some of the pharmacy technicians, what role they will change. 

And their role’s going to change, and I think we have to make 

sure those roles are clearly defined. And we have to make sure 

we ask the right questions, and to make sure — again, I’ll go 

back to this — that public safety is key. 

 

 But the pharmacists talk about, and I guess the changes in here 

have talked about working in collaboration with physicians. I 

guess they can order some testing, look at some of the results. 

And I think they’re going to try to collaborate with physicians. 

And if that’s what it is, hopefully at the end of the day we’ve 

talked to Saskatchewan physicians, association of physicians, 

get their input and their view, as well as the association for 

pharmacists. 

 

You got to make sure at the end of the day the checks and 

balances are done, to making sure . . . Again, I have said about 

public safety, we want to make sure that those provisions are 

there and changes are being made. And I think people want to 

make sure, people that go into pharmacies . . . Pharmacies are 

busy, and we see, there’s a number of them that are really busy. 

You’ll go in sometimes to fill a prescription or maybe, you 

know, I guess the clinics are closed and you don’t have access 

to a doctor. Some people will go in and ask for some 

medication, something to assist them with a loved one or 

themselves with an illness. And we want to make sure that 

those provisions are clear and the answers on what role they 

have, and what they shouldn’t do, what they can do. You want 

to make sure that the regulations, I guess, that follow will 

ensure public safety. 

 

And we know that they’re asking to make some changes. And 

at this point, I know in committee, and I know our critic for 

Health, the member from Riversdale will do her due diligence 

in committee. We will ask some tough questions in committee 

to make sure. And I guess we’re not, you know, opposed to 

some changes when it will help speed the process for our loved 

ones and for, I guess, patients that need the care that they’re 

asking for, whether it’s the physicians, whether it’s by 

prescriptions or medication that they need to deal with an 

illness. We want to encourage that and make sure that that 

happens. 

 

So you know at this point, it’s just to clarification, making sure 

we’ve consulted, making sure, you know, checks and balances 

are in place to protect the public. We want to make sure. I know 

we’ll do our due diligence on our side. And I know our 

colleagues will have many questions and get clarification, I 

guess, like always if they want to talk to doctors, physicians. 

Our members have that right to talk to, I guess, constituents, 

how they feel about the changes and if this is something that 

they see supportive or not. And if they don’t, well they can 

bring it forward to this Assembly and share it, or they can share 

it in committee, or ask the questions if individuals out there that 

are in our constituency have concerns with the changes that are 

being proposed here. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s, from the minister’s 

comments that we’ve read, they’re, yes, asking for different 

changes the way things will be done. And it sounds like they’re 

trying to move in a way to make the system move quicker to 

deal with illnesses and deal with some of the sickness that some 

of our family or loved ones have or constituents have.  

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know in committee we can ask 

for more clarification, making sure that we have done our due 

diligence, the government’s done its due diligence, and ask the 

right questions to support the industry as it’s, you know, if it’s 

industry that’s requesting these changes. And we could ask 

those in committee: who’s asked for these changes to be made, 

amendments. And we will do all that, and I know we’ll get our 

opportunity in committee. So at this point I have no further 

questions on this Bill. I move adjournment on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 142 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 

Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise on this Bill No. 142, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act. That’s quite a 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5895 

long title, considering it’s a pretty short piece of legislation. 

And really it’s the companion piece to Bill 141, which 

hopefully we’ll get to later tonight at some point as I continue 

with my remarks on that piece of legislation. 

 

But this one is relatively straightforward because it’s an 

enabling piece of legislation that makes amendments to other 

pieces of legislation. Specifically The Education Act, 1995, 

section 369 is amended and allows the Provincial Archives to 

deposit any of its non-current documents with the Provincial 

Archives for preservation in the archives, which is an important 

piece of legislation because, as we know, people get more and 

more into genealogy and curious about their families. 

 

And you know, I think one thing about Saskatchewan 

particularly, as we’ve worked through the evolution of the 

education of students in Saskatchewan, you know, from the 

one-room schoolhouse and the idea that if, I think the number 

was if you had 12 children in three families, you could form a 

school board. And that was the initial basis because so much of 

Saskatchewan was rural. But the key thing was, and it’s a 

wonderful thing when we think about it, that schools were set 

up to make sure kids were educated. That was a priority of our 

pioneers and of people who’d gone before us. And it’s really 

key. 

 

And in fact in many of them it was also a way to learn English. 

You know, we think of schools now as English as a second 

language is a new issue. It’s not new at all in Saskatchewan. In 

fact it’s an age-old issue, learning English. And whether you 

were Ukrainian or French, Métis or First Nations, English was 

not your first language, and so schools were set up with that in 

mind. So it’s a good way to have a set of records, and this is the 

enabling piece of legislation for that. 

 

And of course then The Evidence Act is amended by striking out 

The Archives Act, 2004 and putting in the new archives and 

public records management Act. And I think it’s relatively 

straightforward. 

 

What isn’t as straightforward is the companion Bill No. 141, of 

which I’ll have much more to say. And I think at that point I’ll 

be raising the concerns and issues, but I will because we will 

want to make sure and it’s our responsibility. 

 

You know, when you run for election, you don’t know what 

side of the House you’re going to be. But if you’re in 

opposition, you have to make sure you hold the government 

accountable for its actions, and that is particularly for the 

legislation. And so while this may seem relatively 

straightforward and we have no flags going off right away on 

this particular piece of legislation, we definitely will have 

questions, and we’ll have, as I said, for its companion piece, the 

one that’s driving this one forward. 

 

It is odd tonight that we’re doing 142 before we do 141, but 

that’s sort of the way it goes. It’s kind of, you know, put the 

court before the horse, but that’s the way it is tonight. We’ve 

got the cart before us. So I’ll just park it until we could find that 

horse. And so I know it will come up soon. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to move adjournment 

of Bill 142, An Act to make consequential amendments 

resulting from the enactment of The Archives and Public 

Records Management Act. I do so move. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Bill No. 143 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 

Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 143, An Act to amend The Degree 

Authorization Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill in this legislature is very 

short. It effectively basically changes a deadline that’s in the 

legislation from a specific deadline of November 30th, 2016 by 

which the affected colleges in Saskatchewan are required to 

meet certain of the guidelines that are in the legislation, by 

putting in the words “the prescribed date.” What this does is 

allow for the cabinet of the government to, by regulation, 

change the deadline to allow for compliance of the provisions 

of this particular bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister set out in quite some detail 

about how and why some of these particular changes are being 

made on this legislation, but I think there’s a bigger question 

that this bill raises with respect to the kinds of degree-granting 

institutions we have in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s very 

clear in the main legislation that the whole purpose of the Act is 

to make it very clear that the University of Saskatchewan and 

the University of Regina are the primary degree-granting 

institutions in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is always an interesting discussion because what we 

know is if we go a few hundred kilometres to the south into the 

United States, they have a much more open system of degree 

authorization, or creation of colleges and universities which 

provide degrees, which is much more on a basis of a particular 

region using their local college as an academic development 

instrument, also as a way of making sure that their local people 

have a chance at many types of basic post-secondary education 

in their local communities. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting day to be 

discussing this particular bill because when we met earlier 

today with the presidents and board Chairs of the college 

system in Saskatchewan, one of their points of discussions is 

whether they should be allowed to issue degrees in the regional 

colleges in the province of Saskatchewan. And this would be a 



5896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

much more similar system to what we have in Montana or 

North Dakota or Idaho or some of our neighbours to the south. 

And what could that mean? 

 

Well what it could mean in Saskatchewan is that we would have 

degree-granting institutions maybe more in the line of what you 

would have in Nova Scotia. In Nova Scotia we know that they 

have Dalhousie University, but it also has Saint Mary’s 

University. It has St. F of X [St. Francis Xavier] up at 

Antigonish. They’ve got Acadia over in the Annapolis Valley, 

and they have a few other universities right in Halifax. And 

what it does do is provide quite a bit of choice for students. 

When you look at the size of what they’re doing there, it’s not 

very dissimilar from what we have in Saskatchewan, but they 

do allow for more choice and more I guess varied loyalties. 

 

What would happen in Saskatchewan if we had in Saskatoon: 

the University of Saskatchewan; we had St. Thomas More 

university; we had St. Andrew’s university? You would end up 

with the Lutheran school up there as well. We obviously have 

St. Peter’s out in Muenster. We’ve got others. In Regina we 

could have Luther College and Campion College and the 

University of Regina. We could have the Southeast Regional 

College as a college or an institution. 

 

And I raise all this because there are clearly strong loyalties that 

we hear about as it relates to the colleges and their interrelation 

with the bigger universities in Saskatchewan. And it does raise 

this interesting issue of, what if we did have a less centrally 

controlled system, which Bill 143 and the actual, original 

degree authorization Act deal with, because it would end up that 

we would have many more institutions in the province. 

 

Now I think most of us are quite used to the system that we 

have here, so to talk about this seems a little bit uneasy or a 

little bit strange. But let’s imagine if we had a system where we 

had 15 post-secondary colleges that all had for example athletic 

teams or others where you would actually have within 

Saskatchewan some fairly interesting competition. Because 

what I know over the years is that the opportunities for our 

Saskatchewan young people, when they graduate from high 

school, to go on and play a sport — basketball or hockey or 

volleyball or baseball or all those things — those opportunities 

are quite limited unless they look to the States or to other 

provinces. 

 

For example if you are a volleyball player and want to play in 

Saskatchewan, there might be three or four spots a year at 

University of Saskatchewan, three or four spots at a year at the 

University of Regina. And so you might have a couple of 

thousand young men playing volleyball in high school, and 

there’s that many spots available for them. I think that many of 

the regional areas of the province would be quite proud of any 

sports team they might have that would relate to their local 

college. 

 

And this particular bill, if it had maybe been more expansive, 

might look at that. Actually when you read the minister’s 

explanation, what he’s talking about is Briercrest College and 

its ability to issue degrees, which it now has. But it has some 

steps that it has to go through to make sure that the degrees are 

properly described, and they haven’t been able to get that task 

completed by the deadline of November 30th, 2016. 

But what would have happened or what could happen if this 

was a much more expansive, much more generous way of 

setting up degree-granting institutions in the province? There’s 

no question it would create some economic activity in Weyburn 

or Swift Current or Prince Albert or North Battleford, Meadow 

Lake. All of these places have colleges, but they’re more like 

close feeder schools into SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] or into University of Regina 

or University of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so this particular bill deals with some of the restrictions 

and some of the deadlines which apparently everybody thought 

could be met but now obviously are causing some difficulties. 

And so we have a fairly decent explanation of what some of the 

difficulties are, but I don’t know if we have a total explanation 

of how that happens. 

 

Now in addition, this bill also speaks to other universities from 

across Canada that somehow may be caught by this legislation. 

I know an interesting one was Great Plains College in Swift 

Current has a method whereby people can go to Cape Breton 

University in Nova Scotia to work on a Master of Business 

Administration, and that this is a little bit different. Although 

historically what we know is that Notre Dame college in 

Wilcox for many years was directly related to the University of 

Ottawa and so that their students could start taking University 

of Ottawa courses in Wilcox and then eventually go through to 

the University of Ottawa to get their degree. In the same way I 

know that Luther College in Regina was related to Capital 

University in Ohio, and people were able to make connections 

on degrees that way. 

 

So there’s an interesting history in Saskatchewan which this bill 

gives us a glimpse of, but I’m not sure it necessarily goes to that 

bigger, broader question of whether we would have a broader or 

more generous method of allocating the degree authorization 

power in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I know another area that the bill does talk about is, as its 

general purpose, a greater accessibility for students in the 

province to post-secondary education. Clearly that’s something 

that we all support. I guess what I’m challenging the minister 

and the government to look at is, well are there some other 

things that could be done to enhance some of the regional 

colleges that we have now to provide even more accessibility 

and also more local pride in how some of these organizations 

operate? 

 

I think that anybody who is part of one of the regional colleges 

knows that one of their challenges is the length of time that 

students actually stay in their programs, and two years would be 

really a long time. But if there was a situation where they could 

offer a three- or four-year degree program, all of a sudden all 

kinds of other student activities are available for them. And I 

think that it may be that we’re at a point in the history of our 

province where we would have some further discussions about 

that. 

 

Now I’m not sure how many people have gone down to look at 

what’s happening in some of the bigger states besides North 

Dakota and Montana, but if you go into the state of 

Washington, you have Washington State University, which 

would be more similar to our University of Regina. That’s 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5897 

located at Pullman, Washington, in the eastern part of the state. 

And then you have the University of Washington, which is a 

huge university located in Seattle, which would be very much 

akin to what we would say is the University of Saskatchewan. 

When you go now to the state of Washington, you have a 

Washington State University campus in one suburb of Seattle, a 

University of Washington campus in another suburb, and 

there’s direct competition between universities in almost every 

part of the state of Washington. And what has happened is that 

there’s become this incredible competition for students but also 

between the institutions on a level that’s really quite dramatic. 

 

Now what we’ve done in Saskatchewan with this particular 

legislation that we’re now amending is to say the authorization 

for this is going to happen in the ministry of post-secondary 

education. A deputy minister recommendation to the minister is 

the only way that some of these things can be changed. It’s very 

much I think an organized way to do it, but it still raises the 

question of whether it’s the only way to do it and whether 

maybe it’s necessarily the right way to do it in the next number 

of years when perhaps a much broader choice should be 

available for all of our students. 

 

It’s interesting to look at the history of education in 

Saskatchewan and in light of a bill like this. What we do know 

is that public school education was primarily provided by local 

initiative, sometimes by congregations of churches, sometimes 

by community effort. And I think it was around 1916 that there 

became a public education Act where you had public schools 

right across the province. 

 

[20:00] 

 

At that time there were certain levels of compulsory education, 

and obviously that’s moved up as the years have gone. So we’re 

now at a situation where I think grade 12 is pretty well 

education that’s paid for by the province. 

 

But it begs the question of what happens in Germany or 

Scandinavia, where they provide public education right up to 

the end of the first degree. So in other words, the whole public 

system is something that’s of vital importance for the whole 

community. 

 

I’m not sure if this bill is part of that discussion, but I think it 

raises that question as we expand the degree authorization to a 

few more institutions in the province. But I think that there are 

some bigger questions here which aren’t answered by this 

particular Bill No. 143, but I think they’re questions that should 

be asked as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the bill as it stands will attempt to solve 

some of the particular issues that are here today. I think we need 

much more information about Briercrest’s situation, which I 

think we’ll be able to get in the committee hearings that we 

would have looking at this. 

 

I think that once again though, there are some bigger issues 

around how our provincial post-secondary educational system is 

organized, and I think we should take that opportunity to look at 

that as well. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any more comments at this 

point. But I know this particular amending bill has touched a 

nerve among the members of my caucus, and there will be 

others who want to talk about it because there are so many 

interesting issues that are related to this actually quite short bill. 

 

So at this point I will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 143, 

An Act to amend The Degree Authorization Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 148 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to be able to continue my comments from the other day 

when the clock ran out and I wasn’t quite done what I had to 

say. So I’m glad to rise tonight and complete those comments. 

 

Before I get into the actual bill itself though, I would like to 

express a warm welcome to the new member from 

Lloydminster and welcome her to the legislature. It’s certainly 

great to see another woman here, and it brings our numbers up 

now. I just did the math. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Hear, hear . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Pardon me? A 10 per cent increase, very good. We had 11 and 

we’re now 12. And that brings us over 20 per cent women 

representation in this legislature. So congratulations to the new 

member. I haven’t had an opportunity to meet her yet, but I 

will. And I just want to say, welcome and glad to see another 

woman in the ranks. We’ll get there yet, Mr. Speaker, slowly 

but surely. 

 

In terms of vital statistics, I was looking backwards a little bit in 

terms of the role of vital statistics in our society and also the 

way that the gathering of statistics is reflected . . . how we 

gather statistics reflects our society and who we are as a society. 

And I just wanted to make a few more comments about that 

before I actually get into the substance of the bill. 

 

There’s a few articles that I was able to locate that talked a little 

bit about some of the reflections of our society in the gathering 

of statistics. And there was one article I found from the 

Canadian Journal of Sociology which is called “Who Counts 

Now? Re-making The Canadian Citizen.” In this article, the 



5898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

sociologists are arguing that there’s some upsides maybe and 

downsides but certainly an impact on Canadian history and 

Canadian sociology when we see what the Government of 

Canada did on June 17, 2010. 

 

What they did then, that’s already four years ago, is they issued 

an order in council that authorized the cancellation of the 

nationwide decadal mandatory long-form census. I think many 

of us will remember when that happened, and it certainly has 

changed how the census is now being done. It was replaced by a 

mandatory short-form census, and all the questions from the old 

long-form census was shifted to a voluntary survey called the 

national household survey. 

 

And the article here indicates that this was not a welcome 

announcement, that there were many, many people — 

particularly the organizations and communities all over Canada 

— that were hugely upset about this, Mr. Speaker. And in fact 

even the chief statistician of Statistics Canada resigned his job 

over this announcement, so obviously this wasn’t something 

that they did in consultation with the actual statistics people. 

 

On page 233 of the article, when they were talking about this 

cancellation of the long form, they said: 

 

Hundreds of groups publicly opposed the removal of the 

mandatory long-form census. These included organizations 

representing health, antipoverty, planning, religion, 

marketing, law, insurance, ethnicity, language, teaching, 

research, youth, aging, women, family, childcare, unions, 

chambers of commerce, municipalities, provinces, and 

civil rights organizations. This list is notable in that it 

points to the number of organizations and professions that 

depend on statistical data in order to plan, manage, 

advocate, and do business. For many organization and 

agencies, census data allows them to prove the existence of 

various groups, locate them statistically, present the 

problem to government, and measure the effectiveness of 

their actions once implemented. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, how important vital statistics are 

to making a case. So for any kind of organization that’s trying 

to plead its particular issue to the government, if you don’t have 

data, you really don’t have a case. And our society is certainly 

dependent on data for making arguments for support or 

particular expression, you know, maybe for grant money or for 

anything that’s used to help make a case that that group has a 

need that is identified through the statistics. 

 

On page 234, they go on to say: 

 

While the Conservative Party and Prime Minister Steven 

Harper argued that this change of policy reflects an 

expressed desire on the part of Canadians for more privacy, 

official documentation could not verify this claim. In other 

words, for many people, privacy of self is less important 

than their membership in a group and the official 

acknowledgement of their group. For example, the lawyer 

representing Aboriginal groups (arguing that the removal 

of the census violates the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms) stated in court: “If you’re not counted, then no 

one is accountable to you.” The Federation of Francophone 

and Acadian Communities stated: “The consequence of not 

having reliable and representative data . . . to develop 

programs and services for Francophones could well be an 

erosion of the vitality of French . . . in Canada. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker — that’s the end of the quote — 

you can see, Mr. Speaker, that this is of grave concern to any 

minorities in Canada. And it’s really unfortunate that the federal 

government decided that getting rid of the long-form census 

was something that they thought was good to do. I think by and 

large the jury is out on whether that was a good idea, but 

anything that this article reports on tells us that a lot of people 

were very upset about it. 

 

At the end of their article on page 247 in their concluding 

remarks, they say: 

 

Certainly, the mandatory nature of the census itself 

indicated that collective planning and needs outweighed 

purported individual concerns with privacy. With the 

recent withdrawal of the long-form census, both the 

information used to support the mosaic and the rhetorical 

tool that purports its good has been removed from the 

Canadian political-cultural scene. As the many ethnic, 

religious, and cultural groups that protested this new policy 

indicated, their very existence as ethnocultural “good” is at 

stake. Without official counting, they cannot officially 

exist. Since the mosaic metaphor is so highly tied in with 

the federal policy of multiculturalism, the census itself is a 

tool of mosaic — the good of identity tied to such group 

membership and the good of each ethnocultural piece or 

group in itself. 

 

So I think, you know, given that we’re celebrating today the 

45th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Multicultural Council 

and the importance that that reflects, you know, when they feel 

they can’t even exist without the existence of the long-form 

census data that would help identify and give shape to who they 

are through the gathering of data, I think that’s something that 

we need to be concerned about. 

 

Part of the other thing that that census does is it reflects how 

gender looks in the 20th century. There’s an article that we 

found on Statistics Canada that talks about . . . It’s called “The 

Census and the evolution of gender roles in the early 20th 

century Canada,” and this is by someone named Derrick 

Thomas. And of course we know that coming up this Thursday, 

we’re talking about the Transgender Day of Remembrance and 

we’re talking about it as a day to memorialize those who have 

been killed as a result of transphobia and to bring attention to 

the continued violence endured by the transgender community. 

 

The article that Mr. Thomas wrote talks about how gender roles 

and relations are among the areas that have undergone the most 

profound transformations in Canada in the last 100 years. And 

he talks about the role of the census in reflecting those norms 

and what is seen as normal in Canada. And what he says is, 

social construct, this is a quote, “Social constructs can be 

almost invisible to contemporary social actors and can form an 

important part of what is regarded as reality.” So our reality is 

described by our social construct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They go on to say: 

 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5899 

Some historical perspective is usually required before they 

can be understood. Gender roles and expectations represent 

a mode of thinking and acting, and form part of the 

individual’s identity or relation to self and others. These 

constructs not only condition behaviour but also influence 

what is regarded as scientifically interesting, worthy of 

recording and collecting information about. The 

information collected and the presentation of results are 

indicative of the roles played by household members and 

what was deemed important at various junctures. This 

information ostensibly provided basic knowledge for the 

formulation of social policy and the transformation of the 

society that it measured. 

 

And again, we look at the definition of gender for example, Mr. 

Speaker, and that in itself is evolving in our society. And we 

know that data is now being collected for, say, transgendered 

individuals that was not collected years ago. So I think not only 

does the census define who we are, but it is defined by who we 

are. And it’s kind of an interesting chicken-and-egg situation, 

but I think gathering of vital statistics really helps reflect our 

society and we rely on it to define who we are. 

 

He talks about the position of women within households and 

families in the early part of the 20th century. And it’s 

interesting how he notes that the head of the household was 

assumed to be the man. I mean that was just the social construct 

of the day, and that’s what it was. 

 

In the early 20th century common-law relationships were 

infrequent and not even reported to census takers until 1981. Up 

until 1951 close to 90 per cent of women had entered into a 

legal marriage by the age of 50. And they raised children and 

divorce was extremely rare. About 1 in 1,000 women were 

reported as divorced up until 1941, but in 2006 by contrast, over 

120 in 1,000 women were divorced or separated. So there’s a 

lot of different kinds of information that’s been gathered that 

really tells us a story about who we are. 

 

An interesting example was, was the work of women 

acknowledged? And certainly women were identified as 

housewives or homemakers, and that type of work was never 

even measured by the Bureau of Statistics until more recently. 

And it shows earnings. In the early 1900s women earned just 

over half of what men earned. And we see that the gap is also 

being perpetuated even to this day and that Statistics Canada 

data helped measure what that gap is. So without having that 

information it’s going to be more difficult for sociologists and 

academics to do the research they need to, to prove that the gap 

still exists. And I think that’s something that we need to be 

concerned about actually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The conclusion of the article he talks about censuses, and I’m 

just going to read a quote from the last paragraph of the article. 

So he says: 

 

Censuses were planned and carried out within a social and 

historical context. The expectations of census takers played 

a role in what they looked for and in what they found. The 

data collected and published tended to reflect and reinforce 

the norms of the day. The original and rejuvenated census 

data, documentation and instruction manuals from the early 

part of the twentieth century enable researchers to examine 

how gender roles have evolved and changed as changes in 

society occurred. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So again, I think it just reflects the importance of having that 

kind of information. In this particular bill that’s before us today, 

we see more of that evolution of our society and how we gather 

information being reflected. 

 

In his opening comments, the minister indicated that, he says, 

“. . . today’s world is different from 2009 when the initial vital 

statistics Act was first introduced.” Now I’m not sure if he 

meant just that particular Act, but actually the first vital 

statistics Act was introduced in 1847, so 2009 wasn’t the first 

vital statistics Act. And I’m sure he knows that, but maybe it’s 

the first Act that his government introduced. 

 

We know that The Vital Statistics Act in Saskatchewan has been 

changed many, many times. Since 1920 it’s probably been 

amended six or eight times. And I went through just a few of 

the earlier bills to see what has changed, and here’s a good 

example. In 1920, in The Vital Statistics Act of 1920, there was 

a requirement under, I guess this would be section 26(3) that 

says, “Every record whether of a birth, marriage or death shall 

be written legibly in durable black ink . . .” And, Mr. Speaker, I 

found that to be very interesting. It had to use durable black ink, 

and today we’re talking about electronic signatures. So from 

1920 till 2014, we can see the evolution of even how we gather 

that kind of information. 

 

In 1950 it was interesting to note that there was a definition for 

Indian: 

 

“Indian” means an Indian within the meaning of the 

Indian Act (Canada), but does not include an enfranchised 

Indian. 

 

In 1950, Mr. Speaker, only enfranchised Indians were allowed 

to vote. And until the amendments of the Indian Act of 1950, 

there was a lot of suppressive items within the Indian Act that I 

think were really actually quite oppressive, including the fact 

they couldn’t leave the reserve without permission from the 

Indian agent. And this version of the Act also includes the 

definition of Indian agent, which was still in force at those days. 

 

Now we go to 1965 and we look at the definitions that occurs in 

The Vital Statistics Act Saskatchewan at that time. We no longer 

see a definition of an Indian. We don’t see a definition of an 

Indian agent. We do see the new term now, the Indian 

superintendent. So you can see the reflection of the terminology 

within the Indian Act, and we also see the inclusion now of a 

definition of reserve. So I found that to be quite interesting and 

reflective of the way the information was gathered with respect 

to First Nations in Saskatchewan and just sort of reflects how 

these things evolve. 

 

So let’s move forward now to 2014 and look a little bit at the 

bill that the minister’s introduced. There’s sort of three different 

types of areas where changes are being made, and I suppose two 

are more noteworthy than the third. But first of all, the bill is 

trying to reflect the fact that you can have electronic forms and 

that they’re the norm. So electronic forms are now the norm. 



5900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

I see the Minister of Education get a little tired here, Mr. 

Speaker, but I hope we’ll keep him awake for the rest of the 

session because this is really riveting information and he may 

want to pay attention to this. 

 

So anyways we’re now talking about electronic versions being 

legal, as legal as paper versions. And there’s a whole number of 

sections of the Act that are amended just to indicate that 

electronic is an acceptable legal form of submitting records into 

the vital statistics registry. And again in Saskatchewan, vital 

statistics is almost always birth, marriage, and death, so those 

are the three types of information that our province is 

responsible for collecting. 

 

The second part I think that is interesting, and the minister 

certainly talked about it in his opening comments is, well, is the 

ability for — what did they call them? — prescribed 

practitioners to submit information regarding death and stillborn 

certificates, medical certificates of death, and stillborn deaths or 

stillborns. And what’s happening here is that now instead of just 

a doctor who can sign a death certificate, there is an opportunity 

for a prescribed practitioner to do that in the event that a 

medical practitioner is not available. 

 

So we don’t have a definition of a prescribed practitioner, but I 

believe that’s something that would be available in the 

regulations and that again we’ll find out when they pass the 

regulations exactly what a prescribed practitioner will be. But I 

assume it’s a licensed practical nurse or someone of that level, 

particularly because the minister indicated that in his comments 

from November 4th when he introduced the bill at second 

reading. 

 

The third piece I think that is interesting, and I think it really 

reflects the need for vital statistics in our society, is the 

minister’s recognizing the need for organizations like the 

national Truth and Reconciliation Commission to find data and 

statistics on particular social events like the residential school 

system in Canada. And I believe he indicated that there was 

difficulty providing death information for Aboriginal children 

who attended residential schools in Saskatchewan because of 

the limitations in the current legislation. 

 

So there’s a reflection in this bill of the need for that type of 

information to be available. And hearkening back to my earlier 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, obviously the information has to be 

available to be researched. And so I think again, and I’m hoping 

the Minister of Health will think about encouraging the federal 

government to reinstate that long-form census data because 

when we’re only gathering death information, birth information, 

and marriage information, the whole host of all the other things 

that reflects who we are as a society is no longer being 

collected. 

 

So I know the minister appreciates the necessity and the utility 

and the social function of having this data available for us to 

examine who we were in the past, and I think that’s a good 

piece in this legislation. I think it’s important for groups like the 

commission, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 

Canada, to have access to that data in order to understand how 

we were and what it was . . . how we were acting in times 

before us. And certainly in the future, people will be looking to 

this bill and to the information that’s gathered there. 

So those are sort of the three aspects of the bill the minister 

talked about. He also indicated that there was another, some 

other minor changes that were being made. I noticed that 

because of course, and sadly, the Information Services 

Corporation had to be privatized by this government, and so 

then there was a need for a number of amendments to The Vital 

Statistics Act to reflect that the registrar was now part of 

government and that the corporation was responsible for certain 

things. 

 

A couple of amendments that show up in the bill that deal with 

. . . Maybe something was overlooked when ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], Information Services 

Corporation, was privatized, but there’s some changes in the 

section 78 of the 2009 vital statistics Act that talk about the 

corporation and how the registrar and the corporation can 

disclose vital statistics information. So these are housekeeping 

amendments, but it reflects the sad reality that this government 

chose to privatize this kind of public registry function and 

something that has always been gathered as a service of the 

public service, and I would say as a neutral gathering technique. 

Now that we have a private corporation managing and gathering 

that information, I think we’ll have to watch and see, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not it reflects the information that we 

really, truly need or if it becomes an unfortunate byline in terms 

of budget cuts and efficiencies within the corporation. 

 

But I think I’m rambling, and I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

I will stop that. And I will move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 141 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 

and continue my discussion on Bill No. 141, An Act respecting 

the Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, Public Records 

Management and making consequential amendment to other 

Acts and Regulations. And this is an important piece of 

legislation, and I am glad to rise again. 

 

Last week I started to speak on this just briefly. It was 

Wednesday, just the day after Remembrance Day, and I had 

alluded to some of the important roles that archives play in our 

world and particularly when we were thinking about November 

11th and how archives can help us understand the past, in ways 

that for people today would have difficulty, because they’re the 

keepers of the facts, the artifacts, the things of the past that help 

us make sense of that time and whatever time that may be. And 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5901 

I will take a moment to allude again to that. 

 

But I do want to say for those who are tuning in tonight that this 

Bill No. 141 I think is a critical piece of legislation. And I 

would urge people to watch the progress of this bill, and if they 

have any questions or comments, be sure to let us know. 

 

You know, Saskatchewan has a proud record of its past, and 

really it’s an important one. And you know, we talk about the 

museums and that type of thing. And how do we, how do we 

have as good a record as we can have? And it is our 

responsibility to make that happen as this legislature. And so 

we’re glad to see this come forward. We have a lot of questions 

about this, and I will talk more about some of the concerns I 

have. But I just want to say that this is an important issue. 

 

And I want to set the stage, you know, and I want to . . . I did 

talk last week about the impact of Remembrance Day and the 

fact that, when we are in Remembrance Day ceremonies and 

people are listing or reading the names of those who fought for 

us in the different areas or formats or, you know, whether they 

be in the military or other protective services, it’s really 

important to have that record. 

 

But I think about the archives, the provincial archives, and how 

I certainly appreciate receiving their — I think it’s every other 

month — their little magazine called Saskatchewan History. 

And I’m just looking at one that we got this summer and the 

struggle of Chinese settlers and about exploring the North and 

meeting a pioneer DJ [disk jockey]. And I just think these are 

interesting, and it brings the past to life. And it’s an amazing 

thing when I think about the kind of things that, whether it be 

pictures, original documents, or whether they be cultural or 

factual, it’s an important thing that we have this. 

 

And I think that I just want to congratulate and recognize the 

archives staff for the good, the very outstanding work they do in 

keeping us informed but also keeping us passionate about our 

province and because of understanding our past. And I think 

this is hugely, hugely important. And as the member talked 

about the special celebration, the anniversary for the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, how we recognize that 

“from many peoples, strength,” and that’s key for us. That’s key 

for us. And how we will understand that more fully, if we can 

understand our past, and the archives play a significant, 

significant role. 

 

I want to just highlight one article, and it’s an interesting one, 

Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if you saw Saturday’s paper. It was 

both in The StarPhoenix and Leader-Post, but I’m going to 

quote from The StarPhoenix. And it’s about this document that 

was found and is now at the U of S archives. And I’ll talk about 

the U of S and the U of R, the University of Saskatchewan and 

the University of Regina archives and how they relate to the 

provincial archives. But this is on page A9 and the 15th of 

November 2014. The headline is “Rare document solidifies 

treaty partnership.” 

 

And how we find documents and how they can go astray, and 

then many years later we can find them and they have huge, 

huge impact. So I’ll quote from this extensively. It’s a beautiful 

story, and it’s one of a success story in terms of how archives 

can play a huge, huge role in understanding the past. Because as 

I said last week, and I believe this to be true, that we are all 

children of the treaties. And this is important. So this find is 

something that we can all celebrate. But what happened was, 

and I’ll quote: 

 

A delicate, creased and slightly worn three-page document 

has been returned home to the area where it originated 105 

years ago: Treaty 6 territory. 

 

The document is an original, three-page adhesion to Treaty 

6, signed in 1889 by leaders of the Montreal Lake Cree 

Nation and the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, once 

collectively known as the Green Lake Indians. 

 

Signed in 1876, Treaty 6 covers a large, east-west swath of 

central Saskatchewan, extending as far south as Kindersley 

and as far north as La Ronge. The area also extends west 

into Alberta. 

 

The agreement with the Crown resulted in the creation of 

the two Montreal Lake Indian Reserves and the Little Red 

River Reserve. 

 

[And now] the Montreal Lake Cree Nation now owns the 

historical document, [and they are] loaning it permanently 

to the University of Saskatchewan, where it's held at the 

Archives and Special Collections unit. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And they had a fellow, the band manager from Montreal Lake 

Cree Nation, Mark D’Amato, and he is quoted extensively. This 

is what he had to say: “It was shocking for all of us, when we 

first heard about it.” 

 

In some ways, the significance is the fact that we were able 

to obtain it all, since it was signed in 1889 and transferred 

to Edmund Morris in 1909 and not really heard . . . [about 

it since then]. 

 

Now you may, Mr. Speaker, recognize the name Edmund 

Morris. Edmund Morris was the son of Alexander Morris, the 

fellow who negotiated many of the treaties. But what happened 

was that the person who had given the adhesion to Edmund 

Morris was A.G. Irvine, the Montreal Lake copy. One went to 

Ottawa. There were two copies made. Didn’t have photocopiers 

or whatever in those times, so the two copies were made. One 

went to Ottawa. But you would have thought the other one 

would have gone to the First Nations, so for their records. But it 

didn’t. It was kept by the person who negotiated the treaty 

adhesion on behalf of the Crown, and that would have been 

Commissioner A.G. Irvine. But “In 1909, he presented the 

document to Edmund Morris, a painter best known for his 

pastel portraits of Aboriginal leaders, especially those who 

signed major treaties.” 

 

And many of us will know that downstairs are many of his 

paintings, Edmund Morris. Now it wasn’t like they were tucked 

in behind the paintings but part of his papers. But those papers 

should have gone to the First Nations. But 100 years later, in 

2014, they have come home to the First Nations and that is 

good, good news. 

 



5902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

And as D’Amato said, that they “are excited, glad to have it 

home. And we want to make sure our young people have a good 

understanding of the value of the document.” And he says, 

“This is a learning tool for everyone, First Nations people and 

non-First Nations people.” 

 

And of course it’s at the University of Saskatchewan, their 

special collections archives unit, so it can be in safekeeping. 

And it’s on permanent loan. The ownership is clear: it’s with 

the Montreal Lake Band and it’s their document. But it’s easily 

accessible and it’s safe and that’s hugely important. The 

university, I know, and the archivist, the U of S archivist, Tim 

Hutchison — and he’s pictured with the original Treaty 6 

documents — is just delighted to play a role as an archivist to 

make sure that it’s safe and that there’s access, particularly to 

young people, because it’s a huge thing. 

 

Now I talked about last week about the whole discussion about 

public records because this is the addition. This may be more 

the theme. And it will be interesting to have the discussion in 

committee about this because before it was just, the Act was 

called the public archives Act, plain and simple and 

straightforward. Now we’re talking about public records as if 

they’re something more beyond than archives, so we’re not sure 

what the significance of public archives. 

 

But as I said at that time last week that we did have a list of 

people who were designated to be on that board but are 

interestingly . . . The representative, there was not a 

representative from Culture on that board. And I wondered 

about that because it seems to me, particularly since the 

Minister of Culture is the person responsible for the public 

archives and public records, that he would have or she would 

have somebody on that board. But that is not the case and I 

wondered why, because public records are much more than just 

a justice issue or much more than a financial record, I would 

think. They’re really a cultural record too and I have a lot of 

questions about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have questions too . . . You know, when 

we’ve been talking to people, the question arises, how does this 

change what is now and what will be? And we’ll be looking 

forward to consulting with folks. We notice that there’s a 

change in terms of the relationship with the University of 

Saskatchewan and University of Regina. We know that a lot of 

early records were actually kept by the University of 

Saskatchewan. They were the first archivists in the province. 

And so what is the role particularly of the University of 

Saskatchewan in this? And what does that mean? What does 

that entail? And so it’ll be interesting to hear more about that. 

What are the costs here? This is a hugely important issue in 

terms of . . . We know the public archives has chronically been 

underfunded and needs to have more funding. And whether this 

is a signal that, of course, we’ll see appropriate funding in the 

budget, I think this is an important, important one. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take, while I have 

certain ministers in the audience, I want to talk about some of 

the things that are recorded. And I don’t know if the Minister of 

Culture . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well all ministers are in 

the audience. Certain ministers are in the audience. You know, I 

had to look at this. And I was wondering whether the Minister 

of Culture is getting to know his colleagues very well, very well 

because some of the things he’s had in here brings to mind 

certain ministers, brings to mind certain ministers. 

 

And of course it talks about the public record that the 

Legislative Assembly, the Legislative Assembly Service, every 

officer of the Legislative Assembly, every government 

institution, every court, talks about the things that will happen. 

This is 24(5)(b): 

 

create and implement a records policy, management 

policy, and procedure to protect and maintain all public 

records that are in the custody . . . control of the 

Legislative Assembly [on and on] for which they are being 

maintained. 

 

And it talks about certain records. So I know that the ministers 

will have to follow these instructions. They’re usable and 

accessible, transferable. And here’s the kicker, Mr. Speaker: 

they have to be legible. The records have to be legible. So I’m 

looking at certain ministers and I’m wondering whether the 

Minister of Culture is going to have these ministers take some 

handwriting course. Now I don’t know about the Minister of 

Education, whether he’s going to put back into school cursive 

handwriting, but I think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Standardized cursiveness. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Standardized cursive handwriting. Because I’ve 

got to say, sometimes we have issues about legibility here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When we’re talking about archives, it’s important that the 

archives are legible and understandable. And I appreciate the 

Minister of Culture stepping up to the plate and saying that 

from now on the records of the ministers are going to be 

understandable and legible. So I think this is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only if Archives gets them back from 

former ministers. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I think they’re all in order, Mr. Speaker. They 

are all in order. They are all in order, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we can debate that. I don’t know 

if they’re going to create another bill, but whether that one is in 

the bill, but they are all legible. I’ve got to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, they are all legible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So anyways but I think this has got a lot of budget implications, 

and we’ll be looking forward to hearing about this. But we’ll be 

looking forward to hearing more about this in committee. 

 

As I said earlier last week, that the consultation piece is one that 

we’ll be really interested in hearing from the different folks 

who have a real stake in this, have a real stake in this. And as 

we clearly see, whether it’s the University of Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s the University of Regina, the First Nations, the 

Métis folks, those organizations clearly want to make sure their 

records are protected and if there’s a role for the Provincial 

Archives, it’s got to be protected. 

 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5903 

And of course as we’re talking today, the multicultural 

organizations really want to make sure their records are 

protected too and whether the Provincial Archives are 

considering that. What that means in this piece of legislation is 

huge. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know this will be an important 

piece of legislation, and we think it’s an important one both to 

have the conversation. I think it’s critical that we review this 

every once in a while. But clearly it’s a priority for us, and I 

think it’s a priority for this House that we do it right: there’s no 

unintended consequences; nothing is lost. For the Archives, 

that’s not a joke when something gets lost. They really want to 

make sure everything is in its right place. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move now that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 141, An Act respecting the Provincial Archives of 

Saskatchewan, Public Records Management and making 

consequential amendment to other Acts and Regulations. I do 

so move. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:41.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5889 

 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5891 

 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5893 

 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5894 

 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5895 

 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5897 

 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5900 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


