
























































Hansard: May 12, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 62A  MONDAY, MAY 12, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5381 
 May 12, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Apology 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to make a personal statement at the 
present time. Last Thursday, May 8th, I interrupted a statement 
by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. In reflecting on my 
spur-of-the-moment decision, I find I was hasty and it was 
inappropriate to have intervened at that time. There were other 
means at a better time to deal with the issues. I wish to 
apologize for my untimely actions and ask forgiveness. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 46 grade 10 
students from Winston Knoll Collegiate. Accompanying the 
students is their teacher, Michelle McKillop, and also we have 
some chaperones, Vonnie Schmidt and Brad Howard. So 
welcome to 46 grade 10 students who are seated in the west 
gallery. I think they’ve filled up that whole gallery. So it’s 
wonderful to see you here today. We’ll have a chance to have a 
visit shortly. So please enjoy the proceedings. Thank you very 
much for coming. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 
today, we have 33 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson 
Collegiate here in Regina, and they’re accompanied by two of 
Regina Public’s finest, Donarae Deringer and Kelsi Lyon. I 
look forward to meeting with this group after routine 
proceedings, so help me welcome them, please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my 
great pleasure to introduce some Campbell Collegiate students 
from here in Regina. There are 1,500 . . . or sorry, 15, not quite 
1,500. There are 15, let’s be very careful about that, high school 
students, and these are studying English as an additional 
language. The students come from China, from Pakistan, from 
India, and from Korea, and they’re joined today by their 
teachers, Trudy Thorson and Shayne McMillen. I welcome 
them to their Assembly and ask all members to join in that with 
me. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of education. We know 
that education is one of the most vital services the government 
provides to citizens, and we know that this government has 
failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 
resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. 
 
And we know this government has failed to develop a real plan 
to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as an 
additional language students, support community schools and 
their communities and students. And we know this government 
has adopted a P3 [public-private partnership] privatization 
approach to building schools the province needs even though 
the scheme will cost more than traditionally built schools and 
will leave out community needs in the design of the schools. 
And we know we must build the best education system for 
today and for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best education, quality education for 
Saskatchewan that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic 
and population changes, that is based on proven 
educational best practices, that is developed through 
consultation with the education sector, and that builds 
strong educational infrastructure to serve students and 
communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of residents and communities that 
are concerned with safety on Dewdney Avenue. They’d like to 
see the trucks, the semi, heavy-haul truck traffic immediately 
rerouted They recognize that this is an issue created by that 
government and that any further delays by that government to 
fix this problem are entirely unacceptable. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 



5382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. 
 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased once again to stand today to present a petition on 
highways throughout all of Saskatchewan. And this particular 
petition, Mr. Speaker, is in support of Highway 908, which is 
the only highway to service the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follow, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
commit to repairing and upgrading Highway 908. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this highway is in very poor shape. It 
provides service to the regional hospital. And the people that 
have signed this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, are people 
from Patuanak and the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition in support of a residents-in-care bill of rights. 
Those who have signed the petition point out that residents in 
care have the right to dignity, respect, and safety; that residents 
in care deserve basic guarantees of the quality of care they 
ought to receive; that residents in care have the right to 
individualized care that meets or exceeds minimum quality of 
care standards; and that it is the responsibility of the provincial 
government to ensure consistent standards of care in facilities 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan adopt Bill 
606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, which would 
provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right to quality, 
high-level standards of care in seniors’ care homes. 

 
I so submit. This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals 
from Rosetown, Herschel, Vanscoy, Delisle, Biggar, and 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of improving safety on Highway No. 1 east 
of Regina. The petitioners point out that the Highway No. 1 
corridor between Regina and Balgonie has become 
unacceptably dangerous, as attested to by the number of traffic 

collisions, many involving personal injury and death. The 
petitioners point out that the speed limit is currently 110 
kilometres per hour, which is not appropriate; and that 
intersections with dozens of vehicles waiting to enter at rush 
hour are unacceptable and dangerous; and that drivers daily 
must risk their lives and those of other motorists just to get on 
and off the highway. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, until the overpasses are built along this 
corridor: (1) immediately install traffic lights at the 
appropriate locations along Highway 1 between Regina 
and Balgonie, (2) immediately reduce speed limits to 
appropriate levels within this corridor, and (3) take steps to 
ensure that the speed limits are enforced. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a great many citizens. 
This particular batch is signed by citizens from Regina, 
Lumsden, Davin, Saskatoon, Balgonie, Strasbourg, Copper 
Sands, and White City. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Unemployment Rates Lowest in Country 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to rise 
in the Assembly today to share the very exciting news that 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate in April 2014 was the 
lowest ever recorded at 3.4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April marked the 16th consecutive month that our 
province has had the lowest unemployment rate in the country. 
Currently our unemployment rate, at 3.4 per cent, is less than 
half the national rate at 6.9. With Regina at 3.4 per cent and 
Saskatoon at 4.4 per cent, both cities have a lower 
unemployment rate than any other Canadian city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also proud to announce that our province 
continues to see increases in Aboriginal employment. 
Off-reserve Aboriginal employment was up 2 per cent for 15 
consecutive months of year-over-year increases, and Aboriginal 
youth employment was up 7.2 per cent for 11 consecutive 
months of year-over-year increases. Altogether, Aboriginal 
employment was 11.3 per cent, which is down from 12 per cent 
it was in April of last year. Mr. Speaker, these milestones are 
something that we all should be very proud of. 
 
I would like to thank the business owners and workers in our 
province for their contribution in helping us move 
Saskatchewan forward. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Regina Outdoor Hockey League 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this winter, despite the 
countless weeks of frigid temperatures, eager families crowded 
the outdoor rinks of Regina to participate in the Outdoor 



May 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5383 

Hockey League. 
 
From seasoned vets to first-timers, the OHL [Outdoor Hockey 
League] brings together kids from all walks of life and athletic 
backgrounds. The league provides families with the opportunity 
to become involved in the sport without the substantial financial 
barriers of registration and equipment expenses. Mr. Speaker, 
this year over 300 kids played at nine sites throughout the city. 
It’s a wonderful opportunity to get children involved in physical 
activity, team camaraderie, and friendly competition throughout 
the winter months. 
 
I had the pleasure of strapping on my skates and joining the 
crew for a good skate over at the Rosemont site on a few 
occasions. Nothing beats a good outdoor hockey game, 
especially when it’s followed by hot chocolate and good 
conversation. 
 
There are many people to thank for making this season a great 
success. Thanks to the league director, Laura Logan, for her 
dedication to the program; to Ranch Ehrlo for organizing; and 
to the main sponsors, KidSport and the Royal Bank of Canada. 
Special thanks also go out to the Rosemont rink crew including 
coaches Bradyn Parisien, and Dustin Henderson, as well as the 
keepers of the shack, Dennis and Judy Zawryucka. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in extending 
our gratitude to players, volunteers, supporters, and organizers 
of the Outdoor Hockey League. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

International Nurses Day and National Nursing Week 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring attention to 
the Assembly that May 12th is International Nurses Day. This 
date was specifically chosen because it’s the birthday of 
Florence Nightingale, the founder of modern-day nursing. It’s 
also the beginning of National Nursing Week which runs May 
12th to 18th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we set aside this special time to recognize the 
outstanding contributions that nurses make to our health system 
and to our communities. Saskatchewan is fortunate to have so 
many highly skilled registered nurses, nurse practitioners, 
registered psychiatric nurses, and licensed practical nurses. 
They are extremely important members of health care teams 
and serve their patients very well.  
 
Our government values what they do and knows how much 
they improve Saskatchewan’s health care system. That’s why, 
when we took office in ’07, we set a goal of hiring 800 new 
full-time nursing positions. We did that, and in addition we’ve 
hired 200 additional nursing positions, making the total 1,000. 
We’re seeing the fruits of that labour, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association recently 
announced that the number of registered nurses and 
practitioners in Saskatchewan has hit an all-time high of 11,042. 
Twenty per cent more nurses call Saskatchewan home than they 
did six years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all nurses in Saskatchewan for their 
commitment to patient and family-centred health care, and I 

thank them for their dedication to their patients and our health 
care system. They’re making a real difference in the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased also to 
rise today to recognize National Nursing Week and 
International Nurses Day. Today and throughout the week, we 
have an opportunity to reflect on the difference nurses make in 
our health care system. 
 
The International Council of Nurses is a federation representing 
over 13 million nurses all over the world. Every May 12th since 
1965, the ICN [International Council of Nurses] has used May 
12th to remind everyone of the high quality of nursing care and 
the valuable contribution of nurses to health policies. 
 
In Canada the campaign spearheaded by the Canadian Nurses 
Association recognizes nurses throughout the week. The CNA 
[Canadian Nurses Association] has been providing leadership 
for the nursing profession in Canada for over 100 years. The 
CNA not only guides nurses in their profession, it represents 
their collective vision, making nurses a driving force for 
improvement. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Here in the province, much leadership has been provided by the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, which has been fighting for 
safe, quality health care since 1974. It is also important to 
recognize the work of licensed practical nurses, psychiatric 
nurses, nurse practitioners, and others in the province as key 
members of the health care team. 
 
Nursing is often identified as one of the most trusted 
professions in Canada. Many of us know a nurse who 
demonstrates the courage, knowledge, and support that makes 
their role in health care so important. Mr. Speaker, supporting 
our talented and motivated health workers is essential for 
healthy Saskatchewan people. Quality health services cannot be 
achieved without an adequate number of appropriately prepared 
nurses, and we support these organizations in their calls for 
better health care in the province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Thursday evening the Minister of Justice, MA [ministerial 
assistant] Reagan Seidler, and myself joined 100 other walkers, 
mostly men, in the second annual Walk a Mile in Her Shoes 
event in Melfort. And yes, we were wearing ladies shoes with 
four-inch heels. 
 
The walk’s purpose is twofold: first to raise funds for the 
Angel’s Lighthouse domestic violence shelter and the North 
East Outreach and Support Services organization. The walk was 
very successful in that nearly $24,000 was raised. And I would 
like to mention one walker in particular, Justin Newberry, who 
raised an incredible $7,002. This is outstanding, Mr. Speaker. 



5384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

The second and maybe more important aspect of this walk is to 
raise awareness of the horrors of domestic violence. Too long 
this crime has been hidden in the shadows, and as a society we 
must shine the spotlight on the people who offend and protect 
those who suffer from this criminal act. Too many women, too 
many men, too many children have their lives victimized by 
these criminals. We must break this cycle of domestic and 
sexualized violence. 
 
I ask that all members join with me to congratulate the NEOSS 
[North East Outreach and Support Services] board of directors, 
administration, staff, and all of the volunteers who joined to 
make this event happen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Family First Radiothon 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, earlier this month, 
I along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow had the 
opportunity to participate in the 8th annual Family First 
Radiothon in Moose Jaw. The radio marathon was hosted by the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation and 800 CHAB radio. Mr. 
Speaker, the Moose Jaw Health Foundation was asking for 
donations for the purchase of equipment for the new hospital 
now under construction. 
 
I am pleased to announce that the radiothon surpassed its goal 
of $500,000 and ended up with a grand total of $688,344. Mr. 
Speaker, there are many people to thank for this. However I’d 
like to take a moment to acknowledge two of the radiothon’s 
larger donors. Al and Bernice Fox have been generous 
supporters for the radiothon for a number of years. Following 
the passing of Al this past year, the family of Al and Bernice 
Fox made a donation of $80,000. Their generosity is very much 
appreciated. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge the $250,000 donation announced 
by Barrie Vice, the Saskatchewan manager, program manager 
for Golden West radio through the support of the Orange 
Benevolent Society. This is the largest donation of the 
radiothon’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation and 800 CHAB radio on the 
success of the Family First radiothon. And a special thank you 
to the hundreds of donors who helped in this cause. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, well, well. 
 

Opposition Statements 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you for that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Albert Einstein once said, if the facts don’t fit the theory, 
change the facts. Mr. Speaker, since the Leader of the 
Opposition assumed his role, the members opposite have taken 
this quote as their lone policy.  
 
Never let things like the facts get in the way of the narrative, 

Mr. Speaker. Last week the member from Saskatoon Centre 
accused the government of cancelling the living skills program 
at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] when in fact the program has accepted both spring 
and fall applicants. And the week before that, the Leader of the 
Opposition accused our government of throwing out Christmas 
trees that were used to raise money for the Moose Jaw hospital 
foundation, when in fact the trees were thrown out under the 
reign of the NDP [New Democratic Party] when the member 
from Regina Lakeview was Health minister. 
 
And not to be left out, the member from Athabasca tried to pull 
a fast one on the media and state that when he was minister of 
Highways, zero per cent of highways contracts were not 
completed on time, when in fact 37 per cent of those contracts 
came in late in 2006-07. And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition tried to use a personal story from the member of 
Melfort to distort the government’s position on standards of 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during his leadership campaign, the Leader of the 
Opposition stated, and I quote, “Genuine debate and real 
scrutiny are far too often lacking at the legislature.” Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the members opposite, we couldn’t 
agree more. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Pediatric Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week Lana 
Fidler’s nine-year-old daughter, Brielle, was rushed to St. 
Paul’s Hospital in severe pain. Even though a doctor said that 
urgent surgery was required to remove Brielle’s appendix, there 
was no pediatric surgeon available in Saskatoon to help her. 
The doctor told Lana that they would have to send Brielle the 
next day to Regina. 
 
Understandably, Lana is very upset about the treatment that her 
daughter received. She said this: “Is our health care system 
seriously that poor that we didn’t have any doctor here that 
could help her? What happens when the next kid needs 
something? It’s quite sad.” 
 
To the Premier: how is it possible that there was not a doctor 
available in Saskatoon to help Brielle? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the Leader of the Opposition for the question. And while I’m 
unaware of the specific case he raises, it’s something we’d 
obviously want to look very carefully at. 
 
We want to be able to ensure the appropriate and timely care for 
all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have 
worked hard to invest in additional pediatric resources in the 
province, including a 27 per cent increase in pediatricians, for 
example. Mr. Speaker, it’s also why we’ve worked very hard to 
move beyond talking about a children’s hospital, have 
committed real dollars to the children’s hospital that needs to be 



May 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5385 

built in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d also be very interested in looking into this 
particular case. We take these cases and all cases like them and 
the stories that accompany them about Saskatchewan families 
very seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lana was told that the 
road ambulance would take her daughter to Regina at 5 a.m. 
They actually didn’t leave until 6:30 in the morning, and that 
was incredibly frustrating for Lana because Brielle was in such 
tremendous pain. When they finally arrived at the Regina 
General Hospital around 9 a.m., they were told that the 
ultrasound tests from the night before had been lost and they 
would have to redo those tests. It wasn’t until about 5 p.m. that 
Brielle received the required surgery that she urgently needed. 
Lana says it was very difficult to see her daughter Brielle in so 
much pain for so long. 
 
Again to the Premier: how is it possible that Brielle did not 
have access to the physician that she needed to have her 
immediate health care need dealt with in Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m not aware of the specifics around this particular case, but 
it’s something that we take very seriously. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we also have the Saskatchewan air ambulance that’s available 
in the province of Saskatchewan at the direction of health care 
professionals who believe that an air ambulance is needed. And 
I’m not sure why an air ambulance would not have been 
deployed in this particular instance. Again it’s something that 
we would want to look into. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Lana says that the nursing care 
that her daughter Brielle received was great. She actually talks 
about a little koala teddy bear being tucked in with her daughter 
on the long trip headed down to Regina. 
 
Lana says that the nurses and the staff in Saskatoon were 
incredibly frustrated that the surgery that Brielle needed 
couldn’t be provided in Saskatoon. Now this government has 
gutted pediatric care here in Regina. In fact there’s no longer an 
ICU [intensive care unit] pediatric unit here anymore. And 
those services, Mr. Speaker, are supposed to be provided in 
Saskatoon. So it’s incredibly concerning, Mr. Speaker, that 
there was no doctor available to help Brielle and that she had to 
be taken by road ambulance to Regina while in an incredible 
amount of pain. 
 
My question to the Premier: if Saskatoon is supposed to be the 
hub for pediatric health care, how is it possible that Brielle had 
to go by road ambulance to Regina to get the urgently needed 
surgery that she needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these are important questions 

that we will now ask with respect to the case as well. In this 
particular instance, obviously the pediatric surgeon was not 
available and so the decision was made for the transfer to 
Regina where there was surgeons available for it. Mr. Speaker, 
obviously a decision was made with respect to road ambulance. 
 
But let’s be very clear. In the province of Saskatchewan we 
have sufficiently resourced a very, very effective air ambulance. 
Mr. Speaker, we also have STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society]. STARS are not yet moving children around, 
transferring children, but certainly the fixed-wing aircraft are. 
And so again we would want to defer to health care 
professionals to make the call as to which kind of ambulance 
was the most effective and suitable, appropriate for each 
particular case. But, Mr. Speaker, be assured we’ll look into this 
particular matter. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question was 
specifically, if Saskatoon is supposed to be the hub for pediatric 
health care here in the province as the government has stated, 
how is it possible that Brielle did not have access to a surgeon 
to get the urgently needed surgery that she required? Why did 
she have to come to Regina if in fact Saskatoon is supposed to 
be the hub for pediatric health care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because the 
pediatric surgeon was not available. That’s the answer to the 
question. And so a decision was made for the transfer of the 
patient to Regina. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s also why the government has been 
moving resources and planning towards the construction of a 
brand new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, so 
that there can be that critical mass of professional front-line 
people involved in health care for Saskatchewan children, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Right now there’s a working group that’s being led within the 
Ministry of Health, and the Minister of Health informs me is in 
place to develop a plan specifically around the right 
complement of resources for the children’s hospital in the area 
of pediatric care in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have invested in additional resources in this province since 
coming to office in 2007. That includes increased resources 
around pediatrics, increased resources from what were here 
previously. That includes more nurses, Mr. Speaker, and just in 
today, that includes the reality that there are today in the 
province of Saskatchewan 420 more doctors practising now 
than there were before we took office. 
 
More work to be done and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look into this 
particular case, but this government is committed to ensuring 
that we are investing in human resources and the appropriate 
facilities to provide top quality care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
 



5386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we knew from budget 
documents that this government was planning to rack up 
significant new debt at the Global Transportation Hub. And 
now we know that cabinet recently moved to increase the debt 
limit for the GTH by a whopping 650 per cent, from 10 million 
to $75 million. To the minister: why is this needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you for the question from the 
member. Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub is 
growing in leaps and bounds. There are a number of additional 
businesses have set up operations, and I will provide you with 
the list, if you choose, with respect to it. They are assembling 
more clients all of the time. In addition to that, they are working 
on the construction of a number of road networks within the 
facilities, utility corridors, things of that nature. I believe we are 
down to around 105 acres that are still left there of the initial 
about 800 that was developed, and they’re moving to the next 
stage of developing the property. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been pretty 
minimal interest from the private sector in the GTH so this 
government’s been scrambling to use public resources to keep 
this project going. Our Crown corporations have already been 
forced to support the Global Transportation Hub with a lot of 
money. 
 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] spent 
over $2.4 million to purchase land there. SaskPower, who the 
minister of the GTH is also the minister for SaskPower, spent 
$27 million for their land at the GTH site and will spend a total 
of $230 million to build its facility and relocate its operations to 
the GTH. And now the GTH debt will also be skyrocketing. To 
the minister: why is he struggling so much to get the job done 
on the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 
private investment at the Global Transportation Hub, the total 
private investment in the Global Transportation Hub currently 
stands at $485 million. There are 732 people that are full-time 
employed there and there were 1,800 jobs during the 
construction phase of it. 
 
When you look at private sector involvement there, Morguard 
has been one of the most recent ones. They have purchased 50 
acres and have leased another 50 acres as an option, and they’re 
going to be acting on that option, I am told. Emterra has opened 
a facility there, $18 million facility just recently. CP [Canadian 
Pacific] rail has a $50 million investment. They’ve talked about 
expanding their operations there as well. Consolidated Fastfrate 
has over 10,000 square feet there. The list goes on and on of 
private sector investments in there. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — [Inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, total 
Crown corporation debt has already increased 94 per cent under 
that government. After this year, according to the government’s 
own budget documents, Crown debt will have increased by 106 
per cent under its watch. That means that in seven years under 
this government, our Crowns will have racked up over $4 
billion in new debt, and there’s no end in sight. 
 
Now this government is increasing the debt limit for the Global 
Transportation Hub by 650 per cent, not counting the tens if not 
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on related infrastructure 
and spent by the Crown corporations. To the minister: how 
much debt in total will Saskatchewan taxpayers have to rack up 
for the Global Transportation Hub, and just what sort of return 
on investment is he looking for? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting, coming from this member who gets up on a daily 
basis and complains about truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. 
Well those trucks that are on Dewdney Avenue are travelling to 
the Global Transportation Hub as a result of a significant 
amount of investment that there is at that facility, so you can’t 
have it both ways. We don’t want to have trucks, but we want to 
make sure that the Global Transportation Hub is growing. 
 
But what is happening is we have the Global Transportation 
Hub that is growing in leaps and bounds, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re also taking action, we’re also taking action with respect 
to the truck traffic out there. As the highway network is put in 
place — it is being built right now — that problem will be 
solved as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the debt at the GTH 
that’s growing in leaps and bounds. And you know, that 
minister is also the Minister for SaskPower, and the Crown 
corporation investments at the GTH are also growing leaps and 
bounds. I often think it would have been an interesting 
conversation to watch the Minister for the GTH convince the 
Minister for SaskPower that he should place millions of dollars 
out there, Mr. Speaker. It would have been an interesting 
conversation. 
 
As far as the unacceptable safety on Dewdney Avenue, when 
will that minister, when will that government take it seriously? 
When will they get those trucks off Dewdney Avenue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again the member opposite has his facts incorrect. The 
SaskPower officials, through the CEO [chief executive officer], 
Robert Watson, approached the GTH themselves, asked for the 
opportunity to buy property out there. 
 
The reason was really quite simple. They have a number of 
facilities in the city of Regina that they want to redevelop into 
the Global Transportation Hub, therefore making those 
properties available for redevelopment right in the city of 
Regina. I know the member opposite doesn’t like development 



May 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5387 

in the city of Regina, but we’re going to continue with 
development — $485 million of development right now and 
counting. We will continue down that path. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Accommodation for People With Disabilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government has admitted that as of May 
1st, there were at least 12 community living service division 
clients living in hospitals for extended periods of time because 
this government has nowhere else for them to go. But we know 
of at least one other that has been living at St. Paul’s Hospital 
for a full year. 
 
These are individuals with intellectual disabilities. They deserve 
to live in a home, not to be warehoused in hospitals for years at 
a time. To the minister: how can she possibly justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will know we had 
I think a very good discussion at committee about this particular 
issue. I think the members and the public will acknowledge the 
good work that’s been done by this government, in particular 
this minister, to move forward with building new group home 
spaces all across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that for many of these individuals, they 
are looking for . . . We are looking at the system, and the 
Ministry of Social Services works closely with the Health 
ministry. To date, Mr. Speaker, the updated information that I 
do have is 12 individuals. These are all individual 
circumstances that we are trying to work towards, and in fact 
the Minister of Social Services indicated that the most recent 
movement out of the hospital setting into a group home was just 
April 9th of this year. So it in fact shows that we are making 
progress on this important file. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Several CLSD [community living service 
delivery] clients have been in hospital beds waiting for more 
appropriate placements for almost a year, one for more than two 
years. One has been in hospital waiting for a placement for four 
years. Another has been in hospital waiting for a better 
placement for seven years, Mr. Speaker — seven years. Again 
these are individuals with intellectual disabilities that deserve to 
live in a home, not to be warehoused in hospitals for seven 
years. To the minister: how does it make any sense to 
warehouse community living clients in hospitals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we acknowledge that the Ministry of Social 
Services and the Ministry of Health need to continue to work 
towards finding these individuals a place to live. Certainly with 
the examples, and I know for the most part, and the member 
will know this, in some cases it’s 30 days, 27 days. Yes, I 

acknowledge that there are a few of those 12 cases across this 
entire province that are in the years. Mr. Speaker, I would say in 
terms of the ones for four years and seven years, those are 
individuals living at Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. 
 
Certainly we know that there are extenuating circumstances in 
some of these cases which make it difficult to find a home for 
these individuals. But certainly the people of this province need 
to know that the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Social 
Services work very hard to find a home for these individuals. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The main issue here is that this is not a 
common sense approach and it’s simply not fair to these 
individuals to have to live in a hospital for years on end — a 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. But there are also significant questions 
about the cost of this approach. We know that it’s incredibly 
expensive to keep someone in a hospital bed. So it begs the 
question why this government hasn’t bothered to sort out other 
places for these individuals to live. To the minister: how much 
is it costing Saskatchewan taxpayers to keep people living in 
hospitals for years at a time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly members will know, and the public will 
know the work that this government has done, particularly by 
the Ministry of Social Services and the minister, to reduce the 
wait-list of 440 individuals that were waiting for placement. We 
do acknowledge though that there is more work to do. 
 
With respect to these cases, and not to get into the specifics, but 
these are complex cases. Oftentimes individuals exhibit very 
aggressive or sexually inappropriate behaviour that makes it 
difficult to place them in community care, but we do work hard 
with the Ministry of Social Services. As the Ministry of Health, 
we do know that there needs to be more work to place these 
individuals in the community. That’s why we’re working hard 
together as ministries, and we will continue that work. 
 
These 12 individuals obviously need a home. They need a 
permanent home, and we’re working hard to do that. And in 
fact I think the indication from the Minister of Social Services 
that the most recent individual that was on this list received a 
home on April 9th of this year shows that we are continuing 
that work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has to check his 
list. The update came after that April 9th move out, Mr. 
Speaker, so there was an additional person living in hospital. 
 
We’re concerned about all of these individuals who have been 
living in hospitals for extended periods of time because this 
government can’t figure out where else to house them. And 
we’re also concerned about what will happen when the Valley 
View Centre closes its doors because if this government can’t 
figure out what to do with these CLSD clients who have been 



5388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

stuck in hospitals for years, how is it possibly prepared to meet 
the needs of the residents of the Valley View Centre when it 
closes its doors? To the minister: what is the answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my 
colleague the Minister of Health indicated, not only did we 
address the 440 wait-list that was there when we became 
government; there’s also been an additional over 215 
individuals who we have helped to find a home and provide 
services to. 
 
Just Friday, I think the member opposite is aware that we had 
indicated there has been one client from Valley View has 
moved out of Valley View. Another one has moved out today. 
We are continuing to merge, not only the needs of the people in 
Valley View but the individuals with intellectual disabilities 
living right across the province, into homes, more than 40 
different communities in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the members opposite are 
concerned about people with disabilities, intellectual 
disabilities. When we became government, there was 440, not 
12 people, that were waiting for services. Every one of those 
individuals matter to us. And we know that every one of them 
needs a personal plan and they need to be able to go into a 
home that works for them with the services that they need. We 
will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we haven’t 
got a place right now because we have to find the right place, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer the 
question. If she can’t figure it out now, if there are 12 
individuals living in hospitals right now, what is she going to do 
when the doors on Valley View Centre closes? This is the state 
of affairs now. What she going to do? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in the recent budget, 
members opposite are well aware that we intend to move at 
least 20 individuals from Valley View out this year. And at the 
same time there was additional money for people that are 
requiring services that live right across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there is always going to be a need 
for homes. And not only that; they need specialized care. That’s 
why right across this province we’ve been looking at homes for 
individuals from anywhere from two to five people in a home. 
We look at their plans. We look at what their families require. 
We look at where they need to be. And every one of them is 
unique and every one of them needs special care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe the members opposite are finally 
worried about Valley View, finally worried about Valley View 
when we never heard a word from them when they were in 
government. We never heard about the 440 people on a 
wait-list. We never heard about the continuous need to make 
sure that people with disabilities were included in our 

communities — not stuck in a place, in an institution, but 
included in the community. Mr. Speaker, every one of our 
people are important to us and they will continue to be part of 
our plans as we go forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ministerial Relationship With Board Members 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the Premier 
familiar with the legal principle of reasonable apprehension of 
bias when it comes to independent tribunals like the Social 
Services Appeal Board? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
occasions in government, both in terms of the years we’ve been 
in office and the years that the NDP were in office, where 
someone who chairs a quasi-judicial board or an independent 
board that hears appeals will also consult with the minister, 
whether it’s a Saskatchewan Party minister or whether it used to 
be an NDP minister, on the administration of the file, Mr. 
Speaker, or perhaps the structure of the boards themselves. And 
my understanding — I think I know where the member’s going 
with this question — that is exactly the case here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — The Premier should read from page 299 of 
volume 4 of Dussault and Bourgeat’s Administrative Law, and 
perhaps the Minister of Justice could track down a copy. And it 
says this: 
 

To have a decision by a public officer or agency set aside 
for bias, it is thus not necessary to prove without a doubt 
that prejudice or interest was present; only the existence of 
circumstances likely to give rise to the apprehension of 
bias need exist. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, by this government refusing to fix this, this 
government is leaving every single decision heard by the Social 
Services Appeal Board open to appeal at the Court of Queen’s 
Bench and having those decisions overturned by the courts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: is he not concerned that this 
government’s refusal to fix this will leave many cases to be 
challenged in the courts and overturning the decisions that have 
been made by the independent tribunal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned in the House last week, members of 
Executive Council have responsibility for certain pieces of 
legislation and as part of that there are administrative and 
adjudicative panels that are empanelled as a result of that. They 
have responsibilities for that, Mr. Speaker. And as part of that, 
it’s the administration of those panels that’s very, very 
important to the minister. So for instance we’ll sit and have a 
discussion with a Chair of a particular panel with respect to 



May 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5389 

administrative matters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t need to be lectured by the Leader of the Opposition 
with respect to the law, Mr. Speaker, but I will tell you that 
when those discussions take place, Mr. Speaker, they certainly 
take place without any compromise with regard to the 
independence of those tribunals, Mr. Speaker. They’ll continue 
to happen because they’re important for the ongoing and proper 
and efficient conduct of those panels. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it would be good if we were only 
talking about the conversations that would occur, Mr. Speaker, 
to give the reasonable apprehension of bias, but it goes much 
more than that. 
 
Here’s what we know: the Minister of Social Services went to 
Ghana and London and billed taxpayers inappropriately for 
those expenses. The minister took her friend along for that trip. 
They had a $200 personal lunch at taxpayers’ expense which 
was only repaid once the opposition exposed that expense. The 
minister and the friend were chauffeured around London, Mr. 
Speaker, in a Mercedes, for $3,600 a day which was only repaid 
once it was exposed by the opposition. 
 
The Social Services minister then appoints that very same 
friend as Co-Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board, which 
is supposed to be — supposed to be — an independent tribunal. 
And the Social Services minister and her friend have had at 
least one lengthy conversation about board-related issues. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how does 
this not count as reasonable apprehension of bias? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned already, 
these conversations happen on a regular basis and they’re 
certainly without compromise to the independence of those 
panels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I noted in Premier’s estimates, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
numbers came out, this particular panel had rendered decisions 
against the government in more cases than was previously the 
case. So how the member can stand up and say there’s some 
reasonable apprehension of bias here, Mr. Speaker, is beyond 
me. And in any event, Mr. Speaker, there are appeals to the 
Court of Appeal and the Court of Queen’s Bench in those 
circumstances if there is some suggestion that there is a 
reasonable apprehension of bias which, Mr. Speaker, there is 
not in this case. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Social Impact Bond Supports 
Home for Mothers and Children 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in the House today to share with you an important 
announcement that was made this morning in Saskatoon. A new 
home for single mothers called Sweet Dreams officially opened 
today. This new home was a result of a cutting-edge funding 
model. This funding model is called a social impact bond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to announce that this is the first 
time a social impact bond has been used in Canada. Social 
impact bonds, or SIBs, are funding arrangements made between 
governments, private investors, and service providers. Under 
these arrangements, government sets out a specific social 
outcome it wants to have achieved. It acquires the money to 
achieve that social outcome from private investors, and it 
promises to pay the investors a pre-arranged sum if and only if 
the service provider achieves a desired outcome in a set period 
of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me explain how this works with Sweet 
Dreams. This home will provide single moms and their 
children, who are at risk of requiring services from child and 
family services, with affordable housing. While the mothers are 
living at Sweet Dreams, they will receive support to complete 
their education, to secure employment, or to participate in 
pre-employment activities such as life skills and parenting 
classes. The ultimate goal of this program is to transition the 
mothers and the children back into the community and to keep 
the family unit together during and after the program. 
 
Under this social impact bond, the service provider is Egadz. 
Egadz received $1 million from Conexus Credit Union and 
Wally and Colleen Mah to deliver the program and achieve the 
desired social outcome, which is to keep 22 children with their 
mothers and out of foster care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based on the degree to which this program is 
achieved, government either pays or does not pay Conexus and 
the Mah family the amount outlined in the agreement. The 
success of this goal being met will be measured by an 
independent assessor. Payments to the investors are calculated 
based on the degree to which the desired outcome is achieved 
and will range from 75 per cent to 100 per cent. 
 
Any outcome less than 75 per cent of the goal will result in no 
payment by government but, Mr. Speaker, I am very confident 
that this goal will be achieved. I am confident because I know 
that everyone involved in this project cares a great deal about 
their community, about children, about parents, and about 
keeping families whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we anticipate this project will result in 
savings of government between point five four million and 1.5 
million over five years, what’s more important is the social 
impact. What’s more important is that children will avoid the 
foster care system and they’ll remain with their mothers. 
What’s more important is that mothers will receive the support 
they need to rebuild their homes, to receive education, to 
receive . . . to find employment, and to provide for their 
families, the ones that they love. 
 
We are helping the families who live there by ensuring they 
have a safe, healthy place to call home while they receive the 
supports they need. Mr. Speaker, Sweet Dreams is based on a 



5390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

multi-ministry, long-term strategy that aligns with the 
objectives of the Saskatchewan child and family agenda. 
 
The partnerships that were developed to make this project a 
reality under our government’s resolve is to ensure a better 
quality of life for all Saskatchewan people, a goal under the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth. It’s remarkable what can be 
achieved when we come together to find a unique solution to 
challenging problems. We thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to thank the minister for the advance copy of her 
comments. And we know that while the House was, we’re in 
session now, but the advance, the media was in Saskatoon as 
well as the embargoed stuff for the MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. But we are here now talking about the 
Sweet Dreams project. And I think it’s an important one in 
terms of what we can do to keep families together, to support 
them, and mothers and children and families whole, and make 
sure that they can be together through strong housing, through 
employment, that type of thing. 
 
But this is an interesting concept that the minister’s advancing, 
the idea of social impact bonds. And we did not hear about this 
in the Throne Speech or the budget speech or during Social 
Services estimates. So we didn’t really get a chance to question 
the minister about how this will be carried out. So we’ll watch 
this very closely. 
 
And she has referred to the proof or the results-based outcomes. 
And we’ll be watching this very carefully how the government 
develops the benchmarks and how they will measure this, the 
independent investigator or auditor, how that will play out and 
how this will actually be more efficient than the current system 
in place. 
 
So the question really for the type of announcement that was 
today — that we can all get behind, we can all get behind what 
Sweet Dreams and Egadz is doing — was private money really 
necessary for this? Because we all value children at risk and 
what we can do to make sure that is reduced every day in this 
province. 
 
We’ve been hearing about this issue for many, many years, and 
so it’s an important concern. But the question is, was private 
money really necessary, in that we believe on this side of the 
House that the government should be making this a priority 
with adequate funding necessary in the budget. Did just this 
happen now, where the ministry found out they were going to 
be short of their projects and the funding, and now here they’re 
off-loading it? So, Mr. Speaker, we will watch this very closely. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 

Southern Conservation Land Management Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today the Government of Saskatchewan announced 
the implementation of the southern conservation land 
management strategy and the proclamation of its supporting 

legislation and regulations: The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2010, also The Conservation Easements 
Amendment Act, 2010, and the wildlife habitat and ecological 
land designation regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years, the ministries of 
Environment and Agriculture have worked closely with 
conservation and agricultural stakeholders to develop and refine 
the strategy that was announced today. I want to acknowledge 
the important role that these stakeholders have played as we 
develop this strategy, and we look forward to continuing work 
with them and other groups as it is implemented. The new 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, accommodates both public and private 
ownership, using modern conservation tools to make sure that 
significant ecological values are maintained regardless of 
ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear about this. We will 
continue to protect ecological values in southern Saskatchewan. 
Most current, WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] 
designated land will continue to be protected, either through 
Crown ownership and WHPA designation or with Crown 
conservation easements. This was determined through the use 
of the Crown land ecological assessment tool, or better known 
as CLEAT. 
 
CLEAT is a computer model that evaluates lands based on their 
ecological value and risk of development. The tool was 
developed by agrologists, biologists, and ecologists from the 
government and from conservation agencies. Crown lands with 
the highest ecological value, nearly 50 per cent of current 
WHPA lands, will not be sold. Another 37 per cent with 
moderate ecological value may be sold, but only with the 
protection of a Crown conservation easement held by the 
Ministry of Environment. 
 
Only lands assessed as having lower ecological value may be 
sold without easement. These lands make up only about 15 per 
cent of the land currently designated under WHPA. Further, 
government has committed to assessing vacant Crown land and 
adding those with high ecological value to WHPA as a 
designation when appropriate. This will help maintain total 
acres in WHPA and ensure that high value lands are 
appropriately protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 7 per cent of the revenue from the sale of former 
WHPA lands will go to the Fish and Wildlife Development 
Fund to support conservation of habitat protection projects. The 
amended legislation gives us a range of new compliance tools 
to make sure that ecological values are protected on designated 
land and that the obligations under Crown conservation 
easements are indeed fulfilled. These include new and expanded 
compliance options for enforcing conservation easements 
including stop work orders, equipment seizures, injunctions and 
fines, as well as increased penalties for contraventions. 
 
We will continue to welcome the perspectives of all the 
members of the southern Crown land conservation committee 
as we move forward. As part of an open and inclusive process, 
the committee will provide a forum for discussions about land 
stewardship and to resolve potential conflicts while continuing 
to provide advice for the strategy as implemented. Thank you 
very much for the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 



May 12, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5391 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to the 
minister for providing his comments in advance of his 
statement. Mr. Speaker, the minister’s statement and the 
information released today regarding the sale of WHPA lands 
under the newly proclaimed Act raises a lot of questions for the 
official opposition and for stakeholders all over the province. 
 
The minister has not explained how the price will be 
determined for these WHPA lands, Mr. Speaker. This will give 
some producers, particularly small operators, a reasonable cause 
for concern. The minister has not explained why over 500,000 
acres of Crown land have been rated at a low ecological value 
and if this represents a deterioration of the value, the ecological 
value of those lands since they were put into protection. 
 
Although I believe that producers are and always have been the 
best stewards of Saskatchewan land, the minister has not 
provided reason and not explained the impetus behind the 
decision to remove 1.8 million acres from the Crown inventory, 
which is a huge decrease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, leases provide a steady return in perpetuity, 
benefiting all citizens in addition to the benefit for the producer 
who’s paying reasonable lease rates. As is the case with our 
Crown corporations, Saskatchewan’s common sense people 
have made it clear they prefer year over year of revenues from 
Crown-owned assets over a one-time sale. Surely a government 
benefiting from 50 per cent more resource revenue wouldn’t do 
this just for the money. 
 
I also have questions about the resale of this land once in 
private hands, especially concerning if an easement has been 
changed or removed by a producer and the government before 
selling the land. The amendments to The Conservation 
Easements Act proclaimed today will now allow for easements 
which are supposed to be in perpetuity to be minimized or 
eliminated at the minister’s discretion. Certainly the minister 
has not explained why his government sees fit to make it 
possible and easier for an owner of conservation land to just 
apply to or reduce or eliminate the easement that’s protecting 
the land’s ecological value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wondered, while I was listening to the 
minister’s statement, if any of these lands were bequests from 
private individuals who turned them over to the Crown for 
protection. I believe it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
statement today provides producers and Saskatchewan residents 
who care about conservation and the protection of wildlife 
habitat with more questions than answers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 137 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

Bill 137, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 137, The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 138 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 138, The 
Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 138, The Officers of the 
Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill 139, The Election Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 



5392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2014 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 139, The Election 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:32.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Apology 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5381 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5381 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5381 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5381 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5381 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5381 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5382 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5382 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5382 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5382 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Unemployment Rates Lowest in Country 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5382 
 Regina Outdoor Hockey League 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5382 
 International Nurses Day and National Nursing Week 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5383 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5383 
 Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Fundraiser 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5383 
 Family First Radiothon 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5384 
 Opposition Statements 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5384 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Pediatric Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5384 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5384 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 
 Accommodation for People With Disabilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 
 Ministerial Relationship With Board Members 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Social Impact Bond Supports Home for Mothers and Children 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5389 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5390 
 Southern Conservation Land Management Strategy 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5390 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 137 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 
 Bill No. 138 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 
 Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


