
























































Hansard: April 16, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 16, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5189 
 April 16, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, Dave and Lori Hill who 
are joining us today from Abbotsford, BC [British Columbia]. 
Dave and Lori are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are 
here today as the family representing MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] Lloyd Hampton who will be officially 
remembered in the condolence motion that will be brought 
before the legislature later today. I would ask all members to 
join us in welcoming the Hills to this legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly. a group seated both in the east gallery and on the 
floor of the Chamber. They come to us from the Canadian 
Mental Health Association, from the centre over on Albert 
Street. It’s a great place to visit, does a lot of great work there, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly it’s good to have that visit returned 
to myself at the legislature here today. 
 
We’re joined by Michelle Foster, Suzanne Quesnel, and a fine 
group again, both in the gallery and here on the floor. I look 
forward to having a fuller visit with them later on today, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this 
group to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a quick 
hello to an individual seated in the west gallery. That is Bill 
Stevenson, a fine individual. And certainly I’ve had the chance 
of running with Bill in the last election, and I think I might have 
the chance of running with Bill in the one to come, but we’ll see 
how this goes, Mr. Speaker. But please join me in welcoming 
Bill Stevenson to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all colleagues in the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m pleased today to introduce a young gentleman 
sitting in the west gallery, a grade 8 student from M.J. Coldwell 
School in my constituency, Mr. Ben Bateson. And Ben is joined 
today by his, I’m assuming it’s his mom, Debbi-Lynn Bateson, 
who I’ll be meeting with shortly after question period for some 
Q & A and some pictures. I’ll have further things to say about 
Ben and his mom in an upcoming member’s statement, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you and to everyone in the Legislative Assembly, I 
would like to have . . . further on the introduction of Bill 
Stevenson to the members of the Legislative Assembly, I can 
inform the member that I’m quite certain he will have the 
opportunity to run against Mr. Stevenson again in the election 
in 2015 or 2016 or whenever it comes. And we’re very much 
looking forward to having Bill sit on this side of the floor after 
the next election, and I want everyone to take the time and 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plans to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. 
 
And we know that the privatization of health care laundry will 
mean a devastating loss of over 300 good-paying jobs, 
devastating local economies and families and that the 
privatization of health care laundry will take money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to instead to be used to 
boost the profits of an Alberta-based corporation. I’d like to 
read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profit of an 
Alberta-based corporation; and, furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
safety concerns on Dewdney Avenue and the position that 
heavy-haul truck traffic needs to be rerouted from Dewdney 
Avenue. They note that any further delay from that government 
is entirely unacceptable to address a problem created by that 
government. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 



5190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action, as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed today by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of the North. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
standing today to present yet another petition on highways in 
northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the people that have 
signed this petition are primarily petitioning on Highway 155, 
the main artery to the northwest part of the province. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to commit to repairing and 
upgrading of Highway 155. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse but, as in any other petition that 
we’ve signed on highways, highways petitions have been 
signed from all throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition from 
residents from our province that want to bring to our attention 
the following: that in 2012 the government stubbornly cut the 

grants for Yorkton’s harness racing industry, and the 
government has failed to properly listen or consult with the 
residents of Yorkton. This government’s cuts toward harness 
racing will continue to negatively impact breeders, trainers, and 
other employees, as well as destructively impact the economic 
spinoffs of the harness racing industry. And without these 
grants, Yorkton residents who have contributed through their 
hard work and tax dollars may have to relocate to provinces 
which do support the harness racing industry, like Ontario, 
Alberta, or British Columbia. So in the prayer that reads as 
follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan may be pleased to call on the government to 
immediately reinstate the grant funding for harness racing 
in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

 
These are signed by citizens of Wadena, Rocanville, and 
Yorkton. I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

Student Trip to United Kingdom 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to recognize a group of young students from M.J. 
Coldwell Elementary School in my constituency of Regina 
Northeast. This group of six is preparing to depart for London, 
England tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. They range from grades 8 to 
10, and will be accompanied by their teacher, Debbi-Lynn 
Bateson and Tara Dryburgh. The students are as follows: Nash 
Farrow, Gray Farrow, Trey Danyluk, Bailey Johnson, Alex 
Huzle, and Ben Bateson. 
 
 Mr. Speaker, this trip has been in the works for two years now, 
and they are very excited that the time has finally come. Some 
of the students have travelled in the past, but for many this will 
be a new experience and definitely the furthest any of them 
have been away from home. They will begin their trip in 
London and then visit various other cities in the United 
Kingdom, including Somerset, Bath, Stratford, and Oxford, 
before returning home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young students are sure to enjoy a rich 
educational and cultural experience over the next week. And 
they have earned it by raising monies to assist paying for the 
trip through a variety of fundraising activities, one that they will 
remember fondly for quite some time to come, I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing a 
safe and meaningful trip to this group of young students and 
their teachers and chaperones. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

2014 National Aboriginal Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
announce that the 2014 National Aboriginal Curling 
Championship will be held this weekend at the Granite Curling 
Club in Saskatoon. This national Aboriginal event was in 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5191 

danger of not being sponsored for the second year in a row. 
Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, the historical northern Saskatchewan 
Métis community of Ile-a-la-Crosse and its group of companies 
will now be hosting the event. 
 
Local businesses and the community organizations also rose to 
the occasion, including the mayor and council of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, the Ile-a-la-Crosse Communication Society, the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Friendship Centre, the Sakitawak Development 
Corporation, and others gathered to support this great national 
tournament. It would not have been possible, Mr. Speaker, to do 
this alone. We also want to thank Cameco, the Fort McKay 
Métis, and the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority for 
rescuing this very important event. 
 
Mayor Duane Favel spoke on behalf of the many volunteers, 
including Lawrence Corrigal, Elaine Favel, Nap Gardiner, and 
Vanessa Gardiner when he said: 

 
This has been a celebrated and important social event for 
many Aboriginal people from Ile-a-la-Crosse and across 
Western Canada for many years. When we heard that this 
bonspiel might not happen this year, my community asked 
if they could sponsor it. I’m proud to say we are 
sponsoring it. 

 
There’ll be 36 teams in the men’s and women’s division 
playing for $18,000 in cash prizes and the national title.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the next step is to guarantee that this event 
continues on and continues to take place for years to come. I 
call on the members of the Assembly today to support and to 
recognize the players and organizers of this very important 
event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Canadian Ringette Championship 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
weekend I had the opportunity to attend the 2014 Tim Hortons 
Canadian Ringette Championship which took place here in 
Regina. Mr. Speaker, 42 teams gathered in our city for this 
tournament. More than 1,000 ringette players, coaches, and 
trainers, as well as 50 officials representing communities across 
Canada took part in this national championship. 
 
The championships were designed to provide fun, friendship, 
and fitness to participating players and to encourage and 
promote ringette across our country. Also there is three national 
championships crowned in the under 16, under 19, and National 
Ringette League. In the National Ringette League final, the 
Ottawa Ice picked up their first-ever gold medal after defeating 
the Cambridge Turbos 7 to 4. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, of note, on a sidebar right after the game, 
one of the girls’ boyfriends came out and proposed on the ice. It 
was a very big occasion. In the under-16 final, Ontario and 
Central Alberta Sting matched up, with Ontario coming out on 
top 6 to 5. And, Mr. Speaker, in an exciting under-19 final, 
Manitoba downed Edmonton Elite 5-4 to claim gold. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in congratulating 
all the tournament champions and award winners as well as the 
teams who qualified for this prestigious tournament. I’d also 
like to thank the parents, coaches, and all their support staff 
behind the scenes that worked hard to bring this tournament off 
without a hitch. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize all the event organizers that made this possible. And, 
Mr. Speaker, of note, everyone at that tournament said the 
Co-operators Centre was one of the best facilities that they’d 
ever played in. I’d like to thank the facility managers for that. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 
Living in Harmony Awards 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was able to attend 
Saskatoon’s Living in Harmony Recognition, Art, and Literary 
Awards ceremony presented by the city of Saskatoon’s cultural 
diversity and race relations advisory committee on the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
The annual Living in Harmony Awards recognize local 
organizations or individuals for their efforts in promoting 
intercultural harmony in our community and for going above 
and beyond the call of duty to promote co-operation and 
understanding between cultures. 
 
Winners include the staff at Vincent Massey Community 
School, who have been incredible leaders. And for this they 
received the Community Recognition Award for their efforts. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Each year the school hosts a cultural festival where each class 
presents the food, clothing, and customs of many different 
cultures. And this year, they also held a large powwow with 
hundreds of people in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tanya Dunn-Pierce of Saskatoon Health Region 
won an award for her effort in promoting a more representative 
workforce, and in the Art category, Carl Songco from Brownell 
School. And Marione Pangilinan and Mehar Un-Nisa of Royal 
West Campus took home awards, as did Shaye Currie of 
Wildwood School, and an entire class at Alvin Buckwold 
School for their literary contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these Living in Harmony Award winners and thank them for 
dedicating their time and efforts to making Saskatoon a more 
welcoming place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Skills Canada Competition 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last week I had the 
great opportunity to bring greetings at the Skills Canada 16th 
Annual Saskatchewan provincial competition held in Prince 
Albert. 
 
This year’s MCs [master of ceremonies] were Saskatchewan’s 
own Jayden Leister and Bo Chiasson, both of whom first 



5192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

competed in a previous provincial competition, then moved on 
to representing Canada in robotics at the 2013 WorldSkills 
competition. 
 
The Skills Canada Saskatchewan provincial competition brings 
together the best high school students, post-secondary students, 
apprentices, and other training program students to compete 
against other Saskatchewan youth at a skill, trade, or technology 
that they have been working on over the past year. The 
provincial competition gives students the opportunities to 
showcase their skills and knowledge in their trade or 
technology’s field of study, and it allows companies and 
industries to come and see the skills of possible future 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next five years, Saskatchewan is going to 
need more than 16,000 technical and skilled trade workers to 
meet the needs of our growing labour market. These bright 
students could help fill our growing need for workers, and we 
would be lucky to have them contributing their remarkable 
skills to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking Skills 
Canada for the 16th annual Saskatchewan provincial 
competition and congratulate all the students who took part in 
this competition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Debate Team Places First in Competition  
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize a neighbour, a constituent of mine, and a former 4-H 
member, a wonderful young woman by the name of Jacey 
Safnuk. Jacey is attending Edwards School of Business. It’s the 
Business college at the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Earlier this year, Jacey, along with fellow classmates, entered 
the debate team competition in which they would be competing 
against other schools in Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that the debate competition was 
held right here in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. They 
only had half an hour before the competition began, and each 
team was given the topic of the debate and what side of the 
argument that they would be debating. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
within that very short time frame, the teams had to pull together 
their arguments and be ready to compete. 
 
According to Jacey’s mother, my friend, Jill Rennie, Jacey was 
very excited to be able to sit in the Premier’s chair, which must 
have been very good luck because their debate team ended up 
winning first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in congratulating Jacey 
Safnuk and her team on winning first place at the debate team 
competition. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Flood Damage Reduction Program 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 8th, we 
announced the 2014 emergency flood damage reduction 
program. This program provides engineering and technical 
assistance to municipalities while sharing the cost of permanent 
and temporary flood prevention works. As in the past years, this 
program covers 100 per cent of the costs for engineering 
assistance. It reimburses individuals for 85 per cent of the cost 
for approved permanent flood protection work, and 
communities and businesses are eligible to receive 75 per cent 
of the cost of an approved permanent flood protection work. 
 
These include projects like installing berms, culverts, and the 
costs associated with this. This program also covers 50 per cent 
of the cost for temporary flood protection measures. This would 
include things like purchasing of sandbags, sand, and pumping. 
This program has been very effective in helping Saskatchewan 
communities and Mr. Speaker, I can personally attest to the 
benefit provided to a number of rural Saskatchewan 
communities that experienced significant flooding this last 
summer. 
 
Since 2010 the Water Security Agency has invested over $35 
million in flood mitigation efforts through the emergency flood 
damage reduction program to nearly 2,000 individuals, to 
communities, to rural municipalities, and First Nations. 
 
An independent analysis was done in 2011 on the 2011 program 
and showed that for every dollar that was invested we were able 
to save $20 in damages. We know that again this year many 
municipalities and communities are starting to prepare for this 
spring’s runoff and the EFDRP [emergency flood damage 
reduction program] provided by this government will help 
support those efforts this spring, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know about a 
bunch of the cost with this government’s lean pet project — $40 
million, Mr. Speaker, for one US [United States] consultant, 
$17 million each and every year for kaizen promotion offices, 
and $3,500 a day for each Japanese sensei that’s flown here to 
the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has refused to give us the 
total cost that taxpayers have spent and will spend to train 
health care workers in lean, whether it’s the kaizen basics 
training, Mr. Speaker, where health care workers learn how to 
fold paper airplanes and learn Japanese terminology, or whether 
it’s the lean leader certification where senior managers travel, 
go off to Seattle and to Utah. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: how much will 
taxpayers pay in total for health care workers to get lean 
training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5193 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
date we’ve spent $26 million; $18.8 million of that has been by 
the Ministry of Health. Part of that is the John Black and 
Associates contract. Some of those dollars were also pre the 
John Black and Associates contract. Mr. Speaker, 6.7 million 
has been spent on RHAs [regional health authority]. 
 
What members opposite will see over the coming years as we 
transition out of the John Black contract, what we intend to 
have is a system that will be able to support itself. And so 
regional health authorities are now beginning the transition 
away from the John Black and Associates and the use of 
consultants because we will now have that expertise in-house, 
an expertise, Mr. Speaker, which has already saved more than 
its cost to taxpayers in Saskatchewan, but as well, expertise that 
other provinces are looking at. In fact, Mr. Speaker, deputy 
ministers from across the federal government are currently in 
Saskatchewan looking at how we’re applying lean to the health 
system and beyond here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a journey that 
this government is taking Saskatchewan taxpayers on. And 
here’s what we know so far. We know that senior 
administrators are taking the lean leader training. For these 
senior administrators, it takes 35 per cent of a full-time 
equivalent year. That’s about 80 full worker days, Mr. Speaker, 
to get the lean leader certification. Now admittedly, I confess I 
do not know if this makes all of these lean leaders kaizen black 
belts. That might be something that this government wants to 
comment on. I do know the deputy minister of lean likes to 
refer to these lean leaders as senseis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s not the real issue here. The real issue is how much 
this is costing Saskatchewan taxpayers. To the Premier: how 
much will taxpayers pay in total for senior administrators to 
spend 35 per cent of their time receiving lean training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well certainly when we made the decision and, you know, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, based on some of the findings that we 
found from lean, not only from other organizations like Virginia 
Mason and Thedacare in the United States, other provinces that 
already had looked at lean and implemented lean in some small 
pockets within the health system, but as well what we learned 
and what the members opposite I think learned in 2005, ’06, 
and ’07 when they had implemented lean in a very limited way 
in Five Hills and, Mr. Speaker, what their own report had 
indicated is that the province was now in a position to be able to 
implement lean all across the entire health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve indicated before is that the dollars that 
we have spent to date are $26 million. That’s both between the 
ministry and the regional health authorities. But more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, what it has meant in terms of 
reducing the costs and the efficiencies that we’ve found in the 
blood savings alone, $26 million, but overall nearly $40 million 
that we’ve already saved. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we know so far. In 
the Health Quality Council alone, 18 people are taking lean 
leader training; in P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland, Mr. Speaker, 
50; Regina Qu’Appelle, 96; in Five Hills, 52; and in Saskatoon 
Health Region, over 100. In just those five organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s over 300 people taking lean leader training 
which takes them away from their jobs for about 80 days each 
working year. 
 
To the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and he needs to be clear on this: 
how many senior administrators are leaving their jobs for a full 
third of the year in order to take lean training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well certainly what the intention is, over a four-year period is 
we develop the lean program within Saskatchewan Health, but 
also more importantly be able to transition away from the use of 
consultants. That certainly is a part of this, but we do need that 
expertise internally. So what we do want to do is ensure that a 
large number of health workers do have the basics, 
understanding of lean. That’ll happen over a four-year period. 
So we are essentially purchasing that understanding, and 
essentially a quarter of our work staff will have that basics 
when it comes to lean. 
 
But we are ensuring that a large size of our senior leaders, as 
well as front-line staff, do have a comprehensive understanding 
of lean so that we have that expertise here in the province, so 
that we can on an ongoing basis continue to deploy lean which 
has already saved us more dollars than we’ve already spent on 
lean, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in this case, whether it be the blood services, whether it be 
wait times for mental health and addictions work, whether it be 
wait times for MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], certainly 
we have seen the benefits. But we do want to have that 
expertise in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was, how many 
senior administrators are taking the lean training, and how 
much is it costing Saskatchewan taxpayers to have them away 
from their jobs for 35 per cent of the year? Mr. Speaker, we 
know that the lean leader training, those receiving the training 
are among the highest paid administrators in the health system. 
Just Maura Davies, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon Health Region, to take the lean training would cost 
$135,000. That’s 35 per cent of her annual salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen the lean leader certificate that those who 
complete the training receive, and it is quite impressive. I do 
admit that. It says on it, Mr. Speaker, “You are now certified in 
the basic tools and method of the global production system, and 
are authorized to practise kaizen.” And it has John Black’s 
name on it with the minister’s name on it, Mr. Speaker, in 
English, and thankfully also in Japanese, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: what does it exactly mean to be 
authorized to practise kaizen, and why are we paying so much 
to have health care administrators, among the highest paid, to 



5194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

spend 35 per cent of the year away from their jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is, as we implement lean 
across the entire health care system, we do need to have that 
expertise here in the province, whether that be through some of 
the work of the training that senior leaders are doing, through 
the work of JBA and associates. That’s part of the contract that 
we’ve signed with JBA [John Black and Associates]. It’s $40 
million over a four-year period, Mr. Speaker. It’s two-tenths of 
1 per cent of the entire health care budget, what we essentially 
spend in 20 hours in the health care system, Mr. Speaker. So a 
very, I think, small proportion of what we spend in the health 
care system. 
 
But we know the benefits of that. Not only today, not only in 
the ongoing years under the JBA contract, but more 
importantly, we’ll have the expertise within the health care 
system so that the deployment of lean can continue long after 
the JBA contract has ended, so that we’ll have that expertise 
that we can focus on patient safety, improving patient safety, 
reducing errors and waste within the health care system, which 
we know even in its early days is already paying for itself. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s own figures, 
their own data shows that when we look at patient satisfaction, 
when we look at pain management, when we look at infection 
rates, Mr. Speaker, those numbers are all going in the wrong 
direction under this government’s leadership, under lean. 
 
Taxpayers are paying for well over 300 people to take the lean 
leader training that we know of. For a whole year, they’ll spend 
35 per cent taking lean training away from their jobs. They’ll jet 
off for tours, Mr. Speaker, to Utah and to Seattle, and they’ll get 
a certificate at the end of it with John Black’s name on it, with 
the minister’s name on it, and thankfully yes, in English and in 
Japanese, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
Saskatchewan people will be on the hook not only for the 
training and for the travel costs, but they’ll be on the hook for 
the wages for those that are spending 35 per cent of the year 
doing this and, Mr. Speaker, for any costs for replacement staff. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to know. They deserve to know 
how many health care administrators will be receiving this 
training and how much will it cost. To the Premier: what’s the 
answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well certainly what we are doing, as I’ve said before, what we 
are doing is providing for . . . to ensure that we do have that 
expertise within the province so that long after the JBA contract 
has ended that we’ll have that expertise. That’s what 
high-performing health organizations have done in working 
with an organization like JBA, although there are others that 
people can contract with. But certainly that’s what we want to 

have, is the expertise here in the province so that we can then 
move away and transition away from having to rely on 
consultants. 
 
But what we do know is that already we have saved more than 
we have invested within lean through the JBA contract . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member from Rosemont 
says, according to John Black. But no. Alone on blood savings, 
we know the rate that we used to discard blood products. We’ve 
reduced that rate by 17 to 18 per cent a year. We know what 
that means in actual dollars, and we know that means a better 
product for the people that we’re providing services to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that what we’re seeing right now, though, 
is all other provinces that have an interest in lean are looking at 
Saskatchewan, including the federal government, and we are 
leaders in this front. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Planning for Children’s Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — In December the Leader of the Opposition 
asked the Premier about the design of the children’s hospital. 
He asked why this government would proceed with a plan for a 
children’s hospital that would actually have fewer maternity 
beds than currently exist. And he asked why this government 
would ignore the concerns of front-line health care workers who 
have long said the proposed design is inadequate. The Premier 
didn’t have an answer, and the Health minister just vigorously 
defended the plan. But now we’ve learned this government is 
scrambling to fix the design of its children’s hospital because it 
is too small. To the minister: how wrong was the original 
design that was finalized last year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I could perhaps 
quote a member on this side of the House, the children’s 
hospital that will be built will certainly be bigger than the 
children’s hospital built by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just find that the line of questioning is a little bit 
unusual coming from the member opposite who in committee 
last week . . . We had a very good discussion about this where I 
walked through the process that is taking place over the last 
number of months, which in fact we talked about on the floor of 
this Assembly where we acknowledged that there were 
concerns about the size of the hospital, that we had taken a bit 
of a pause in terms of finishing the design of that and working 
through those projections to ensure that we are actually building 
a right-sized children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve also indicated to the member opposite that she doesn’t have 
to wait that long. We’ll be making an announcement in terms of 
what that analysis has showed, working together with the 
Children’s Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan, the Saskatoon 
Health Region, and the Ministry of Health, and I think people 
will be very pleased with what we do arrive at. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5195 

Ms. Chartier: — In December the minister said the design of 
the children’s hospital “has been given final approval.” And he 
trumpeted the fact that this is a lean-designed hospital, using 
that as an argument that there couldn’t possibly be anything 
wrong with the design. But now it is scrambling to fix the 
design because it is too small. 
 
We’ve already heard similar concerns about other lean-designed 
health facilities, including the ones planned for Kelvington and 
Moose Jaw. One front-line health care worker that wrote to us 
from Kelvington said, “Our hospital beds will be cut from 12 to 
seven. We as staff have voiced concerns over this, but as for the 
beds they say the 80 rule says this is all you need.” 
 
To the minister: isn’t lean at least partially to blame for the fact 
that this children’s hospital design is too small? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Actually no, in fact, Mr. Speaker. What 
I’ve indicated, what I did last fall . . . And I’m going to ensure 
that I do this, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to go back and check to 
see what I said last fall, because I know that this issue was 
discussed on the floor of the Assembly. I know that the member 
opposite has a version of what I said in the fall. I believe that I 
had indicated that we were looking at the design based on the 
feedback that we had received. So I want to go back and just 
ensure what the member opposite is saying is in fact what I had 
indicated. 
 
But in terms of the children’s hospital, what we did know is 
from what the original design was and then implementing some 
of the lean design within the facility — which by the way 
involves patients and families and front-line providers in the 
design of that — we actually were able to build with the same 
level of services a smaller footprint of the facility. The question 
on the children’s hospital is whether or not the footprint needs 
to be larger, and we are working through that process. 
 
In terms of Moose Jaw, alone in savings on the operational 
efficiencies over a 20-year period by what we’re going to build 
is 85 to $160 million in efficiencies over a 20-year period. 
Because of lean we are going to continue to build in a different 
way than we have in the past. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — There’s no doubt that the lean process is at 
least partially to blame here. But so too is this government’s 
lack of proper planning. The minister had a hard time in 
committee coming up with a credible explanation for why this 
government is now scrambling to fix the design of the 
children’s hospital. To the minister: why did this government 
take so long to realize that its plan for the children’s hospital is 
flawed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly what I’d 
indicated in committee is that we had received some feedback 
to say that the physical space of the children’s hospital and the 
number of beds that have been contemplating, there were two 

issues. One is the change in how services will be operated. 
That’s one thing. The second is the actual number of beds and 
the size of the facility. So we put a pause on the drawings to 
say, let’s not complete them until we do this work. That’s what 
I indicated in committee. That took place late last year, just 
several months ago, so they’ve been working through a process 
on that. 
 
We will be announcing a decision on that in the coming weeks, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that this is prudent to ensure that when 
we build a facility that it is the right size for the population that 
it will serve not only today but into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Until the middle of March, this government 
kept using the design of the children’s hospital as an example of 
savings achieved through its lean pet project. But then, 
curiously, the Premier and the Health minister stopped talking 
about the design because they finally realized that it’s a flawed 
design and they’re scrambling to fix it. This redesign work will 
cost taxpayers more money and the final tab will also be higher 
because of the added rooms and beds. To the minister: how 
much more will the redesign cost taxpayers and what will the 
total new cost be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to have an opportunity to talk 
about the fact that we are building a children’s hospital in this 
province, something that had been long neglected by the 
members opposite. 
 
In terms of the number of beds, what we will do if a decision is 
in fact made to increase the number of beds in the children’s 
hospital, it will still be done using lean principles. So in terms 
of what was originally contemplated in terms of the size of the 
children’s hospital, what had been done after the work of lean 
and designing the children’s hospital and then making a 
determination of whether or not additional beds will be used, 
lean will still be used. We will still be able to point to the 
efficiencies that will be found over a 20-year and beyond period 
in terms of the operational efficiencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that the members opposite really 
don’t understand this. They wouldn’t know what we’re talking 
about because this is a new way of designing buildings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The minister didn’t ask the previous question. 
How much more will this new design cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we will be 
announcing a finalized design for the children’s hospital. I 
haven’t at this point even announced whether or not that will be 
an expansion of the existing children’s hospital, the design that 
had been earlier approved in 2012. 



5196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

When we do announce that decision, Mr. Speaker, we will most 
certainly announce all that information. But at this point what 
we have done is provided $200 million to the Saskatoon Health 
Region. They’re drawing interest on those dollars that will be 
put towards the children’s hospital. And we also announced 
when the design was complete, an additional $15 million as a 
part of the government’s contribution. And we certainly look 
forward to the next couple of weeks and a very exciting 
announcement for the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Appointments by Governments 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday this 
government defended the Minister of Social Services’ decision 
to appoint her very close friend to the Social Services Appeal 
Board. This is the same very close friend that the minister 
travelled to Ghana and London with on her $19,000 
taxpayer-funded trip, and it’s the same very close friend that the 
minister took out for a $200 lunch at taxpayers’ expense. And 
when asked how the decision to appoint her very close friend 
was made, the minister said, “They gave me a list and I said, ‘If 
all people are the same, as competent, well then, put Rita on the 
board.’” 
 
To the minister: how many other competent people did she pass 
by in order to appoint her very close friend and travel partner? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 
member opposite, I had an opportunity last night to review the 
information I was given about Rita’s background. Since 1989 
she’s been employed in the social work field. She has 
experience in the child protection field as a social worker. She’s 
experienced as a child and family therapist in both the public 
and the private sector. She has experience as a community 
wellness coordinator. She has experience as an individual who 
has contributed to her community, and she’s been involved in a 
number of organizations like the Saskatchewan Association of 
Social Workers, the private practice registry of social workers 
in Saskatchewan, Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also noted that when it came to the decisions that 
were looked at by the appeal board, between 20 and 25 per cent 
of the time the appeal board decided against the ministry. I 
think the people are doing their work. I think they make sure 
that the families are recognized and that they are front and 
centre. That is my goal, to make sure that we have people that 
are competent in this area. And as far as having somebody who 
is supportive of our government, 60 per cent of the people in the 
province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, when asked about whether it’s 
appropriate to appoint friends to these types of boards, the 
Social Services minister admitted yesterday that “It’s probably 
better if they’re not a real close friend of the minister.” So to the 
minister: why then did she appoint her very close friend and 
travel partner as Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for his question. As we’ve stated, we look at the 
qualifications of people that we appoint to boards. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not even against appointing NDP [New 
Democratic Party] supporters to boards. Just recently we 
appointed Dion Tchorzewski to the new ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] board. I’m sure the 
NDP know them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to be asking this 
question, if he wants to have some concerns about friends and 
family being appointed to boards, Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, when he was a minister, appointed Perry 
Kappel, his very own ministerial assistant, to a government 
relations job at SaskPower with a salary range between 48 and 
$79,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the NDP wants a standard for 
us that they themselves refuse to ever live by, Mr. Speaker, and 
refuse to live by to this day. Mr. Speaker, I have a list of NDP 
appointments. If they want to listen to them, I’m happy to read 
them out, Mr. Speaker. Tom Keeping, former NDP MLA, 
appointed to the Chair of a panel that mediates disputes on 
farming in 1997. John Solomon, former NDP MLA, appointed 
Chair, Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my time is up. I have more. Please ask me 
another question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Social Services 
minister said yesterday that she thought it would be 
inappropriate. And it’s interesting that . . . [inaudible] . . . going 
on this line, if it were an NDP minister that appointed a very 
close friend to chair an appeal board related to their ministry. 
 
So what she is saying is it would be inappropriate for someone 
from a different party to do this, yet it’s somehow perfectly 
acceptable for her to do it. To the minister: how does this make 
any sense? How come the double standard? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to talk 
about a double standard. It was the member asking the question 
who appointed his very own ministerial assistant to SaskPower. 
We have list after list of NDP supporters that the NDP 
appointed to boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would point out in the case that was referenced with the Social 
Services minister, Rita Crone was paid about $10,000 for her 
work on the Social Services Appeal Board, a job that is a very 
difficult position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if the members opposite want to talk about their own 
record, I have a list of gold-plated contracts that the NDP gave 
to their very own supporters. Bernie Churko got $217,000, 
about $30,000 a month, for seven months of work to manage 
flood response . . . 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5197 

The Speaker: — Order. I think we would all like to hear the 
questions and the answers. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bernie 
Churko got . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Will the member for Regina Rosemont 
come to order and stay in order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bernie 
Churko got over $30,000 a month for seven months of work to 
manage flood response at Fishing Lake and we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP absolutely failed on that file. Tom Waller — 
I know that they know him — got $417,000, over $32,000 a 
month, to run the NDP’s Forestry Secretariat for 13 months, a 
five-person office. Wil Olive was on the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance board of directors at the very same time that his very 
own law firm was receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
legal work from Crop Insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the NDP cannot stand there and demand a 
standard from us that they themselves refused to observe. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter 
is that this issue would never have even come to the light 
without a whistle-blower tipping off the opposition because the 
membership of the current appeal board is not listed anywhere 
and the government wouldn’t even release the details about the 
current membership. That’s how secretive this government is. 
And I guess it had a reason to be secretive because the minister 
had clearly yet made another inappropriate decision. To the 
minister: will this government agree to post the ministers’ 
orders like this online so it can be held accountable for its 
decisions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t be amazed, 
but I am. Every day that we stand in this House where the NDP 
make accusations against us, we answer their questions. We 
released all of our travel information just recently, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m happy to have a discussion about NDP travel when they 
were in government because there are some pretty interesting 
stories there as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for the member from Saskatoon Centre to 
stand up and ask for accountability and talk about appointing 
friends to boards when he did exactly the same thing, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps he can explain to the taxpayers of this 
province why SaskPower was on the hook for paying for his 
friend to be on their board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the House to 
present condolence motions on behalf of previous members of 
this House who have passed away. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 

to present condolence motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make 
a few comments about two members who served this legislature 
in years previous who have recently passed away. Before I read 
the motions into the record, however, I’d like to present the 
comments. 
 

Lloyd Edward Hampton 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Today I rise to remember Lloyd Edward 
Hampton, a former member of this Assembly from the 
constituency formerly called Canora. I offer my sincere 
condolences to his family, some members of which are seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, today. 
 
Lloyd was born in Tisdale, Saskatchewan in 1941, but relocated 
with his family to North Vancouver, BC in the 1950s. And 
while he completed his high school, he worked in a Chevron 
service station fulfilling his passion for mechanics. A few years 
later, he actually purchased the Chevron service station and then 
later married his wife, Jean. 
 
The couple continued to be active in both the service station 
business and a taxi business that they operated at the West 
Coast. The pull home from his Saskatchewan roots proved too 
strong for Lloyd and his family, so in 1973 they moved to 
Prairie River, Saskatchewan. 
 
From 1973 to 1982, Lloyd operated an agricultural implement 
business in both the Prairie River and Preeceville areas before 
running as a candidate for the Progressive Conservative Party in 
1982. 
 
Lloyd served the people of the Canora constituency from 1982 
to 1986. Through his term in office, Lloyd dedicated himself to 
his constituents with the same helpful spirit and dedication to 
service that made him a successful service station operator and 
business person. 
 
In 1986 with his term in office coming to an end, Lloyd decided 
to dedicate more time to his family life and to retire from 
politics. Lloyd and his wife split their time between British 
Columbia and the Canora area until Lloyd passed away on the 
20th of November 2011. 
 
May we all join together to remember Lloyd Hampton, former 
member of Canora, accomplished business person and family 
man. Mr. Speaker, the motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution that 
he made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Lloyd Edward Hampton, who passed away on 



5198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

November 20th, 2011 at the age of 70, was a member of 
this Legislative Assembly from 1982 to 1986, representing 
the constituency of Canora as a Progressive Conservative, 
independent, and Western Canada Concept member. 
 
Mr. Hampton was born June 18, 1941 at Tisdale and was 
raised on a mixed farm in the Prairie River area. He was 
an agriculture implements salesman. 
 
He will be missed by his family and children, Lori, Dean, 
and David. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial 
Secretary: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to his 
province. 
 
Lloyd Edward Hampton, who passed away on November 
20th, 2011 at the age of 70, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly from 1982 until 1986, representing 
the constituency of Canora as a Progressive Conservative, 
independent, and Western Canada Concept member. 
 
Mr. Hampton was born on June 18th, 1941 at Tisdale and 
was raised on a mixed farm in the Prairie River area. He 
was an agricultural implements salesman. 
 
He will be missed by his family and children, Lori, Dean, 
and David. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
with the Provincial Secretary this afternoon to pay tribute to Mr. 
Lloyd Hampton. As has been pointed out, he served in this 
Assembly from 1982 to 1986, and he represented the 
constituency of Canora. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had Lloyd Hampton chosen to write a political 
memoir, I think it would have been a pretty interesting one, 
when we hear of some of the details of what he spent his time 
doing through his life and some of the political, different 
political involvements that he had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And though his political career wasn’t a very long one, it 
certainly was a fairly intriguing one with its fair share of twists 
and turns. Lloyd Hampton was elected as a member of the 
Progressive Conservative Party in 1982, but he left the PC 
[Progressive Conservative] caucus in 1985 to serve as an 
independent member, and then to serve as a Western Canada 

Concept member for part of 1986, before again serving as an 
independent. 
 
So I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that had he written a memoir, it 
certainly would have included some good stories. When he 
announced that he would not seek re-election, he spoke about 
the significant strain of public service on his family, and about 
his desire to spend more time with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lloyd Hampton put his name forward. He earned 
the support of his fellow citizens in an election campaign, and 
he represented his fellow citizens here in the legislature for four 
years. And for that, Mr. Speaker, we’re grateful for the service, 
the public service that he provided, and we’re grateful to his 
family for allowing and enabling him to do that work as an 
elected representative. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the members take the question as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Herbert Junior Swan 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today again to 
remember Herbert Swan, a former Progressive Conservative 
member of this Legislative Assembly for the constituency of 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Swan was born on the 10th of January, 1927 in Beechy, 
Saskatchewan and attended primary and secondary school in 
the community of Demaine. From there he completed his 
studies at both the Saskatchewan Technical Institute and at 
Success Business College. 
 
In 1949 he married his lovely wife, Anita Syroishka. They had 
four children — Karen Brenda, Bonnie Louise, Kirk Frederick, 
and Heather Gail — and were blessed with 12 grandchildren 
and several great-grandchildren. 
 
In his life prior to being to elected to this legislature, Mr. Swan 
had considerable business and management experience. He 
served on the Outlook School Division Board for 15 years and 
was the past president of the Provincial Executive of the School 
Trustees Association. From 1975 to ’78 he was a director of the 
Canadian School Trustees Association, as well as a deacon of 
the Mennonite Brethren Church in the community of Beechy. 
 
Mr. Swan was first elected to the Saskatchewan legislature in 
1978. In 1982 he was elected Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly. It was during his tenure as Speaker the Legislative 
Assembly began televised broadcasts of proceedings. Following 
his term as Speaker, Mr. Swan was appointed as, first, minister 
of Environment, and subsequently, minister of Environment and 
Public Safety. 
 
Let’s all join together now to remember Herb Swan, former 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5199 

member for Rosetown-Elrose, Speaker of our Legislative 
Assembly, and dedicated family man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that I present reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly records with great sorrow and regret 
the passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Herbert Junior Swan who passed away on May 28th, 
2013 at the age of 86, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1978 until 1991, representing the 
constituency of Rosetown-Elrose for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. Mr. Swan served as Speaker of this 
Legislative Assembly from June 17, 1982 until December 
2, 1986 and held two ministerial positions from 1986 to 
1989. 
 
Mr. Swan was born on January 10th, 1927 in Beechy and 
attended primary and secondary school in Demaine. He 
completed his grade 12 at the Saskatoon Technical 
Institute. He had considerable business management 
experience and farmed in the Beechy district. 
 
He is sadly missed by his wife, Anita, and their four 
children as well as several grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Provincial Secretary: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Herbert Junior Swan, who passed away on May 28, 2013 
at the age of 86, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1978 until 1991, representing the 
constituency of Rosetown-Elrose for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. Mr. Swan served as Speaker of this 
Legislative Assembly from June 17, 1982 until December 
2, 1986 and held two ministerial positions from 1986 to 
1989. 
 
Mr. Swan was born on January 10, 1927 in Beechy and 
attended primary and secondary school in Demaine. He 
completed his grade 12 at the Saskatoon Technical 
Institute. He had considerable business management 
experience and farmed in the Beechy district. 
 
He is sadly missed by his wife, Anita, and their four 
children as well as several grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren. 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 
to join in with the remarks that have already been provided by 
the Provincial Secretary and pay a tribute to Mr. Herbert Swan 
who served in this Assembly from 1978 to 1991, a significant 
period of time over a number of elections, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly saw a lot of action from different vantage points in this 
Assembly. 
 
In opposition, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, he served 
as the critic for Municipal Affairs, Social Services, and 
Agriculture, critic portfolios, Mr. Speaker, that are diverse and 
certainly would have kept him busy during his time in 
opposition. 
 
After the 1982 election, Herb Swan served as the 18th Speaker 
of the Legislative Assembly. He served as Speaker until 1986, 
presiding over a very unbalanced House with a very large 
government and a very small opposition. But it was a small 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, that I know was able to punch well 
above its weight. But the debates over those years, Mr. Speaker, 
were most certainly lively and I’m sure, as a Speaker at that 
time, he had a big role to play and to serve in ensuring that the 
work of the House functioned as it ought to. 
 
No doubt that was a raucous four years and members on both 
sides of the House undoubtedly gave Speaker Swan more than a 
few headaches during those times. After the 1986 election, Herb 
Swan served as the Minister of the Environment and then had 
public safety added to his portfolio. Then he retired from 
political life in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public service is, I believe, an noble calling and 
something that is required in order to have a strong democracy. 
And whether we are on the government side of the House or the 
opposition side of the House, we understand the important roles 
that we play in representing our constituents and in working 
from our different sides of the House for the best interests of the 
province. And Mr. Swan had that opportunity as a minister, as a 
critic, and the opportunity to watch over the proceedings as 
Speaker. 
 
Theodore Roosevelt said after his retirement from politics that a 
person who engages in public service is one who “. . . knows in 
the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, 
if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that his place 
shall never be with those cold and timid souls who neither know 
victory nor defeat.” 
 
Herb Swan indeed took a risk. He put his name on a ballot. He 
put his name on election signs. And he campaigned for the 
support of his fellow citizens, and then he represented their 
interests here in the legislature. He served as a minister, served 
as a critic, and served as the Speaker of this Assembly. For that 
service that he provided and his willingness to take that step and 



5200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2014 

run for public office, we’re grateful for his service and we’re 
grateful for his family for sharing him with the entire province. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, we would wish to extend 
and express our sincere condolences to his family and to his 
friends, especially to his wife, Anita. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
have the opportunity to rise today and say a few words about 
Herb Swan. Over the years, I had the opportunity to speak to 
Herb on a number of different occasions, but the one that really 
stands out in my mind was several months after the November 
2007 election. I believe it was in July of 2008, and through a 
mutual friend, I made arrangements to go to the farm home of 
Herb and Anita and have coffee with them one afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were so warm and welcoming. We spoke 
about many things that day, and politics obviously was one of 
those topics. What particularly stands out in my mind is Herb 
was a wealth of advice and concern. And what he spoke most 
about was to remember to keep a work-life balance. Clearly, 
Mr. Speaker, his family were very important to him, and I 
believe he always kept that in mind during his many years in 
politics. 
 
Herb passed away at the end of May, as was previously said, 
and his funeral was on May the 31st last year. I found out about 
his funeral virtually at the last minute and quickly made plans to 
attend. And on that day, as the MLA representing the 
constituency that Herb had previously represented, I had an 
opportunity to make some comments to the media about him. 
 
The first word that came to mind when I was speaking about 
Herb was gracious. I think that aptly described him. And later 
that day, Mr. Speaker, when I saw the Premier’s comments 
when he offered his condolences to the Swan family, how the 
Premier referred to Herb was as a gracious and patient man. 
And it struck me that the Premier and I both used the same 
word to describe him, which was gracious. One of the 
dictionary definitions of gracious is showing a natural kindness 
and courtesy. I think that very accurately describes Herb Swan. 
 
A couple of weeks ago, I called his son, Kirk, to tell him about 
the proceedings today, and he was so pleased that we would be 
speaking about his dad in the legislature today. Mr. Speaker, not 
only was Herb Swan a gracious and humble man, so too is his 
family. Several of my colleagues since the funeral last year told 
me that they would have attended his funeral to show their 
respect had they known at the time. But, Mr. Speaker, today all 
of my colleagues are showing their respect to Herb Swan, and 
we offer our condolences to his humble and gracious family. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to add a few words about Herb Swan. Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Swan represented Rosetown-Elrose, which is 
where my wife grew up. He had a busy life outside of politics. 
He farmed. He was a seed grower and, a particular interest to 

me, he was a school board trustee and was president of what 
was then the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. He 
served as an opposition critic, held two different cabinet 
portfolios, and a significant period of time as Speaker of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I knew and met Mr. Swan during the ’80s. And he 
was, I think, definitely was the type of politician that all of us 
wanted to be. He was happy. He enjoyed what he was doing 
and enjoyed representing his constituents. 
 
But I knew him more recently as he moved into Preston Park 
Residence in Saskatoon. He and Anita moved in there 
approximately a year or two before he passed away. He was 
popular and well liked within the residence and enjoyed a visit 
from somebody outside of the residence, especially somebody 
like myself that was more than willing to talk about politics. 
 
While he was proud of his career, both as a farmer and as a 
politician, he remained humble and exceptionally down to 
earth. He was the type of person that did not want to hold forth 
that he had had the position of Speaker or even as a cabinet 
minister. He just enjoyed being Herb Swan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
he is the type of individual that epitomized what Saskatchewan 
residents are and want to be — a life well lived. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d be 
remiss if I didn’t take a moment to just say a few words about 
Mr. Swan. When I was first elected in 1986, Mr. Swan, if you 
will, became a dad to me. I was kind of the young pup around 
here at the time, and I really appreciated Mr. Swan for what he 
stood for. As my colleagues have already said, very gracious, 
very humble, and so unassuming, and yet you knew where he 
stood on issues. He was a man who had a lot of knowledge and 
an individual you could approach. And I really grew to 
appreciate Herb and his wife, Anita, and certainly the longer I 
spent around here, getting to know his family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing that really sticks out in my mind about 
Mr. Swan was when he was appointed minister of the 
Environment. And I remember the debate that took place on this 
floor. There’s many members in this Chamber right now do not 
remember those days where Committee of the Whole and 
Committee of Finance all took place on the floor, and the 
minister was responsible to answer all the questions. 
 
There was a period in time where we had a debate regarding the 
Rafferty-Alameda dams taking place in southeast 
Saskatchewan. And the opposition of the day took great offence 
that we would even move forward. And for one whole month, 
basically one whole month, day after day, 2 in the afternoon 
until 10 at night, Mr. Swan stood here as a minister and 
responded to the questions from the opposition. Never once did 
I hear him complain. And at the same time he happened to be, 
on the weekends, taking his wife south for medical care and 
attention. 
 
And I just looked at that man and I thought, that takes a real 
man to stand up here and, without ever showing any anger or 
annoyance with what was going on, he assumed his 



April 16, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5201 

responsibilities gracefully. He treated everyone with respect, 
and those are features that I think sometimes maybe some of us 
have forgotten all about, some of those features of an 
individual. But certainly Herb was a gentleman that I believe 
really portrayed what I always envision an MLA should be. 
Tried to assume that, but unfortunately I’ve got . . . He had big 
shoes to follow. 
 
Mr. Swan as well not only represented his constituents, but he 
had a faith that was as deep as you could find. And I respected 
that. And before he left office, he had been involved with the 
Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast for a number of years. And he 
came and he asked if I would be willing to take his position on 
that committee, and I was really honoured that he would ask me 
and have had the privilege of serving on that Prayer Breakfast 
committee since his invitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only say, he was a gentleman that we could 
all look up to, we could all learn from. And I extend my deepest 
sympathy to his wife, Anita, and the family, as we mourn the 
loss of such a great gentleman. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the question as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

TRIBUTES 
 

David Tickell 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly of 
the passing of a former officer of this Assembly. Mr. David 
Tickell, who passed away on February the 7th, 2014, was the 
second ombudsman for the province of Saskatchewan from 
1977 to 1987. 
 
Mr. Tickell was born on February 21st, 1936. He had a 
background in law and government administration. He practised 
law in the private sector, working in the public service in 
Ontario and Saskatchewan, including the Ontario Hospital 
Services Commission, and as senior solicitor in the Department 
of the Attorney General. 
 
Mr. Tickell began as ombudsman four years after the 
Ombudsman’s office opened its doors. His achievements as an 
ombudsman included a comprehensive report on foster care and 
advocating for the creation of the Children’s Advocate, which is 
now the Advocate for Children and Youth. 
 
Following his term as ombudsman, he later became the 
executive director of the John Howard Society and taught 
human justice at the University of Regina for over two decades. 

Mr. Tickell is survived by his family: Sandra Pearce; his 
children, Melanie, Amanda, James, Jennifer, Melissa, Matthew, 
Sarah; and his brother, Dale. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to ask for leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
an audio-video record of the oral tributes together with the 
Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted be 
communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 
families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
an audio-video record of the oral tributes together with the 
Hansard transcript and resolutions adopted be 
communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 
families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 
tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:44.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5189 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5190 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5190 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5190 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Student Trip to United Kingdom 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5190 
 2014 National Aboriginal Curling Championship 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5190 
 Canadian Ringette Championship 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5191 
 Living in Harmony Awards 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5191 
 Skills Canada Competition 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5191 
 Debate Team Places First in Competition  
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5192 
 Flood Damage Reduction Program 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5192 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5192 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5193 
 Planning for Children’s Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5194 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5194 
 Appointments by Governments 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5196 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5196 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5196 
CONDOLENCES 
 Lloyd Edward Hampton 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5197 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5198 
 Herbert Junior Swan 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5198 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5199 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5200 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5200 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5200 
TRIBUTES 
 David Tickell 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5201 
  Harrison (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 5201 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


