




















































Hansard: November 20, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 16A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5965 

 November 20, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured this morning to introduce six special 

guests seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, joining us today are 

three university students from the Ivano-Frankivsk National 

Technical University of Oil and Gas in Ukraine. They are in 

Saskatchewan under the Canada-Ukraine science internship 

program that has been in place for 14 years and provides 

student exchanges between the University of Regina, 

SaskPower, and Ivano-Frankivsk University in Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce Iryna Blyshchak. Iryna is 

a business management student who is working in the head 

office of SaskPower. Thank you, Iryna. Oleksandr Kravchuk is 

a petroleum engineering student who is working at the 

Petroleum Technology Research Centre, the PTRC, at the 

University of Regina. And Yulia Savchyn, Yulia is an electrical 

engineering student who is working at SaskPower’s 

powerhouse building here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome Bob Ivanochko, who 

needs no introduction. He’s been here many, many times. Bob 

is one of the hosts providing room and board to the students. As 

well as, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Janet Lysyk and Ken 

Mazur, both very active and dedicated members of the 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members in the House to join me in 

welcoming Iryna, Oleksandr, and Yulia. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition I would like to join with the Deputy Premier 

in welcoming this fine delegation to the Assembly today. To 

Iryna, Oleksandr, and Yulia, I want to welcome you all to 

Saskatchewan. And thank you for the contributions that you are 

making while you are here, contributions that build upon a 

strong history that our province has with Ukraine and also the 

strong ties that we will have into the future. So it’s wonderful to 

have you here in Saskatchewan contributing and learning 

through your different experiences. 

 

And I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to add my word of thanks 

to Ms. Lysyk, Bob Ivanochko, and Ken Mazur for their 

hospitality in welcoming. It’s a typical thing in a way, which is 

a good thing to have, good Saskatchewan hospitality. And I’m 

sure they’re treating the guests extremely well, as they always 

have. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to thank these 

individuals for visiting the legislature today and welcome them. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, guests joining us in the west gallery 

today. 

 

The Association of Saskatchewan Urban Parks and 

Conservation Agencies strives to conserve and protect the 

natural environment in the hearts of our cities and create 

recreational areas where people and wildlife can coexist. While 

Saskatchewan’s seven conservation and development agencies 

are independent organizations, they share many common goals 

and work together through the association and through public 

programs, workshops, and fundraising. 

 

Representatives of these agencies here today are Carey 

Schoeffer and Margaret Moran from Wakamow Valley 

Authority in Moose Jaw; Andy Toth and Travis Bullied from 

Chinook Parkway in Swift Current; Alissa Baker from Pehonan 

Parkway in Prince Albert; Ryan Whippler and Bernadette 

McIntyre from Wascana Centre Authority in Regina — well 

half of them, okay; Nancy Styles and Katelyn Gateman from 

Tatagwa Parkway in Weyburn; Mr. Doug Porteous from 

Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon; Tim Yeamen from 

The Battlefords River Valley in North Battleford. And as well 

from the organization are Andrew Exelby, Lisa Dale-Burnett, 

and Irene Pisula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the guests here today, please join 

me in welcoming them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition I too would like to welcome all 

of you to your Legislative Assembly. My riding touches along 

the Saskatchewan River in Saskatoon, and certainly the 

Meewasin Valley is a very important part of the culture of our 

city and the fabric of our city. So the work you do as volunteers 

is incredibly important, and we want to just thank you for that 

and welcome you here to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province; to immediately reverse its policy of now 

allowing private developers with whom the government 

has close relationships to default on fixed-price contracts 

for affordable housing projects. 



5966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unacceptable danger created by that government with the 

heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue, their failure to 

plan. Of course the west bypass is an important long-term 

solution, but this requires interim action to ensure safety. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from right 

across Regina, including directly on Dewdney Avenue. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m proud to stand in my place to present a petition on the 

Prince Albert bridge. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 

serves central and northern Saskatchewan and as well the 

city of Prince Albert will receive a commitment from 

senior governments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from Melville, from Saskatoon, and all from throughout 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 

care. The petitioners point out, Mr. Speaker, that many aspects 

of long-term care are deteriorating under this government; that 

the Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need 

for safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents; 

that the government is failing to fix the basics in long-term care, 

including rejecting the further urgent requests from long-term 

care facilities for increased and needed staffing levels; and that 

fixing the basics in achieving real improvement in long-term 

care services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 

front-line health care workers, residents and their families as 

opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. They 

point out other things as well, Mr. Speaker, but the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Saskatoon. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 

program. The petitioners in the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 

to act on readily available information about safety 

concerns with its smart meter program, including through 

the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 

SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 

concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 

safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the good 

city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. The 

individuals who have signed this petition bring a number of 

concerns to this Legislative Assembly. And the prayer reads as 

follows, they: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to recognize health care is getting 

worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics by 

listening to health care workers, patients, and their 

families, properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities, 

and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 

spending millions on its pet lean project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from my riding in 

Saskatoon Nutana. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Bullying Awareness Week  

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to recognize November 15th to the 21st as 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5967 

Bullying Awareness Week in Canada. This year’s theme is 

Stand Up! and it encourages youth to speak out against 

bullying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a government we are committed to taking a 

stand against bullying and dedicated to creating a safe and 

comfortable learning environment for students. In an effort to 

combat bullying we are working with a number of programs 

and organizations which were recommended in Saskatchewan’s 

Action Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying. This 

includes the Kids Help Phone and the Red Cross. We also 

formed a partnership with SaskTel and the I Am Stronger 

website to provide students, educators, and families with access 

to anti-bullying resources as an anonymous, online new 

reporting tool, as well as providing the opportunity to be 

engaged in building a caring and respectful online community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second annual Student First Anti-Bullying 

Forum was held yesterday in Saskatoon. My colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, was able to attend on 

behalf of the government. This forum was one of the 

recommendations outlined in Saskatchewan’s action plan to 

address bullying and cyberbullying completed last year by the 

Legislative Secretary for Education. It’s an opportunity for 

students, parents, and teachers to develop the skills to build safe 

and accepting environments in their schools and online. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to support Bullying Awareness 

Week in Canada and to stand up against bullying in our 

community. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Holodomor Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to 

recognize a solemn day for Ukrainian people here in 

Saskatchewan and around the world — Holodomor 

Remembrance Day. Holodomor Remembrance Day is the time 

to acknowledge the engineered famine that killed as many as 10 

million Ukrainians in 1932 and 1933. One-third of the victims 

of this terrible genocide were children. 

 

What makes this atrocity even more unbearable, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that Ukrainian farms were experiencing prosperity and 

producing vast quantities of grain that would have alleviated the 

hunger and starvation. Unfortunately the Soviet forces seized 

the crops from the Ukrainian people and left them to starve. 

 

We must always remember the tragedies of the past and look to 

the future to build a more peaceful and tolerant world free from 

conflict, fear, and genocide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the event of Holodomor hit even closer to home 

this year in light of current events. Russian aggressors are again 

interfering in Ukrainian affairs and exerting unacceptable 

influence on the sovereignty of the Ukrainian people. I hope 

that all members will join with me on this day and this week of 

reflection and will express their solidarity with the Ukrainian 

people in their time of need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 17th to 

the 23rd is Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week. This 

week highlights the issues of addictions and focuses on ways to 

reduce the use and abuse of alcohol and drugs. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that both addictions and mental health issues directly 

affect one out of every five residents. That is why our 

government has increased funding for mental health services by 

34 per cent in the last seven years. But we know there’s more 

that needs to be done. 

 

One year ago the Minister of Health called for the development 

of a 10-year mental health and addictions action plan. Over this 

past year, Commissioner Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder has 

undertaken an extensive consultation process in numerous 

communities all across Saskatchewan. The mental health and 

addictions action plan will help guide new ways to strengthen 

services and break down barriers. Our government expects the 

final report will be released later this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we are providing a continuum of 

evidence-based addictions programs and support through 

regional health authorities and non-profit organizations. Our 

government recognizes all the work that is happening across 

Saskatchewan and all those involved in the addictions field for 

their ongoing efforts, and we thank them. I ask all members to 

join me in acknowledging Addictions Awareness Week. Thank 

you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Children’s Rights Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 

today to recognize Children’s Rights Day. Today we celebrate 

the 25th anniversary of the United Nations Convention on the 

Rights of the Child, which is an important document for 

children and youth in our community and around the world. 

 

The Convention on the Rights of the Child outlines the 

protections and privileges that ought to be provided to every 

child in every home in every community. The kid-friendly 

version of the convention summarizes the document nicely, and 

I quote: 

 

“Rights” are things every child should have or be able to 

do. All children have the same rights. These rights are 

listed in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

Almost every country has agreed to these rights. All the 

rights are connected to each other, and all are equally 

important. 

 

We know there’s still much to do in Saskatchewan when it 

comes to children and youth. The Canadian Council of Child & 

Youth Advocates recently said, and I quote: 

 

A particular area of concern is the vast overrepresentation 

of Aboriginal children and youth in the child welfare 

system. Concerted and dedicated action and special effort 

is required to consider and address the rights and 



5968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

well-being of this group of children and youth. 

 

I hope all members will join me in celebrating the 25th 

anniversary of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 

the Child and will commit to building a province where every 

child has the opportunity to reach their full potential. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Saskatchewan Cities Rank High in Gross 

Domestic Product Per Capita 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Recently 

Statistics Canada released a study of metropolitan gross 

domestic product between 2001 and 2009. I am proud to 

announce that this study showed that Regina was the most 

productive city in Canada in 2009 with a nominal GDP [gross 

domestic product] of $65,404 per capita. 2009 is the most 

recent year for which data is available. According to the study, 

GDP per capita is a measure of the value of output per person 

living in a metropolitan area. Regina is leading the nation in 

GDP per capita, in part due to increased activity, increase in the 

value of oil and gas, manufacturing goods, and agricultural 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina’s ranking among 33 census metropolitan 

areas has increased notably over the years, raising from sixth 

place in 2001 and fourth place in 2005 to the top spot in 2009. 

Saskatoon has also seen their ranking improved over the last 

eight years, starting in 20th place in 2001 and jumping to sixth 

place in 2009. 

 

Saskatchewan cities have seen their national position improve 

as the national economy has shifted away from manufacturing 

towards more resource- and agricultural-based sector. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

hard-working people of Regina, Saskatoon, and the entire 

province who continue to strengthen our economy. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Strong Economy Produces Opportunities 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday on the 

front page of the Leader-Post was a Fraser Institute study on 

economic opportunities for young adults throughout Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today not only to commend our 

government on the prosperity of the Saskatchewan economy but 

to commend all of the hard-working individuals who have made 

our province so desirable. This recent study compares all 10 

provinces on employment rates, income levels, private sector 

investment, and population patterns. And as we in 

Saskatchewan already know, the study said that in general if 

one seeks opportunity — money, jobs, and employment 

security — the opportunities are in Western Canada, especially 

Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

We have seen a net gain of 581 young adults to our population, 

and our youth unemployment rate is one of the lowest in the 

country. In addition to this, our average per person income is 

just over $42,000, far higher than our friends in the East. We 

have these opportunities because Saskatchewan has the 

third-highest per capita private sector investment of all 

Canadian provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong. I would like all members 

to join me in recognizing the hard work of our citizens, even 

though we admit there is always more work to do. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Government Invests in Housing in Nipawin 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 

House to talk about the opening of a new rental housing project 

in Nipawin that will enable 24 individuals and families to live 

in a safe and affordable home. 

 

Together with the Government of Canada, I am pleased that our 

government contributed a combined total of $560,000 toward 

14 of the 24 apartments. This funding was made available 

through the capital rent subsidy from the federal-provincial 

Investment in Affordable Housing 2011-2014 agreement. This 

project also received funding under the province’s rental 

construction incentive. Under this incentive we are contributing 

about $156,000 over two years to the town of Nipawin. 

 

This is only part of what has been accomplished in Nipawin, 

Mr. Speaker. Since November 2007 I’m proud that we have 

invested $869,000 in the community to create 32 affordable 

rental and homeowner units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that our government takes 

housing seriously. Together with our housing partners, we are 

doing what we can to make life more affordable for all 

Saskatchewan people. These homes in Nipawin are an example 

of that commitment in action, as are other housing projects 

currently under way throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work together to tackle 

housing challenges across the province and to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Standards in Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Yesterday Margaret Warholm’s children came 

to the legislature. Margaret was in a seniors’ care facility, but 

she was horribly neglected. She was severely malnourished, had 

untreated broken bones, a massive bedsore, and she died 

prematurely. 

 

Yesterday when Margaret’s family was here, Mr. Speaker, they 

were treated to disgusting heckling from the member from 

Estevan and the member from Martensville. Mr. Speaker, the 

family took that personally, and those members should be 

ashamed. Mr. Speaker, but the message from the Health 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5969 

minister was dismissive in its own way and was also hugely 

disappointing for the family. He simply referred Margaret’s 

children to the Ombudsman and failed to recognize that this is a 

widespread problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Does he actually 

think, does he actually think that this an isolated case, or will he 

at least recognize that there are serious problems throughout our 

seniors’ care system that must be fixed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first and foremost, I can say that members on this 

side of the House treat these situations very seriously. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly I think the track record of this government 

shows that we take seniors’ issues, seniors’ care, and the care 

that our seniors receive, whether they’re in long-term care or 

whether they’re living in their own home, Mr. Speaker, we take 

that absolutely serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to this case, first and foremost, Mr. 

Speaker, I would just say that each and every day we have 

thousands of people that work in long-term care, whether they 

be care aids or LPNs [licensed practical nurse] or RNs 

[registered nurse], that provide care in a manner that is with 

warmth and love and compassion for their residents. 

 

But in a case like yesterday, where we have what seems to be a 

breakdown in that care, Mr. Speaker, we take that absolutely 

seriously. I can inform the House that this morning I wrote to 

the Ombudsman asking the Ombudsman to look into this 

specific case and report back to me and to the public, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’d be happy to table that letter today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Margaret’s family spoke about 

their own experience with Margaret’s treatment, with her 

premature death. And they spoke, Mr. Speaker, about their 

treatment yesterday with their very own words. What’s 

incredible, Mr. Speaker, is for the minister to pretend that this is 

an isolated case and simply a one-off. 

 

Margaret’s experience is not an isolated case. I hear these 

stories, Mr. Speaker, far too often, and it is incredibly 

frustrating to have a government that will not recognize that this 

is a widespread problem. Margaret’s family believes, as do I, 

that we need minimum care standards which apply to all care 

facilities province wide to ensure that this type of neglect stops. 

They’re frustrated, Mr. Speaker, that this government removed 

minimum care standards instead of strengthening them, and I 

agree with Margaret’s family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is for the Premier. Does he agree, does he agree 

that we need minimum care standards, or will he still stubbornly 

dismiss the call to fix what needs to be fixed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again in the 

absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. Again I do want to stress the fact that 

in this province we have over 7,300 residents that are in care 

each and every day. We have thousands of people that work in 

the system, whether they are care aids or LPNs or RNs, Mr. 

Speaker, and they provide care that is in a way provides for 

compassion and warmth and love. These are people that in 

many ways become a part of their own family, Mr. Speaker, 

and I appreciate the work that they do and the relationship that 

they build. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in cases like these though, we take this very 

seriously. That is why . . . And I will quote from the letter that I 

wrote to the Ombudsman this morning. I quote: 

 

I am requesting that you investigate the circumstances 

surrounding Margaret Warholm’s care and death and 

whether the provincial special care home guidelines were 

followed in this case and that I would request that you 

would report any finding and recommendations that you 

have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll table the letter this morning, and I look 

forward to the Ombudsman’s report in this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can try to remove 

this from his office, but he should be taking and should have 

been taking a much more direct interest in this, Mr. Speaker, as 

it was raised. 

 

And it’s interesting for the minister to bring up the guidelines, 

Mr. Speaker, because I think it is absolutely laughable for the 

minister to suggest that somehow, somehow that the program 

guidelines for special care homes are meaningful minimum care 

standards. It’s simply not believable. 

 

We have obtained, Mr. Speaker, internal emails from the 

minister’s very own office, his very own office that show that 

his political staff do not even buy those lines. His former chief 

of staff wrote to ministry officials, “Is there any further policy 

development or requirements under each of the items under 

section 1.4 for care standards? These are good but extremely 

general.” A ministry official writes back and says, “I do not 

believe there are more specifics, unless that is done at the 

regional level.” Well clearly, Mr. Speaker, it is not being done. 

Not even the own minister’s political staff sees these guidelines 

as having substance, as having specifics. 

 

My question is for the Premier. How can this government 

possibly keep pretending that we have minimum care standards 

when officials say that there are no specifics and even the 

minister’s political staff have said that they are just simply 

extremely general guidelines? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again in the 

absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 



5970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

I will again indicate that I’ve asked the Ombudsman to look 

into this case. I’ll table the letter for the House, Mr. Speaker, so 

members can see exactly what I’ve asked for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also perhaps suggest, because I don’t know the 

context in which the member opposite is quoting from the 

email, so perhaps the Leader of the Opposition will also table 

what he is quoting from so that I can have a look at what he’s 

tabling from. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say this, that the guidelines that are 

in place are comprehensive. They’re 193 pages, Mr. Speaker. 

They are requirements for all special care homes in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had in the past legislation that called for, for 

example, the inspection of long-term care facilities by the 

ministry. However, Mr. Speaker, that section was removed by 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker, 

when they were the government of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to improve care for seniors in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what we have built in 

terms of capacity, in terms of what we have done in terms of 

FTE [full-time equivalent] improvements. Mr. Speaker, I’ll take 

no lessons from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, he should take lessons from 

Margaret’s family. He should take lessons, Mr. Speaker, from 

his own political staff. 

 

If he’s curious about the emails, I’ll give the dates for his staff 

to look it up: Sunday, October 22nd, Mr. Speaker. Over the 

weekend, there was a flurry of emails going back between the 

minister’s political staff and those in the ministry, and that is 

when, Mr. Speaker, the former chief of staff for the minister 

said that they are extremely general guidelines. My question, 

Mr. Speaker, is for the minister. Does he believe, does he agree 

with his political staff that the guidelines that are in place are 

extremely general? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

considering that the guidelines replaced bills and regulations 

that numbered just a couple of pages, Mr. Speaker, 193 pages 

make up the guidelines today, Mr. Speaker, which I believe are 

comprehensive in terms of what they require from a special care 

home. I think that they clearly state the rights and the 

responsibilities of not only the staff and the administration of 

special care homes but also the rights and responsibilities of 

residents and their families, Mr. Speaker. I think it goes into 

great detail, over 193 pages, what the expectations are in terms 

of the care that is provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in cases where that care appears to not have been the case, 

we take that very seriously. That is why this morning I 

contacted, by letter, the Ombudsman’s office, asking the 

Ombudsman to look into this particular case and report back the 

findings to the public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a bunch of extremely general 

guidelines do not count as minimum care standards. It’s simply 

not believable, and the minister’s refusal to recognize that goes 

to the heart of this problem. There is the specific case that we 

have of Margaret’s family, but this is much broader, much 

wider. And this is about a minister that refuses to admit that we 

need minimum care standards. 

 

The government is starting, Mr. Speaker, to require hourly 

check-ins with residents in some facilities. That’s good, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s an example of a minimum care standard, but 

that should be there for all facilities, Mr. Speaker, on a 

province-wide basis. This government should work with those 

on the front lines to develop a clear minimum level of care, a 

base level of care with the standards associated with that. And 

those standards, Mr. Speaker, should apply province wide. 

 

To the Premier: how can he possibly, how can he possibly be 

opposed to clear minimum care standards? Why does he keep 

hiding behind extremely general guidelines that clearly are not 

working? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take this 

question on behalf of the government. Mr. Speaker, again it is 

incorrect to say that there are no minimum standards in place in 

special care homes in this province. That is not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry works with the regional health 

authorities and all of our facilities to ensure that the 

administration and the front-line staff know what are the 

expectations, the rights, and the responsibilities of facilities, as 

well, the rights and responsibility of residents and their families, 

Mr. Speaker. Those care guidelines are in place. The document 

totals 193 pages, Mr. Speaker. I think that speaks volumes in 

terms of the amount of detail that are in those guidelines. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we have staff 

that provide care in a loving and a compassionate and a warm 

manner. But, Mr. Speaker, when that care fails for a resident, 

we take that seriously, Mr. Speaker. That is why I am asking the 

Ombudsman to look into this case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yesterday I reintroduced The 

Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act which would require the 

government to implement clear, province-wide minimum care 

standards. To the minister: will the government agree to pass 

The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again, we have minimum care guidelines in this province that 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5971 

has been put in place through a 193-page document that is 

required for all facilities to operate, Mr. Speaker. But again, and 

I’m looking at and just had a brief look at the member’s bill 

because certainly, Mr. Speaker, there were deficiencies. 

 

I will note though, Mr. Speaker, that the bill continues to 

request or provide for ready access of a copy of most routine 

inspections of facilities, Mr. Speaker. The inspection process 

that was put in place was in place during the 1990s, Mr. 

Speaker. The ministry responds back to me that that 

requirement wasn’t actually followed by about 1996. 

Inspections stopped under the members opposite. In fact that 

legislation was repealed in 2002 by the members opposite when 

they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This government can’t keep pretending that 

poor quality of care is a rare occurrence. The reality is that poor 

quality of care is the norm because of chronic short-staffing and 

because there are no clear minimum care standards. There are 

just extremely general guidelines. To the minister: how can he 

keep standing behind extremely general guidelines? Why won’t 

he pass our legislation and develop clear province-wide 

minimum care standards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member 

opposite just said that poor quality of care is the norm in special 

care homes in this province. Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of 

people that work in long-term care — care aids, LPNs, RNs — 

in over 150 facilities in this province I think that would be 

shocked to hear that poor quality of care is the norm on a 

day-to-day basis in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would disagree with the member opposite, and I 

think that the thousands of people that work in long-term care 

and I think the thousands of families that have residents in care 

would disagree with that sentiment, Mr. Speaker. We take these 

issues seriously, Mr. Speaker, but we believe that the care that 

is provided to the vast majority of our residents is done in a 

loving way, in a respectful way, Mr. Speaker, and I wish the 

member opposite would share that sentiment. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask members to listen to the question 

and to the response from both sides including the members that 

asked the question. I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have paid $790,890.22 to John Black for airfare — 

nearly $800,000 just for airfare. And that’s just up until March 

31st, so that doesn’t include all of John Black’s flights since 

then. To the minister: how much in total have taxpayers already 

spent flying around this highly paid American lean consultant? 

What’s the number? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the contract that will end in June of 2015 will see the 

government spend on the John Black contract $35.5 million. To 

date, as of July, Mr. Speaker, so a couple of months ago, we’ve 

already spent nearly $26 million. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, through all the work beginning in 2008, in 

fact a little bit of work that was done under the NDP when it 

comes to lean, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to see savings of 

$57 million. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been able to reduce what 

we believe will be the ongoing operational costs in places like 

the new Moose Jaw Hospital, the new children’s hospital, both 

which are under development, Mr. Speaker, in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been able to see some quality 

improvement work, quite a bit of it done throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker, because of our use of lean throughout 

the system, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, some 

enhancements in long-term care, but we still have more work to 

do, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but I think that this shows that 

the province and this government is committed to quality 

improvement within health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Loosely translated, Mr. Speaker, it sounds like 

the meter’s still running. The monthly airfare costs for John 

Black appear to be about $30,000 over the last couple of years, 

so we’ve probably spent another $210,000 since March just to 

fly John Black around. That’s a whopping $1 million just for 

John Black flights. 

 

We also know that John Black’s hotel bills were $963,513.87, 

and again that’s only up until March 31st. So to the minister: 

how much have we paid for this high-priced American lean 

consultant’s hotel bills in total? What’s the number? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as of July of 2014, so far we’ve spent about $26 million on the 

JBA [John Black and Associates] contract. Mr. Speaker, it’ll be 

close to $35 million by the time the contract is exited on June of 

2015. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, certainly I’ve been able to share with 

members of the House and the public some of the work we’ve 

been able to do through using a lean consultant over the last 

number of years. 

 

But here’s, Mr. Speaker, an example I think that speaks to 

patient-first care, resident-first care in the province. In 

Heartland Health Region in one of their long-term care 

facilities, they were able to reorganize and standardize how 

something as important, Mr. Speaker, as how breakfast was 

served. 

 

Prior to using lean, Mr. Speaker, all residents received their 

breakfast at 8:30 regardless of whether they wanted to be up at 

that time or whether or not they were prepared at that time. But 

thanks to improved scheduling using lean processes, they’ve 

expanded the breakfast hours from 7:45 to 9 o’clock to give 

more variety for those residents, as well as breakfast is now 

served 72 per cent faster, when the resident is ready for their 



5972 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

breakfast, Mr. Speaker. It speaks directly to what we’re trying 

to do with improved quality improvement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the monthly hotel costs for 

John Black appear to be about $38,000 per month over the last 

couple of years, so that means we’ve probably spent another 

$266,000 on John Black hotel bills since March. In total that’s 

well over $1.2 million just for John Black’s hotel bills. 

 

We also know that taxpayers have already given John Black 

$402,122 for per diems, $209,419 for miscellaneous expenses, 

and those numbers are just up until March 31st. The gravy train, 

or in this case, Mr. Speaker, the gravy plane just keeps rolling 

over there. 

 

To the minister: what’s the total amount to date the taxpayers 

have paid to John Black for per diems and miscellaneous 

expenses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again as a part of the contract, as of June 31st of this year, so 

earlier this summer, $25 million has been spent through the 

JBA contract, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be, as I’ve said 

publicly, exiting that contract June of next year. The total will 

be less than the 40 million that we had initially thought. It’ll be 

about $35 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But through that work, what we’ve been able to see is quality 

improvement throughout the health system, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously some regions would be more advanced in terms of 

the work that they’ve been able to do, but all regions have been 

able to certainly learn, in terms of new methodologies, a new 

way to do daily work within the health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an example, and I believe I’ve shared this one: 

pediatric cardiology patients, so some of our youngest, most 

vulnerable patients, Mr. Speaker. The time from registration to 

discharge in Saskatoon was reduced from two and a half hours 

down to one hour, a 50 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker, for 

those patients. It’s quality improvement that we’re focused on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. In today’s 

StarPhoenix, the title of a column or an article on John Black 

states, “Tout lean success, not cost, Black says.” You know, 

interesting advice from the consultant, but it would seem that 

the minister is taking that in spades. 

 

The minister has claimed that John Black submits receipts for 

all these expenses. There are huge travel bills and hotel bills 

from the American lean consultant, and Saskatchewan 

taxpayers deserve to know what we’re paying for. Again to the 

minister: will he table detailed receipts today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, again we have spent to date $25.2 million as of July, 

Mr. Speaker. Our contract costs with John Black will be $35 

million by the time the contract ends. But certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve been able to see some significant savings and 

efficiencies within the system, Mr. Speaker, knowing that we 

need to make the health care system in this province, as all 

provinces are struggling with, Mr. Speaker, to be more efficient 

so that we can see the sustainability of public health care across 

Saskatchewan and across Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will know that in this year 

our budget is a 3 per cent increase. Last year it was a three and a 

half per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, a far cry from about 10 

years ago when the increase in the health budget was 6.3 per 

cent. And yet at that time, 15 communities lost long-term care 

beds, and seven lost acute care beds, Mr. Speaker, and 120 

people in the health system lost their jobs in a 6 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. We need to do a better job of how, Mr. 

Speaker, we ensure that this system is sustainable in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Costs for Boundary Dam Carbon Capture Project 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are still 

waiting for answers on this government’s massive Boundary 

dam project which cost somewhere between 1.4 and 1.6 billion. 

The minister admitted last week that we don’t own the 

technology, that we can’t commercialize it, and that Alberta’s 

Cenovus is paying only $25 per tonne for the captured carbon. 

 

So in light of that, my question is for the SaskPower minister. 

What does he expect to be the net gains or losses over the next 

30 years? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very good project for 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan has some 300 years of coal 

supply. We generate approximately 60 per cent of the electricity 

in this province with coal from the southeast part of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of federal regulations around emissions, 

the project was undertaken. The federal government has 

contributed about $230 million to the project, the province of 

Saskatchewan about 1.2, $1.3 billion to the project, Mr. 

Speaker. It has received acclaim from around the world. We 

have had visitors to the project. Some 20 countries and 

businesses from around the world have visited the facility to 

take a look at it, Mr. Speaker. This is a good project for the 

people of Saskatchewan. It clearly meets the standards in terms 

of emissions going forward, and it is a project that is receiving 

acclaim from around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Industry experts estimate that Cenovus will 

take huge profits back home to Alberta, leaving taxpayers with 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5973 

a massive deficit. They say that $25 a tonne is a bargain 

basement deal. If the minister won’t reveal the projected net 

gains or losses that Saskatchewan people should expect, 

perhaps he’ll answer this: why are we only getting $25 a tonne 

for the captured carbon when the benefits to Cenovus is in the 

billions? Why didn’t we ask for more than that to make this 

project financially viable for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this project is 

getting acclaim from around the world. Environmentalists are 

certainly onside with it. The business community is certainly 

onside with it. 

 

And it is in sharp contrast to how the members opposite, when 

they were in government, managed these types of files. For 

example, when they were in government, Mr. Speaker, they lost 

$2 million on a power project in Guyana. Not one dime was 

ever recovered from that. In addition to that, then they went and 

decided that, because they’re such captains of industry over 

there, Mr. Speaker, they were going to go into the 

telecommunications business, and then they lost $25 million 

down in Atlanta. Then in addition to that on the next one that 

they were involved in — you’d have thought they’d have 

learned on the first one, Mr. Speaker, but no, they pushed back 

right into it again — and in Nashville they lose another $7 

million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then it didn’t matter what kind of business the members 

opposite were involved in, Mr. Speaker. They lost millions 

upon millions of taxpayers’ dollars, project after project. We’ll 

take no lessons from the members opposite about how to run 

business. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Request leave for introductions. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 

introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I’d like to introduce some special 

guests in the Legislative Assembly. Today seated in the west 

gallery, we have more than 50 grade 8 students, teachers, and 

chaperones from Redvers School in southeastern Saskatchewan 

and Westmount Community School in Saskatoon. These 

students are accompanied by their teachers: Morgan Wasylyk 

from Redvers School and Christopher Clark from Westmount. 

 

They’re here today to participate in A Day in the Legislative 

Assembly organized by the Provincial Capital Commission 

where they will get a chance to learn about the Legislative 

Building, the structure of government, and the democratic 

process. I’m proud that we’re able to host them here today. I 

look forward to meeting them this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

all members, please join me in welcoming these guests to their 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I’d like to take a 

moment and join in the minister to welcome the school groups, 

and in particular Westmount School. It’s my community; I 

represent downtown Saskatoon. So thank you very much for 

coming down here and we’ll talk more later. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 113 to 331.  

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 113 through 131. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I ask leave to introduce a motion regarding the length 

of debate this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion regarding length of debate. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Length of Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That notwithstanding the length of debate specified under 

rule 25(3)(a), on session day 16, being Thursday, 

November 20th, 2014, the period of debate under the said 

rule shall be 45 minutes, with the mover of the motion 

having a maximum of 15 minutes to speak and each 

subsequent member having no more than 10 minutes in 

which to speak to the motion; and further, that the 

provisions of the rule for the 10-minute period for 

questions and comments shall remain unaffected. 



5974 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Government House Leader 

by leave: 

 

That notwithstanding the length of debate specified under 

rule 25(3)(a), on session day 16, being Thursday, 

November 20th, 2014, the period of debate under the said 

rule shall be 45 minutes, with the mover of the motion 

having a maximum of 15 minutes to speak and each 

subsequent member having no more than 10 minutes in 

which to speak to the motion; and further, that the 

provisions of the rule for the 10-minute period for 

questions and comments shall remain unchanged. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 904 — The Mohyla Institute (1958) 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I move 

the second reading of this bill, just a few comments about 

Mohyla Institute. 

 

It was established in 1917 in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan as a 

residential, educational, and cultural facility for students for the 

promotion of Ukrainian religion, history, and the arts. The 

institute was originally on Main Street in Saskatoon but moved 

to its current location on Temperance Street in 1965. It houses 

students from home and abroad that primarily attend the 

University of Saskatchewan. It also serves as a youth hostel 

during the summer months. As well, it is the practice facility for 

the Lastiwka Youth Choir. 

 

Several members of my extended family over the years have 

attended Mohyla proudly. And of course there’s a few people in 

the building that have attended Mohyla, who serve this province 

so capably. David Cooper is one. Kathy Burianyk from the 

Clerk’s office, and of course the Minister of Finance is also an 

alumnus. 

 

Mohyla was incorporated by an Act in 1958. The bill before the 

Assembly today seeks to amend the 1958 Act by amending the 

requirements for the winding up of the affairs of the 

corporation. It’s my pleasure to move that Bill No. 904, The 

Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 904, The 

Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 104, this bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Pursuant to the previous motion, 55-minute debate. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Government Vision for Economic Growth 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

take part in today’s 75-minute debate. I’ll be moving a motion 

at the end of my remarks: 

 

That this Assembly supports the government’s vision for a 

growing province by keeping taxes competitive, practising 

prudent fiscal management, and keeping the economic 

climate positive while seizing opportunities and 

innovation; furthermore 

 

That the vision is creating a business climate that has 

produced one of Canada’s strongest economies that is a 

benefit to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my remarks today will be more of a history lesson 

or a then-and-now speaking of the successes of this government 

and the dismal performance of that NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an article in the November 19th Leader-Post by 

Bruce Johnstone with comments of the Fraser Institute reads as 

follows: 

 

In the 21st century, the Fraser Institute is telling young 

Canadians that Alberta and Saskatchewan offer the most 

opportunity for jobs and prosperity . . . Western Canada is 

the land of opportunity while Ontario and Quebec, the two 

most populous provinces, now resemble Atlantic Canada 

with its gloomy economic outlook and relatively poor 

prospects for young people . . . 

 

Clearly, where there’s more private sector investment 

there are more jobs and greater opportunities for young 

Canadians to enjoy a middle-class lifestyle . . . In general, 

if one seeks opportunity — money, jobs, and employment 

security — the opportunities are in Western Canada, 

especially in Alberta and Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a far cry from the 16 years of the NDP 

government, for the NDP government basically kept this 

province in a recession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we were treated to a little bit of poetry 

in the Assembly, and I wondered about that. I thought maybe 

that, you know, I’ve got nothing against poetry, but maybe 

poetry should be read at home or to your children or your 

grandchildren. And I would strongly suggest to the members 

opposite that they read the Speech from the Throne 2014. They 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5975 

would be well more advised to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has had the lowest unemployment 

rate in Canada for 23 consecutive months since January 2013, 

the lowest youth unemployment rate in Canada at 6.3 per cent, 

where nationally it is 12.6. Mr. Speaker, Regina has had the 

lowest unemployment rate among all CMAs [census 

metropolitan area] in Canada, in October 2014 at 3 per cent, the 

ninth straight month for the lowest CMA. Saskatoon had the 

second lowest unemployment rate in Canada at 4.4 per cent in 

October of 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 576,200 people employed in October: an increase 

of 19,700 jobs compared to October 2013, an increase of 71,700 

compared to October of 2007. Employment has increased year 

over year for the past 35 months. Saskatchewan’s employment 

growth of 3.5 per cent was the highest above the national 

increase of 1.1 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past seven years there have been 70,400 

new jobs created in Saskatchewan. Fewer than 10 per cent of 

those jobs, 6,600 were created in the resource sector. This 

following breakdown is of the 70,400 jobs since 2007: the 

construction industry, 18,000; health care, 10,700; resources, 

6,600; science and technology, 6,200; education, 5,800; 

agriculture, 5,300; all other sectors, 17,800; for a total of 

70,400. Clearly a province that is very diversified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in June, employment hit a record of 577,000 

people working in our province. Saskatchewan’s population is 

now at an all-time high of over 1.125 million people. That 

represents an increase of more than 123,000 people in the past 

seven years, a far cry from the previous seven years when 

Saskatchewan’s population actually declined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province remains on track to reach the 

population target set by our government of 1.2 million people 

by 2020, while Statistics Canada has predicted Saskatchewan’s 

population could surpass 1.5 million people. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to just read a few quotes from 

members opposite previous on the population issue. One being, 

“. . . the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase our population 

by 100,000 in 10 years is more wishful thinking than 

statistically attainable.” NDP MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] Doreen Hamilton. 

 

“. . . they propose to increase the population of Saskatchewan 

by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number of years, Mr. 

Speaker. Well it’s so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, 

that it flies in the face of reality.” NDP MLA Harry Van 

Mulligen. 

 

“Of course he says that he wants to increase the population of 

the province by 100,000 people. Well who would disagree with 

that? That’s fine, but the question is, do you have a plan to 

achieve it, Mr. Speaker? And I say they do not have a plan or at 

least they do not have a plan that makes any sense.” Eric Cline. 

 

Just one more, Mr. Speaker: “We’ve heard this, we’ve heard 

this so-called plan. It’s a plan that says all you’ve got to do is 

cut all the taxes — cut taxes particularly for the corporate folks 

— cut all the taxes, you know, you sell off [some of] the 

Crowns, and . . . you’ll get rid of labour legislation that protects 

workers, and somehow this is magically going to turn into 

100,000 people. Well we know what the experts have said 

about it.” Lorne Calvert, 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people definitely were not in touch. Mr. 

Speaker, in July, unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per cent, 

the lowest unemployment rate ever recorded. In September, 

Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate and the fastest 

rate of job creation anywhere in Canada. Saskatchewan people 

are earning more than ever before and they are keeping more of 

what they earn, thanks to lower taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the topic of taxes, I would just like to bring a 

few things to mind. When the NDP always talked about taxes, it 

was about implementing more taxes, basically. The 

Saskatchewan Party government is committed to keeping taxes 

low to encourage investment and make life more affordable. 

Since 2007 the Saskatchewan Party government’s tax 

reductions have saved families almost $2.8 billion. 

Saskatchewan residents will save 480 million this year due to 

these tax cuts. 

 

Since 2007 our government has increased the personal, spousal, 

and child exemption amounts and introduced a new low-income 

tax credit. For example, an individual taxpayer pays no tax on 

the first $18,650. A family of four with a $50,000 annual 

income will pay just $166 in provincial income tax in 2014, 

compared to $2,302 in 2007. By the end of 2014, this family 

will have saved $14,000 over seven years. We have removed 

114,000 Saskatchewan residents from the provincial income tax 

roll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, property tax payers funded 60 per 

cent of the cost of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education. 

In 2009 the Saskatchewan Party government delivered the 

largest education property tax reduction in our province’s 

history, reducing the amount to 35 per cent. Mill rates were 

reduced in 2009 and 2011, which has saved Saskatchewan 

residents a cumulative 728 million. We reduced education 

property tax on agricultural land also by 80 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP record is that they closed 176 schools 

while raising education property taxes. Under the NDP, 

approximately 150 rural municipalities launched a tax revolt in 

2005 to protest paying the highest education property taxes in 

the country. They raised taxes at least 17 times while in 

government, including raising the PST [provincial sales tax] 

three times and income tax twice. They raised the PST after the 

2000 election after saying they wouldn’t. And a statement by 

then Finance minister Harry Van Mulligen was, “Why don’t 

parties want to talk about tax hikes during elections? I don’t 

know. I suspect anyone who talks about tax hikes is not likely 

to be very popular during the course of an election campaign.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, where I live, I can remember, 2003 my EPT 

[education property tax] tax or mill rate was 22.5 and our 

municipal mill rate was around . . . I believe it was around 8 or 

9. Right now with the EPT at 5.03 on residential and the mill 

rate of 4.5, total mills of 9.53, a huge saving in property taxes. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP talked about EPT but that’s all they did. 



5976 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

The Saskatchewan Party acted on EPT and the 2014 EPT mill 

rates will remain the same as the 2013. And they are as follows: 

agriculture, 2.67 mills; residential, 5.03; commercial, industrial, 

8.28; and 11.04 for the resource sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about agriculture 

sector in our province. Agriculture is the backbone of our 

economy, and under the NDP they did everything possible to 

destroy it. Just a couple of things I would like to talk about. 

Under the Agri-Food Equity Fund from 1994 to 2002, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP government invested 31 million in private 

business. Over 24 million in losses to date. There were 25 

investments, 20 losses to date. Mr. Speaker, this government is 

getting out of private business. If I was to total up the losses on 

other ventures of the NDP, would it not have been much wiser 

to put that money into the GRIP [gross revenue insurance 

program] which they cancelled, drought assistance, education 

tax rebates, improving crop insurance, fully funding CAIS 

[Canadian agricultural income stabilization], irrigation 

expansion, gopher control programs, livestock assistance, and 

many more? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the good news story in agriculture is record 11.7 

billion in ag and exports in 2013, the third consecutive year of 

record exports. Under the NDP in 2007, it was 6.4 billion, an 83 

per cent increase since 2007. Wheat was the top export 

commodity in 2013. Strong cattle and hog prices, record crop 

production in 2013. From Stats Canada, 38.4 million tonnes, 1.8 

million tonnes above the growth plan which was up 36.6 

million tonnes, 40 per cent above the 2012 production and 48 

per cent above the 10-year average. Realized net farm incomes 

in 2013 was $2.63 billion, 187 per cent increase since 2007. 

The western stock price insurance program was created, along 

many, many other things. 

 

I’m running out of time here, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve got many 

things to talk about, some very important initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, by this government. It’s the largest education tax 

reduction in Saskatchewan history. Western livestock price 

program was introduced in 2014. One hundred sixty-two dollar 

acre coverage now, for 88 acres under the NDP in 2007, and so 

we’ve nearly doubled that. One hundred dollars per acre in 

unseeded acres now available versus $50 under the NDP. 

Committing to fully funding federal-provincial programs 

upfront. NDP refused to do this. Mr. Speaker, there are many, 

many programs that we have initiated moving Saskatchewan 

forward, strong leadership, standing up for Saskatchewan, and 

the plan for growth and record growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit of some facts, for 

instance, on the construction industry. Since 2007 building 

permit values have totalled 14.6 billion, an increase of 223,000 

from the previous seven years of the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few facts on the oil and gas industry. I always 

hear about the pot of gold that was left to this government by 

the member from Athabasca. Well I just want to set a few 

things straight. In 2001 to 2007, there were 15,800 oil well 

licences issued; from 2008 to 2014 under this government, 

24,071. Now one may say that that was created because of the 

price of oil. I pulled off the stats of the Alberta oil and their 

records. From ’92 to 2007, there was a steady increase of oil 

drilling in Alberta. Since 2007 it has come down and we have 

gained. Is it possible now oil companies recognize that this is 

the place to do business? Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. I 

would love to get into highways and infrastructure, but time 

doesn’t permit. And at this point, I’d like to introduce this 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports the government’s vision for a 

growing province by keeping taxes competitive, practising 

prudent fiscal management, and keeping the economic 

climate positive while seizing opportunities and 

innovation; and further 

 

That this vision is creating a business climate that has 

produced one of Canada’s strongest economies that is a 

benefit to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford: 

 

That this Assembly support the government’s vision for 

our growing province by keeping taxes competitive, 

practising prudent fiscal management, and keeping the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Does the member, does the minister want the opportunity to get 

up and speak? 

 

. . . and keeping the economic climate positive while 

seizing opportunities and innovation; and further 

 

That this vision is creating a business climate that has 

produced one of Canada’s strongest economies that is a 

benefit to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I was ready to get 

up here, but I was being heckled by members opposite. You 

know, I was being harassed a bit by the member who is 

responsible or was responsible in part for the undoing and 

eliminating of the film tax credit, something that was building a 

bright future in our province, the member from Northeast. And 

I was being shouted across by the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow who we rarely hear in this Assembly other than if it 

is a heckle. So in many ways, it was actually good to hear him 

actually speak today, although it might have been productive 

for him to say something that related directly to his constituents. 

 

I am pleased to enter into dialogue here today, to debate here 

today. You know, the motion that was put forward by the 

member, you know, is really again sort of what we see from this 

government, a lot more back-patting of itself and really a lot of 

partisan cheerleading and all about their own partisan interests, 

and very much less so about the real interests of Saskatchewan 

people. It’s sort of all about them, Mr. Speaker, less so about all 

Saskatchewan people, and that’s a concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think this is where, you know, I mean government has 

sort of got into this space here now where they’re really just one 

big spin machine, Mr. Speaker, trying to tout their own record 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5977 

and pat themself on the back. And I think that Saskatchewan 

people expect a little more humility, and they expect a little bit 

more reflection of the realities that they’re facing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this motion put forward is, you know, is one that really, 

you know, doesn’t reflect the realities of Saskatchewan people 

when I think about what they’re facing. Certainly we have 

incredible economic opportunity in this province for which we 

should be fully capturing, and we know that that’s coming from 

our resources. We know that it comes from our people and our 

workers. We know that it comes from our fine entrepreneurs 

and businesses — those that are investing and those that are 

hiring, those that are providing opportunity in our province. 

What we recognize with this government is that they’re all too 

willing to try to take that credit, something that they’re not 

responsible for, and sort of tout their own supposed plan as 

being the genesis of some of the good economic activity. 

 

And what we see is that this government just isn’t holding up 

their end of the bargain. We see that this government isn’t 

actually allowing Saskatchewan to be all it can be, to capture 

the full opportunity. And we can look at that on so many fronts, 

Mr. Speaker. When we look at it from a shear economic 

perspective, we see how this government is sitting on their 

hands and dragging their feet as it relates to improving 

procurement for Saskatchewan people, something that’s so 

critically important for certainly the businesses of this province 

who, yes, invest in this province, who, yes, employ in this 

province, who, yes, pay taxes in this province along with those 

workers who are also doing the same thing, Mr. Speaker, who 

deserve a level playing field and a fair shot at government 

procurement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this government drags its feet and has way more interest 

having a whole bunch of Texas licence plates tripping around 

this province, creating all sorts of problems, Mr. Speaker, as 

opposed to building on Saskatchewan opportunity, selling out, 

selling out those very businesses. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

approach to trade by this government and its procurement 

policy is naive, simplistic, and ideological, Mr. Speaker, instead 

of rooted in good common sense, practical steps that could 

serve the fine businesses, the manufacturers, the construction 

companies of our province in truly capturing the full 

opportunity that Saskatchewan people deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

Critically important steps. 

 

Not only is improving a procurement policy, Mr. Speaker, 

going to be good for our economy and good for those 

businesses who are creating investment here . . . or providing 

investment here in our province, it’s about providing better 

value for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. And that ultimately needs to 

be the most important piece. 

 

[11:15] 

 

We look as well at the opportunities we have economically. 

And where this government is simply dropping the ball and not 

allowing us to be all we can be, Mr. Speaker, is where they 

went out and outright eliminated the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan, taking a once thriving industry that provided 

economic returns to the people of the province but also created 

a sense of pride and excitement and quality of life for many, 

Mr. Speaker, and eliminated a film tax credit and drove out of 

this province all sorts of entrepreneurs who were investing in 

our province and hard-working people in the film industry, Mr. 

Speaker, many of whom made a big and direct investment in 

our province. 

 

And I just think, you know, it’s just such a shame, Mr. Speaker, 

that you have this time of resource strength and economic 

potential, and you have a government that’s actively choosing 

to be less instead of being more, Mr. Speaker, choosing to be 

less instead of choosing to be more. 

 

And if you think of all of the people, all of the people that are 

moving to Saskatchewan, something we’re excited about 

around population growth, our ability over the long haul to 

retain those individuals and be as strong as we can be is to make 

sure we have that quality of life in place, to make sure that we 

have a strong cultural component, to make sure we have a 

strong arts component and, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that life 

is affordable in Saskatchewan. 

 

And what we’ve seen under this government on the 

affordability side of the equation is a government that just 

doesn’t get the reality of Saskatchewan families, just doesn’t 

get it. And you know, they can heckle away from Walsh Acres 

or from Regina Northeast or from Wakamow all they want. But 

what I think they need to do is go listen to the people of this 

province, the everyday families of this province who have had 

the cost of living jacked up on them in a way that has caused 

real hardship for so many families across Saskatchewan. 

 

You’ve got people working harder than ever, harder than ever. 

Many taking two and three jobs on, Mr. Speaker, just to make 

ends meet. You’ve got people that are trying to take care of 

their families whose wages have been relatively flat but whose 

cost of . . . at a time where the cost of living has been jacked up 

and skyrocketed in this province, Mr. Speaker, with no 

recognition by that government. And this harms the middle 

class from being all it can be. It harms Saskatchewan from 

being all it can be. 

 

And you think of all those hits on the pocketbooks of everyday 

families that are facing these costs. We see the inaction on 

housing by this government, the real inaction on housing, Mr. 

Speaker. We see the property tax issue, Mr. Speaker, where this 

government is unwilling to provide the important, proper 

dedicated infrastructure funding to our growing communities, 

Mr. Speaker, and as a result they leave the heavy lifting to the 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. And we have a property tax, Mr. 

Speaker, then that’s having to be the tool that is going to fund 

the growth of communities and the infrastructure renewal. 

That’s a heavy hit on families across Saskatchewan, one that 

many can’t afford. 

 

And this government, that is blessed with all sorts of revenue 

and revenue tools, needs to do a better job of supporting our 

municipalities so that there’s not this big, heavy tax burden 

being downloaded and off-loaded to the families and businesses 

paying property taxes and subjected to big property tax 

increases. 

 

We see it on their power bills, Mr. Speaker, with the approach 

of this government that sells out opportunity, that created the 

smart meter debacle where they basically strapped these 



5978 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

dangerous explosive devices to the homes of Saskatchewan 

people, for which now this government is leaving both 

Saskatchewan people at risk, Mr. Speaker, leaving 

Saskatchewan people at risk, Mr. Speaker, but also wasted their 

hard-earned ratepayers’ dollars, putting that on top of other 

choices by this government when it comes to our Crowns. All 

sorts of outsourcing or the dividend raids we’ve seen of this 

government, that surprise one of just a couple of years ago 

where they, at the end of the year they dipped in and grabbed 

another $120 million from SaskPower, all land up directly on 

the property tax, or the power bill, sorry, of families and 

businesses all across Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s tremendous opportunity in 

Saskatchewan for which we’d like to build upon. We would like 

to work together. We’re putting plans . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The members are shouting, how? They 

should start supporting some of the private member bills that 

are before them here today to make sure that economic 

opportunity is extended to all, to address the realities and 

pressures on everyday houses, homes, Mr. Speaker, and to start 

to make a difference for the many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s not going to work is the heckling and shouting from 

across, Mr. Speaker, through debate like this. What’s not going 

to work is sitting on their hands while there’s meaningful, 

important improvements that could be made in areas like 

procurement, or continuing to sell out the interests of 

Saskatchewan people when it comes to our Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we need to do is to truly focus in on what matters to 

Saskatchewan people. I’m running short of time. I wish I wasn’t 

because I could address other areas here as well, Mr. Speaker, 

where it’s clear that this government needs to stop back-patting 

itself and simply congratulating and focusing on themselves in a 

partisan way. It’s not all about them, Mr. Speaker. It should be 

about Saskatchewan people. It should be about all of us 

working together to address the realities they’re facing, to fully 

capture the economic opportunities in our province, build that 

better, bright future for all Saskatchewan people, and build on 

the strength of our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as this debate occurred here today and the 

congratulatory sort of nature of the motion to government itself 

instead of the people of Saskatchewan, and then the endless 

heckling we hear from government instead of focusing on 

realities people are facing, I’m rather disappointed with the 

approach of government instead of focusing on what really 

matters. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d like to remind members that today 

is private members’ day, that it’s meant for private members to 

participate in debate. And I would also remind members that the 

Speaker and Deputy Speaker need to hear what the member is 

speaking when the member is speaking. I would ask all 

members to provide that courtesy to the member on his feet. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am very 

honoured . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thanks. I’m very 

honoured to be here and be able to speak to this debate today. 

And I would like to start off with that I fully support this motion 

presented by my colleague. 

 

With that said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask you if 

you remember the movie, The Dirty Dozen. It was a great 

movie. I really enjoyed it. Well if you didn’t, Mr. Speaker, how 

about the movie, Ocean’s Eleven? Do you remember that 

movie, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe 

you remember The Whole Ten Yards. Perhaps, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I know you remember the nimble nine. Oh yes, that 

wasn’t a movie. That’s the members across, opposite. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, you remember the original eight. 

As the deputy minister, you knew that the Speaker was one of 

the eight. If it were not for the determination and vision of these 

eight MLAs, we sure wouldn’t have the fantastic economy we 

have here today. These eight MLAs that had created the 

Saskatchewan Party in 1997, and with all their hard work in 

going from community to community to meet with people and 

travelling hundreds of miles and maybe only having two people 

show up, but they built this Saskatchewan Party and that’s why 

our economy is the way it is today. 

 

The Sask Party group of eight was led by only one female from 

the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, as she stated at our 

convention this year when they thanked them for all the hard 

work they did. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, there were 

seven other members of that group: past Agriculture minister 

from Saltcoats constituency, a good colleague friend of mine; 

the Speaker of this House from Cannington constituency; also 

previous Speaker from Moosomin constituency; our Finance 

minister from Canora-Pelly constituency; and of course our 

very own Minister of the Economy from Kindersley 

constituency. 

 

No longer sitting as an MLA is our good Rod Gantefoer who is 

now one of the executive of the fabulous STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] air program. And what a program 

that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And of course, Ben Heppner who I 

really didn’t know that well, but I heard some fantastic stories 

about him, like when he was the caucus Chair and if he looked 

at you over his rimmed glasses, you knew — shut up. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, during member statements yesterday, 

while my colleague friend, the member from Carrot River was 

speaking of how we have reduced the waiting list for seniors 

waiting for long-term care, one of the members opposite on the 

other side, started beaking: brag, brag, brag, brag, brag. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to brag some more as to the 

accomplishments we have done. And I also know that they 

couldn’t brag when they were the governing party because they 

never did anything but chase away jobs and create population 

declines. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, here are some highlights and changes to 

this province since the Saskatchewan Party became the 

governing party of this great province seven years ago. Lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada for 23 consecutive months, since 

January 2013. That’s 3.5 per cent in October 2014. Nationally 

it’s 6.5 per cent. Lowest youth unemployment rate in Canada at 

6.3 per cent. The national average is 12.6 per cent. Regina had 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5979 

the lowest unemployment rate among all CMAs in Canada in 

October 2014 at 3 per cent. Ninth straight month it’s been the 

lowest. Saskatoon had the second-lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada at 4.4 per cent. 

 

567,200 people employed in October, an increase of 19,700 

jobs compared to 2013 in October; an increase of 71,700 

compared to 2007. Employment has increased year over year 

over the past 35 months. Saskatchewan employment growth 

rate of 3.5 per cent was the highest, above national increases of 

1.1 per cent. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, record highs, all-time historical highs, 

population aged 15 and over, 846,100. And a female 

employment rate of 264,300. Record highs for the months of 

October, labour force 593,300. Employment, 576,200. Full-time 

employment, 475,800. And a male employment of 311,900. Far 

greater than what was here years ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, year-over-year employment: employment 

up 19,700 jobs since last year. Saskatchewan growth rate of 3.5 

per cent, ranked first among provinces compared to the national 

average of 1.1 per cent. Full-time employment up 14,000, 

part-time up 5,700. Gender: female employment up 11,300 and 

male employment up 8,500. Youth employment up by 2,900 

people. Saskatoon unemployment up 5,900 which is a 3.6 per 

cent increase, and Regina employment up 1,400 which is a 1 

per cent increase over the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, month-to-month employment: Saskatchewan 

employment up 2,300. Saskatchewan employment growth of 

4.4 per cent, ranked fifth among provinces. Full-time 

employment and part-time employment, up and down. Some 

are down. Gender, female employment up 2,500. Saskatoon 

employment up 500 and Regina employment up 1,400. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unemployment is down 700 from a year ago and 

Regina unemployment down 600 from a year ago. Saskatoon 

unemployment up 100 from a year ago. Youth unemployment 

down 400 from a year ago. Aboriginal unemployment down 

400 from a year ago. Aboriginal youth unemployment down 

500 from a year ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP tabled The Fairness for 

Saskatchewan Businesses in Government Procurement Act on 

Monday, “. . . which is aimed at ensuring Saskatchewan 

businesses do not keep losing out while government contracts 

are continually handed to companies from other provinces or 

countries.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP also stated, “For a year and a 

half, Saskatchewan’s steel fabrication industry has been 

pressuring the government behind the scenes for changes to its 

procurement policies, but the government continues to fail . . .” 

Let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been talking with 

those companies all along and bringing that information to our 

party so we could react to it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you wouldn’t know. I know the 

businesses. Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s a quote from the 

member opposite: “All Saskatchewan businesses want is a level 

playing field,” said Wotherspoon. Well we know that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I’ve been talking to them . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d remind the member not to refer to 

members by their name but by their riding. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in June our 

government created Priority Saskatchewan to ensure businesses 

are treated fairly when bidding on government contracts. This 

new branch at SaskBuilds has a mandate to improve 

procurement across the government and Crown sector by 

consulting with businesses and removing barriers that create an 

uneven playing field for Saskatchewan businesses. 

Consultations are under way with businesses, government, and 

Crown corporations across the province to understand what is 

working well and what is not, challenges that they may be 

facing. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Priority Saskatchewan has now passed through 100 meetings 

representing a broad spectrum of stakeholders. While respecting 

our trade agreements, our government will take decisive action 

to maximize opportunities for local businesses. And might I 

remind you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s all they used to do is 

meet, meet, meet, meet, meet, and never did anything to 

respond to it. 

 

Over the past seven years there have been 70,400 new jobs 

created in Saskatchewan because of this government working 

hard to create a better business environment. Fewer than 10 per 

cent of those jobs, 6,600, were created in the resource sector. 

Here is a breakdown of the 70,400 new jobs since 2007: 

construction, 18,000 new jobs; health care, 10,700 new jobs; 

resource sector, 6,600 jobs; science and technology, 6,200 jobs; 

education, 5,800; agriculture, 5,300; all other sectors, 17,800. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has created work, has 

made an atmosphere in this province where companies want to 

come here and work here, not chased away like that government 

has done over the years prior to that. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I say that I support this motion, and I thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to enter into this debate. And it’s an important one 

because as I look at the motion, it really shows where this 

government is at when I . . . especially the last sentence. But 

there’s many parts of it that I just find really problematic, when 

they say that it’s a benefit for all Saskatchewan people. And if 

anybody happened to read the paper, in The StarPhoenix, and I 

think, I hope the member from Saskatoon Meewasin . . . It’s his 

home community. We all woke up with a tragic story about 

“Homeless man found dead.” Something’s wrong. Something’s 

wrong. 

 

And so you put forward a motion like this and not understand 

that things are not all good for everyone in this province. We 

have a problem. We have a problem. And even if the heckles 

over there want to deny that and want to deny that in fact people 

are in crisis and this is what the front-line workers — and in 

fact the Minister of Social Services will call them the boots on 

the ground — are saying, people are in crisis. And that is a real 

issue. That is a real issue. So I expected maybe that the 



5980 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

government would say, and there’s more work to do. That’s 

their favourite tag line when they’re kind of in a jam. They say, 

for the last seven years, there’s more work to do; they’ve just 

got to get around to it. 

 

But this is a problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a situation 

where this government . . . And we heard the member from 

Meewasin say, we will brag and we will brag and we will brag 

and we will continue to brag. Where is the humility? Where is a 

little humbleness? When we see these kind of things happening 

when we are coming into the Christmas season, and they just 

spout off stats after stats after stats. 

 

And here is one. And I don’t know, maybe the two members 

haven’t seen this stat. They haven’t seen this stat. But this is 

one clearly we should not be proud of, and this is, “Sask. food 

banks see largest provincial increase.” This is crazy, Mr. 

Speaker. Where we see other provinces having an annual 

increase of some 1 per cent, 1 per cent increase, what is our 

increase year over year? 19.4. That’s not 1.94. That’s 19.4. 

Why is it that more people, more people are going to the food 

bank? Why is that in Saskatchewan? And half of them are 

children. Half of them are children. 

 

So when they get up and say that all Saskatchewan people are 

benefiting, I think they need to say, can we dial it back here and 

understand that not all people are benefiting. We need to get 

serious about this. 

 

We were happy to hear that they’re talking about an 

anti-poverty strategy. We’ve been calling for that for many 

years, and we’re glad to see that Poverty Costs will be involved. 

But it’s an important, it’s very important to get that work going. 

It’s very, very important to get going. And we have a problem 

here in Saskatchewan with poverty. When so many people are 

doing well, some are not doing so well. 

 

And when we think when we have that kind of economic 

growth . . . Now this government, I couldn’t believe the 

member opposite would say that he’s giving all the credit to the 

people who met to form this party — after being so horribly 

embarrassed by their former antics in the ’80s — as somehow 

they did it all. I mean, again, this is that brag, brag, brag, deny 

the realities of what’s happening in a province like this. 

 

But we see a situation, and you know, it is interesting. And I 

really appreciate the comments that my colleague made earlier 

about the film industry. And isn’t it interesting, isn’t this 

interesting: where is the Premier this week? Where is the 

Premier this week? Well he is in India on a trade mission. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the member knows full well 

that a member may refer to the absence of a member but not to 

reflect on it. So I would caution the member in his remarks. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know 

the government is doing its work in India, right? There is a 

trade mission in India. But this is what a columnist wrote about 

this, and he talked about the curtain trade mission that’s 

happening to India, talking to exports of Saskatchewan’s 

resources like oilseeds and potash. 

 

But, and I quote: “But if such trade missions are to be truly 

successful, one would hope the Saskatchewan premier would 

have his eyes wide open as to whatever possibilities he might 

see,” even if those possibilities might be the ones that he’s 

rejected. “One might hope . . . [the Premier] would be reminded 

that Saskatchewan is more than resources and that things like 

the film industry in this province still do reach around the 

world. ” 

 

He ends this story by saying . . . But it’s interesting, it’s 

interesting what’s happening over in India where they’re having 

this film conference. And he says, “But it does seem more than 

a little ironic that India seems more supportive of 

Saskatchewan-based film projects than the government of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

So how does that work? How does that work? And we see this 

government pick and choose winners and losers all the time. 

And people in the film industry who are clearly . . . Even the 

chamber of commerce, the chamber commerce said that was 

wrong-headed. That was wrong-headed. The chamber of 

commerce said that. They’re picking winners and losers over 

there, Mr. Speaker, and this is a problem. 

 

But I want to get back to, you know, the fact is when we see 

that some people in Saskatchewan are not doing well, this is a 

problem. And you know it’s funny, the member, the minister 

will go on and on about how we have, how we have good things 

happening here in Saskatchewan. And it does remind me of the 

gravy plane, and if you’re John Black, you are doing well. This 

is a good place to be. This is a very good place to be. 

 

And the kind of . . . When we had questions today about how 

much he was spending on hotels, clearly that’s an economic 

incentive for somebody — John Black — and he’s on the gravy 

plane. Roughly $1 million on flights. $1.4 million on John 

Black hotels. Mr. Speaker, that’s something else. I’ve just got to 

tell you that when we see the situation like we have in terms of 

poverty, and this government has talked about transparency . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I have not had a chance to raise this in the House, 

but we know, we know a year ago over 12,000 children were in 

families that were receiving social assistance. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, every year, twice a year I ask written 

questions to get an update to how many children on social 

assistance. The minister this year ordered those questions. 

Refused to answer the question about how many children are 

living in families where they’re on social assistance. Why is 

that? Why is this government afraid of the truth? Why are they 

afraid of the truth? 

 

She ordered the questions about how many people are on social 

assistance, how many people are on TEA [transitional 

employment allowance], how many people on SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability], how many 

children on social assistance. We don’t know. And she will say, 

well, that she will quote the Stats Canada, but we know the state 

of Stats Canada and how accurate their numbers are. 

 

We could have accurate numbers, but this government would 

not answer those questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as they have 

for over 10 times since they’ve taken power. Why is this one 

unusual? So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see a lot of inconsistencies. 

I said there’s a lot of problems with this motion. I know John 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5981 

Black’s doing very well. John Black is doing very well by this 

government. And so if he’s the all people, then we would . . . 

We might support this motion if it was . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Pursuant to today’s order, time for 

debate has expired. Questions? I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When it comes 

to government procurement, what we’re hearing is all 

Saskatchewan businesses want is a levelling of the playing 

field. What Saskatchewan taxpayers deserve is best value for 

their dollars. Businesses have been pushing for well over a year 

and a half, all across the province, heavily in Saskatoon as well, 

but the government has really just dragged its feet and 

continues to do so instead of having any real action. 

 

We’ve introduced a bill here this week and we’d like to see 

something get done, not later but sooner. We’d like to see that 

happen during this session. We definitely need a more 

sophisticated procurement policy that ensures fairness for 

Saskatchewan businesses and value for taxpayers. Certainly 

businesses deserve that. So do taxpayers. 

 

My question to the member from Meewasin: how can he 

possibly oppose that? Why won’t he work with us to get that 

done for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you for 

the questions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have created the jobs. 

We have been listening. That’s why we created Priority 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan initiatives. That’s why we’ve 

done it. That’s why we’re out there with our friend, CEO [chief 

executive officer] is Lionel LaBelle, and he’s out there. He’s 

had over 100 meetings already with different Crowns, 

government, businesses, different groups like the Construction 

Association, etc., to find out what they are seeing so that they 

can bring it back to us and present it to cabinet. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what we are doing. 

And we started this back in June. You only just started looking 

at it last week. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to hear is what the NDP policies and 

plans are. Yet it is painfully obvious that the leader of the NDP 

has no plans and no policy. Even their website has been wiped 

clean of any election platform or resolution. 

 

We hear a lot from the negative nine over there, but nothing 

very productive, Mr. Speaker. To the member from Regina 

Rosemont: your leader has been at the helm for 19 months, and 

I can imagine even you would agree that it is time that everyone 

gets the pleasure of hearing about the smart growth plan. So, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Rosemont: if you 

were the leader, would you already have the plan on your 

website? Yes or no? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

serve with the leader of this opposition every day in this House, 

and I’m pleased that we’re actively listening and proposing 

solutions to Saskatchewan people — the kind of proposing, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s going to make a difference in our classrooms as 

opposed to cutting educational assistants and driving up class 

size, making sure that that’s being capped. Making sure that 

you’re restoring the role of educational assistants. Putting 

forward legislation as we’ve seen this session, such as the 

buy-local day, Mr. Speaker, or improving procurement as we 

put forward a bill here this week, Mr. Speaker, to allow for 

economic opportunities. To commit to rebuilding the film 

industry here in this province and to address affordability in a 

meaningful way that, you know, really runs counter to what this 

government’s done with costly, expensive, dangerous smart 

meter debacles, ripping dollars out of our rainy-day fund, Mr. 

Speaker, ripping dollars out of our Crowns and hiking up the 

bills of Saskatchewan people. We have a plan that will put 

Saskatchewan people first, and their priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 

very proud to put forward a very important initiative called 

buy-local day. It’s being supported by small businesses right 

across the province, entrepreneurs. They think this is exciting, 

an exciting opportunity to profile our small businesses, our 

community. Even CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] agree with this, think this is really important. So to 

the member in Meewasin: does he support buy-local day? Will 

he support our bill? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you for the question. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. To buying in Saskatchewan and purchasing in 

Saskatchewan, we support all businesses that we can no matter 

where they are in Saskatchewan, whether they’re large or small. 

Our Crowns in this province, they do the purchasing for their 

businesses. The governments do the purchasing for . . . 

[inaudible] . . . They buy where they have to and they support 

our small businesses in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Even our farmers, who you never helped at all in all the time 

that you were in power, they buy from local businesses all over 

this province. And most of them are small businesses, besides 

some of the large implement dealers of course. And they all pay 

PST in their purchases. Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes we do support 

all the small businesses in Saskatchewan as well as the large 

businesses in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I appreciate the opportunity to join in the debate for the 

day. And my question will be to the member from Regina 



5982 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

Rosemont. He gets up on his soapbox and he talks a lot about 

what he would do. And besides omitting lots of facts with his 

stories usually, he also omits the fact that he has no plan. His 

leader has no plan. The party has no plan on how to move 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

So my question would be, when the member from Rosemont 

goes on the doorsteps talking with the people of Regina 

Rosemont and all over the province — because he does make a 

lot of mileage, Mr. Deputy Speaker — what does he tell the 

people that he’s talking on their doorsteps of, how he’s going to 

move the province forward? And does he omit some facts with 

them as well as when he’s in a question period, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question from the 

member, nice to receive it. It seemed it was difficult for him to 

deliver. 

 

The plan that we’re pleased to propose every day is about 

putting Saskatchewan families first, Saskatchewan businesses 

first. Everything from an economic perspective around 

procurement, around buying local, around supporting a film 

industry, and of course scrapping the tens and tens of millions 

of dollars that are being wasted right now on the out-of-country 

consultants engaged in this toxic John Black lean project. 

Putting those dollars to where they count in our health care 

system, improving, and actually respecting our educators, not 

running attack ads as we’ve seen the government opposite do, 

but actually supporting, listening, working with them and 

making sure they have the needs they need and that their 

supports are there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And first and foremost, what we all need to have a focus on, 

something that’s clearly our focus, is affordability for 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things we 

haven’t heard a single word from across the way and we don’t 

hear in the Speech from the Throne is about the situation with 

First Nation employment. We know that last year Eric Howe 

gave a report that said if Saskatchewan would employ First 

Nations at the same rate as Alberta and Manitoba, more than 

6,000 First Nations people would have jobs. 

 

Why can’t this government help find jobs for 6,000 First 

Nations people like the other Prairie provinces are doing? Mr. 

Speaker, I want to direct my question to the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin and would be interested in his view on 

that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you for 

the question. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have helped companies 

come into this province and create more jobs for Aboriginal 

people than anybody else. I was involved with a lot of those 

businesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I became an MLA. I 

was helping a lot of the Aboriginals start businesses. I was 

helping a lot of the northern Aboriginals get jobs with some of 

the various companies. 

 

We also have created various, various educational programs 

like ironworking program, which members opposite wouldn’t 

even look at when we asked them to, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes we did, we did start that 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thanks to one of my 

colleagues who went out of his way to make sure that we 

delivered that program. And it has helped a lot of the 

Aboriginals get jobs in the steel industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I’m proud of what we’ve done in that. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before the 

Saskatchewan Party was government, our members had a plan 

to increase Saskatchewan’s population by 100,000 people in 10 

years. The former NDP MLA, Harry Van Mulligen, was 

quoted, quoted in 2003 as saying: 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number 

of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

Well our government did it and in significantly less than 10 

years. Now we are on a track to meet our goal of 1.2 million 

people in Saskatchewan by 2020 which was laid out, laid out in 

our Saskatchewan plan for growth. We have repeatedly asked 

the NDP, what is your plan, with no answer. Let’s try again. To 

the member from Saskatoon Centre: what is your party’s plan to 

continue the momentum of the Saskatchewan economy — your 

plan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired for the abbreviated 

75-minute debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 



November 20, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5983 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m really proud to be able to stand and speak to this bill today. 

I’m very proud that our leader has brought this bill forward 

because it’s one that supports people right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That bill that he brought forward is Bill No. 607 and this is an 

Act to encourage the patronage of local businesses, suppliers, 

and services. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it gets any better 

than this. Actually, this is a great bill that should be supported 

wholeheartedly by all of the members. And I mean, I’m 

assuming they’re all in favour of this because how could you 

possibly be against something like this? It’s a great bill and I’m 

very proud of our leader for bringing it forward. 

 

For some reason I guess maybe the members opposite have 

difficulty with the idea of supporting local businesses. I mean 

certainly with the noise that’s coming from that way it would 

indicate to me that they don’t support buying local in 

Saskatchewan, that they seem — with their procurement 

policies — seem to want to avoid doing that which is really 

shameful. And I know my colleague has spoken about the other 

bill that has been introduced, and we get some feeling from 

them that they don’t support local businesses at all. 

 

Some of the information that you’ll find out there about buying 

local is found on . . . There’s a group called Sasklandia, and 

they’re doing some really good work on the buy-local 

movement here in Saskatchewan. And in fact on one of the 

pamphlets that they’ve produced, they talk about a store in 

Saskatoon that just happens to be in my riding, Mr. Speaker, 

and this is a store called The Better Good. It’s right on 

Broadway Avenue. It’s a very active store and a lot of people 

walking by shop there. In fact, even in the summertime — it’s 

kind of interesting — they put a piano out front and people are 

invited to sit down and play. And quite often when I’m walking 

down the street, you’ll hear somebody playing the piano right in 

front of The Better Good. 

 

It’s owned by Laura and Corey Neufeld, and they’re a couple 

from Saskatoon. And they’re a great example of local 

businesses promoting positive values, including buying local. 

So one of the things they talk about . . . There’s sort of three 

categories when they talk about what they stock in their store. 

They look for products that fit into the category, if it’s organic, 

fair trade, and local. And they admit, they admit that local is 

better for our community, and I think that’s exactly what this 

bill is proclaiming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a very straightforward bill. I think it’s one that all members 

will be proud to support. And we’re hopeful that this 

government will get off its high horse for a couple of minutes 

and actually support a reasonable, practical, supportive bill for 

local businesses. 

 

And I mean, it’s pretty basic. All we’re asking is that we 

proclaim one day of the month as buy-local day. There’s all 

sorts of good things that could come out of this. And we know 

that although . . . I think back to the days when I grew up in a 

small town, Mr. Speaker, and I know it’s very important in my 

family that we buy, we bought our groceries at home in our 

local community. Certainly the local co-op was sort of the hub 

of the community. We had the local credit union and we had 

some local dry goods stores and service stations and people, 

mechanics that would fix cars. And I remember the discussion 

at the supper table about how important it was to buy local, and 

that when people started being able to travel all the way to the 

big city of Moose Jaw, we saw a decline in the buying of local 

products and that hurt our local businesses. I mean, it’s just 

really clear; the economics are clear. 

 

So to encourage people to buy local, to encourage a bill like this 

which is once . . . Although I know we buy local as much as we 

can, but to sort of celebrate that and promote the cause of 

Sasklandia, I think it’s really important that we support this bill. 

And we know that our leader introduced it a few weeks ago 

here in the House, but he actually met this summer with a team 

from Sasklandia, which is the group leading the buy-local 

movement. And that’s why he’s calling on this, he’s calling on 

this government to create a buy-local day. 

 

Ninety-eight per cent of Saskatchewan businesses are small 

businesses with fewer than 50 employees. A third of all workers 

in the province are employed by small business, contributing 

about a third to Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product. And 

we know there’s some really important statistics that are 

available as well in terms of what happens when you spend 

$100 locally. If you spend $100 at a Saskatchewan business, 

only $27 leaves Saskatchewan. Seventy-three dollars will stay 

in Saskatchewan. If you spend $100 at a non-Saskatchewan 

business, we know that 57 of those dollars will leave 

Saskatchewan and only $43 will stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

Those dollars that stay in Saskatchewan go to local suppliers, 

local business services, community donations in Saskatchewan, 

wages spent in Saskatchewan, and local taxes. If the dollars 

leave Saskatchewan, they go to non-local suppliers, non-local 

supplies, and non-local business services. So we know that it’s 

very important to celebrate the amazing accomplishments of 

our small business community here in Saskatchewan. It’s 

incredibly important in small towns, and we know that it’s 

incredibly important in larger cities as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there’s an important event that’s coming 

up here in a couple of minutes in the rotunda, so at this point I 

would just like to support this bill and encourage the members 

opposite to support it as well. Thank you very much. I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 607, The Buy Local Day Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



5984 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2014 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5965 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5965 

  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5965, 5973 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5965 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5973 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5965 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5966 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5966 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5966 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5966 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5966 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Bullying Awareness Week 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5966 

 Holodomor Remembrance Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

 Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

 Children’s Rights Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

 Saskatchewan Cities Rank High in Gross Domestic Product Per Capita 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

 Strong Economy Produces Opportunities 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

 Government Invests in Housing in Nipawin 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5968 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Standards in Care Facilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5969 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5970 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5971 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5971 

 Costs for Boundary Dam Carbon Capture Project 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5972 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5972 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5973 

MOTIONS 

 Length of Debate 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5973 

PRIVATE BILLS — SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 904 — The Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 2014 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5974 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Government Vision for Economic Growth 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5974 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5976, 5981 

  Parent ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5978, 5981 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5979 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5981 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5981 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5982 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5982 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES — SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5983 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


