




















































Hansard: December 08, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 25B  MONDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6315 

 December 8, 2014 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just continue 

with my remarks I was making before the break, just talking 

about some of the problems that people are facing with rental 

situations these days. 

 

I know there’s been attempts made to try and have landlords be 

more reasonable when it comes to rent increases, but it simply 

isn’t working, Mr. Speaker. And we know that a lot of people 

are suffering as a result of the cost of living and the incredible 

burdens that the housing market is putting on people, as I said 

earlier, particularly on fixed incomes. 

 

So you know, legislation, I’ve often said, is like trying to thread 

a needle with a bat. We know that these types of bills are 

designed to promote balance between the rights of the landlord 

and the rights of the tenants, and I guess it’s a continuously 

ongoing kind of evolving situation, as most situations are in our 

society. 

 

So the government here is trying to bring a bill to bring some 

changes to The Residential Tenancies Act. I question the utility 

of some of the changes. One is allowing tenants to claim their 

security deposit, the time to claim from 120 days to two years. 

Well, knowing most of the tenants that I know, if people are in 

a rental situation, they need that security deposit back well 

before 120 days, so I’m not sure the benefit of expanding it to 

two years. Even the minister questioned that, Mr. Speaker, but 

there you go. That’s seen as a win for the tenants on this bill. 

 

Another purported win for tenants in this bill is in section 60 

where landlords, if they wish to evict a tenant for demolition of 

the property, of the premises, the notice period was one month, 

and they’re now extending it to two. So instead of having one 

month to find suitable replacement accommodation, the 

extension is to two. Again a small win, I think, when we 

consider the terrible situations that a lot of renters find 

themselves in, just in terms of suitable and affordable 

accommodation. 

 

Of course when you give a couple of things to the tenants, you 

want to give a couple of things to the landlords. And there are a 

couple items in the bill here that are designed to do that as well, 

and the minister commented on that in his introductory 

comments when he gave the second reading speech. 

So there’s some . . . that’s basically the main tenets of what’s 

going on here. We see some changes, just subtle changes to 

definitions. 

 

One of the things I found very interesting, I’m not sure why the 

Department of Justice would do this, but we’ve talked about the 

hyphen bill, we call it. And that’s a bill that’s before the House 

right now that deals with removing hyphens or adding hyphens 

or making words one word or two words. And one of the things 

that bill is doing is wherever it says electronic mail or that kind 

of language, the bill changes it to email. But in this bill, they 

haven’t done that. And there’s a new section (1.1) which says, 

“In this section, ‘forwarding address’ includes an address in 

electronic form,” which to me should say an email because 

that’s the change that’s being made in the other bill. 

 

So it seems that there’s some inconsistencies here, and if we’re 

going to be word cops that we should be a little more attentive 

to those kinds of issues. But that’s just really an aside and 

something I think that I just find kind of interesting. So there 

you go. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know that others of my 

colleagues are going to want to weigh in on this bill and others. 

And time is quickly passing here in our final session or date in 

this session, so I am going to at this point in time move to 

adjourn the debate on Bill No. 150, An Act to amend The 

Residential Tendencies Act, 2006. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tendencies Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 

Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion of Bill No. 153, The Statute 

Law Amendment Act, 2014. Basically in reviewing the 

minister’s brief remarks and a couple of the points of the 

legislation, the legislation is actually fairly significant and will 

require, by way of the volume of it, it will require a fairly 

thorough analysis. But initial responses to the minister’s 

comments is that this is a modernization of legislation. 

 

Certainly times change, and language that was once used is now 

recognized as outdated and in some cases inappropriate. And 

it’s a shift towards gender-neutral language and then certainly 

even correcting grammatical errors. And those are all aspects of 

course that we prefer to sort of a modernization, and something 

that we would be supportive of. 

 



6316 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

We just want to make sure that we have a chance to review the 

volume of this bill to make sure that there aren’t any other 

changes required. I know the member from Nutana just 

recently, just identified another potential change. It’s important 

that we make this change, that you’re consistent across 

government and that you capture everything that’s needed there. 

 

So certainly we respect the need to modernize language, make 

sure it’s appropriate in what it’s identifying, and certainly 

recognize that times change and what was once maybe 

considered by some appropriate at one point is no longer 

appropriate. So we’ll be keeping track of this piece of 

legislation. I might call on all Saskatchewan people that have an 

interest on this front, stakeholders and different groups, to 

review the volume of legislation before them, and if there’s 

other changes that are required, then certainly we as the 

opposition would certainly constructively consider those and 

see if we can’t strengthen this legislation. 

 

At this point in time, though, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much 

else to say on this bill. I adjourn debate on Bill No. 153, The 

Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 

Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 

le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This bill 

simply supports the practical changes made in the previous bill, 

and it’s my pleasure to enter into debate for Bill No. 154, The 

Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The changes that have been brought forward, it’s been 

suggested by the minister that these are reflective of a 

committee that’s been working, various individuals and 

officials who have been flagging inappropriate terms that need 

to be modernized, and changes as well that reflect sort of our 

modern state: changing electronic mail to email and changing 

facsimile to fax, and many other terms. I’m not sure that this 

captures the potential on social media or otherwise, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly we support modernization of legislation. 

 

This Act is the consequential amendment to the one previous. 

As I said with that first one, it’s going to be important that we 

engage all Saskatchewan people and stakeholders to make sure 

that those changes are, that they encompass everything that they 

should. And so actually I urge all Saskatchewan people that 

have an interest to review their legislation and where 

appropriate, where it needs to be refined, to connect with us, 

and we’ll do our best to bring forward those sorts of 

constructive changes. 

 

So at this point in time I adjourn debate on The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2014, Bill No. 154. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 

Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 

good to rise and join debate here in the legislature, in this case 

on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act. 

 

It’s an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 

some things that on the face of it would seem to recommend the 

legislation. There are some issues that this legislation raises, 

Mr. Speaker, that certainly beg further examination, further 

consideration. And I guess it’s in that sort of ambivalence, Mr. 

Speaker, that I approach this debate. 

 

Certainly in the McCall family household my father was a 

lifelong blood donor and certainly encouraged his kids to do the 

same. And certainly that’s something we’ve carried on. As well, 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all the McCall kids have the different 

donor boxes checked off on our licences, and certainly it’s for 

some of the issues that are raised here, Mr. Speaker, that those 

actions are undertaken. Certainly you need blood, you need 

blood products, and you need organs, Mr. Speaker, in this 

interesting world of modern medicine. 

 

And certainly in Saskatchewan we’ve had differing experiences 

with . . . I can think of recent consideration around the kidney 

transplant program and the way that that is or is not working for 

people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly I think of the occasional signals that the good 

folks at the Canadian Blood Services send out calling for urgent 

donation of blood. So first principles, Mr. Speaker, anything 

that makes it easier, that facilitates or lessens the complexity 

involved in donating blood or human tissues so that they can be 

used for medical purposes, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly worth 

looking at. 

 

And as regards the current process, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

issues that is made a bit more challenging by this legislation, 

it’s the division between what’s in the legislation itself and 

what is anticipated as coming later on in the regulations. So the 

questions beg for the questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I guess off the top, allowing for changing the rules around 

organ donation and allowing for the purchase of tissues again, 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6317 

Mr. Speaker, there’s some pretty significant issues raised by the 

Act there. It begs the question of whether or not people will be 

able to buy organs from other people and the ethical questions 

involved there, Mr. Speaker. It raises questions of class, 

questions of what dollars do to the public health care system, 

Mr. Speaker, and it begs the question of whether or not we’ve 

done everything within our power to expedite the donation of 

organs and blood and blood products within the system as it 

currently exists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s again some pretty serious questions. There’s been a 

long-standing approach when you think of other jurisdictions 

where commerce is very much part of the whole equation 

around human tissues, Mr. Speaker. You think about the fact 

that very recently, Mr. Speaker, in the 2011-12 where, and this 

is quoting from an article dated November 13th, 2014 from 

Barb Pacholik of the Leader-Post entitled, “Province considers 

allowing human cornea purchases,” the fact that, in quoting 

from the article, Mr. Speaker:  

 

In 2011-12, members of a transplant team in the Saskatoon 

Health Region allowed patients waiting for cornea 

transplants to pay $3,600 for corneas imported from U.S. 

eye banks. Not only did the move run counter to The 

Human Tissue Gift Act, but the Canada Health Act, which 

prohibits paying for an insured service. The 11 patients 

were reimbursed. Cornea purchases also ceased. 

 

Shendruk [and that is of course referring to the 

Saskatchewan transplant program director, Diane 

Shendruk] was unsure Wednesday what the cost of buying 

corneas might be today, but [said] it will be borne by the 

health system. “The cost is normally for the processing. 

There’s no market increase or anything,” she added. 

 

Again there, Mr. Speaker, we have raised an issue where on the 

one hand certainly, I’m sure, the difference in the lives of those 

11 patients that those corneas made is invaluable, Mr. Speaker, 

but again issues such as these raise some very fundamental 

concerns about whether or not human tissues should be part of 

commerce. They raise questions about what this component 

does to a public health care system, Mr. Speaker, and it raises 

questions about the ethics of all of this. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation raises a 

great number of questions. It raises questions about whether or 

not this takes on the most pressing shortages or the most 

pressing barriers as regards the donation of certain tissues. And 

I guess we’ve got certainly more questions than we’ve got 

answers at this stage and again, that’s further complicated, Mr. 

Speaker, by the fact that a great number of the issues anticipated 

by this legislation are not in fact covered by the legislation itself 

but are anticipated with further regulations. 

 

So suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a great deal of 

consultation we’ll need to engage in on this particular piece of 

legislation. We want to gain a better appreciation of what’s 

happening in other Canadian jurisdictions. I know that very 

recently, Mr. Speaker, the whole question of for-profit plasma 

clinics in Ontario has been a matter of considerable debate in 

that jurisdiction. What is the experience with access to human 

tissue or blood products in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker? 

And again the fact that the actions undertaken in 2011-12, that 

they were not just in contravention of provincial law, Mr. 

Speaker, but the Canada Health Act itself raises a great number 

of questions that we will be seeking answers to as we go 

forward in consideration of this piece of legislation. 

 

So if I might say, Mr. Speaker, I think the intent of the 

legislation is good, but we definitely have some very significant 

questions about the means undertaken to put these human 

tissues to use in bettering others’ lives. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 157. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 

matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise tonight and enter into this debate, Bill No. 155, 

An Act respecting Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 

Care Decision Makers and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. 

 

And upon reviewing, you know, and listening to the Minister of 

Justice’s remarks just a few weeks ago, it seems that this is a 

relatively straightforward piece of legislation, and he sets out 

the reason why. Apparently since the Supreme Court of Canada 

1988 decision in R. v. Mercure, the Government of 

Saskatchewan has enacted about 57 bilingual Acts, and it’s 

designed to meet the needs of Saskatchewan’s francophone 

community. And that’s a good thing. That’s an important thing. 

We respect the right and the ability for people to read in either 

in English or in French, and this is a good thing. 

 

So this bill essentially repeals and replaces The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

with a new bilingual Act, and according to the minister, “There 

are no changes in substance. The consequential English-only 

bill accompanies this Act to amend the four Acts that [need to 

be] . . .” 

 

So it’s really relatively straightforward, but I do want to say, 

and I know my colleague had said this earlier, it gives us an 

opportunity whenever we rise on our feet to review the existing 

legislation and have an opportunity to become familiar with the 

legislation that exists right now. 

 

And so I’ve had the opportunity to read and review The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 



6318 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

Act, and it’s an important one, and it’s becoming more and 

more important. We raise issues, and we’ve talked about the 

health tissue Act, the gift Act that was just before me and how 

important it is in our day that, whether it be kidneys or a lung or 

heart or whatever — the cornea is a really good example — that 

people can make those decisions and be able to do that in a 

process that they know is respectful, and all the i’s will be 

dotted and all the t’s will be crossed. All the things will be 

looked after. And in this case you’ll be able to understand it 

both in French and English. 

 

And it’s interesting for example that the age at which a person 

can make a directive is 16 years old. I wasn’t aware of that. I 

think it’s important that we become familiar with these things 

and understand at what point should we be talking about these 

things. And I know I’ll be talking later about a bill around the 

health cards and how important those things are and how we 

keep things current so that we can make sure people understand 

the kind of decisions that we would like to have if in some way 

we’re incapacitated and can’t make or communicate that 

decision, but we have previously thought about that. And we 

think of that at end of life or a tragic circumstance where 

somebody’s in a coma and they’ve chosen not to have 

unnecessary aids to support them to continue on. 

 

This is an important Act, and so whenever we see these things 

come across the floor here, it’s important that we take some 

time and understand the Act. There is no substantive change to 

it, I understand. I mean we hope that, and we have all the 

confidence in the world in the translators that the government 

would use. We would hope nothing is lost in translation. 

 

We know we’ve had the statute amendment Act where we have 

some issues around the language, that in French it may seem 

like an appropriate translation straight across the board, but in 

fact something is lost in translation. And we need to change 

that. 

 

So I hope that that’s the case here, that all due attention has 

been given to this piece of legislation to make sure the 

translation is in fact accurate and does reflect the intent of the 

original Act and that nothing has been lost in translation 

because, as we see, there may be unintentional consequences. 

And then we’ll be back debating another bill where somebody 

has pointed out from the francophone community, is this what 

you really mean to say? Is this really the case? 

 

So I do hope, and this would be a question that we have in 

committee is, what are the safeguards? Has it been double 

checked, triple checked? You know, and I don’t know enough 

about translation that would protect anyone in the greater 

scheme of the things except for to ask the right questions. What 

have you done to double-check, triple-check, and make sure 

that the language is appropriate and the language is used as the 

kind of language that is recognized? You know, I mean there’s 

different . . . whether you use straight English or common 

English, but that you have the right words and nothing is lost in 

translation because in this sense, it would be really a shame to 

see some dispute arise because of one person’s feeling about 

what the language, what the words mean in French, and how 

they don’t add up, they don’t mean the same in English. 

 

This is not the intent. The intent is to make sure that whoever is 

making the directive when they were of sound body and mind, 

that they had the capacity to make that decision, and in fact they 

were making that decision and that the intent would be carried 

out and not thwarted by poor translation. 

 

So this is a relatively straightforward bill, but as I said that it’s 

one that I think it’s important for us to review, to understand. 

And when we meet in committee we will have those questions 

about, how did you do the translation? What was the process? 

How did you assure? What is the assurance, the outside 

assurance that in fact they do match up, if there is a way of 

doing that? This is really, really critical. And I think that’s an 

appropriate thing to do. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have a lot of work 

before us tonight, and I would like to move adjournment on Bill 

No. 155, An Act respecting Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 156 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course this is a follow-up, almost like a part two of that bill I 

was just talking about, 155, the health care directives and 

substitute health care Act, so very much along the same line. 

It’s about translation, and it’s really very straightforward. As I 

said that it’s really important. 

 

This one amends the four Acts: The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act, The Electronic Information and 

Documents Act, The Health Information Protection Act, The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Act. And because this other one is 

being repealed and replaced, these need to have the appropriate 

references in there. 

 

And of course these are not insignificant pieces of legislation. 

And we know that there’s been a lot of work done around this 

in terms of making sure that adult guardianship and 

co-decision-making can be as effective as possible. It was at 

one time, you know, the idea that when you gave up your right 

to make your own decisions, it was all or nothing. Now there’s 

a bit of a continuum, so there is more co-decision-making. And 

that’s what we want to see, recognize that when people do have 

the capacity to make some decisions — and that’s an important 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6319 

thing — that’s a part of recognizing people for the people they 

are. 

 

And I’m not just saying, you know, it’s either all or nothing. 

You’re going to be completely under guardianship or you’re not 

going to have any responsibilities. I think this goes a long way 

in recognizing the fact that we want to enable and empower 

people to be in charge of their own lives as much as possible, 

recognizing of course that we don’t want to get anybody into a 

dangerous situation or a reckless situation where they have the 

power to make some decisions that clearly would put them at 

risk or their ability to manage into the future, whether that’s 

with making sure that they’re looking after their money as well 

as they can and that type of thing. But clearly I think that this is 

something that we always are needing to be as vigilant on as 

possible. 

 

But these Acts don’t get into the heart of these substances, into 

the substance of these four pieces of legislation even though 

they are a part of the same suite. It’s just about being translated. 

But I think it’s important again that when we are in committee, 

we will be asking to make sure that nothing is lost in 

translation, that in fact they have a strong method of ensuring 

that the quality and the intention of the first, the original piece 

of legislation, is coming through in the Acts that are being 

translated. 

 

We would hate to see and it would be a really unfortunate 

circumstance, particularly in this area where we’re talking about 

people who are taking on responsibility for others, that 

something has gone awry and it could have been prevented if 

we had chosen our words more carefully. And we don’t want to 

see ourselves coming back with better language in a year or two 

because we could have foreseen this. 

 

So we really are talking about making sure nothing is lost in 

translation. But it’s important to do translation because I think 

it’s important to make sure people can read in the language that 

they are most familiar with, that means something to them, and 

that for them, because they are not reading in their first 

language, that again, you know, that problem of something 

being lost in translation. So this is good to see. 

 

Obviously we will have some questions about this in 

committee. But it’s not . . . I think it’s relatively straightforward 

and I think that I would at this time like to move adjournment 

for the Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 

Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s 

good to join debate today on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm 

Credit Repeal Act. 

 

Now as we survey the legislative agenda of this government 

this fall, Mr. Speaker, there’s some interesting features to be 

noted. Certain of the Acts are being introduced to correct 

mistakes that have been made in the recent past, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of them are to reintroduce legislation that’s been passed 

within the past couple of years. And some of them are to do 

some housecleaning, Mr. Speaker, housekeeping for the 

different legislation. I think of the statute law Act. Some of 

them are quite substantial, and some of them are worthy of 

ongoing debate, Mr. Speaker, and some of them would fall 

under the heading of repeal. 

 

This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is one of those. 

It of course refers to The Family Farm Credit Act. Referring to 

the minister’s second reading speech, having been enacted in 

February of 1979 with the intent of providing a vehicle for 

producers to accomplish the intergenerational transfer of land, 

in terms of the Act at the time enabling the Co-operative Trust 

Company of Canada to make loans to farmers enabling the 

CTCC [Co-operative Trust Company of Canada] to issue 

securities and raise money to lend to farmers. And then 

furthermore, Mr. Speaker, where “the Ministry of Finance was 

able to purchase and guarantee those securities under this Act.” 

Now close the quote from the minister’s second reading speech, 

Mr. Speaker. 

  

In the information related by the minister, it’s stated that the last 

obligations under the Act were discharged as of 1994. The 

minister had assured the House that there are no outstanding 

actions on the file as regards this Act. And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, it would seem to be a prime candidate for repeal. 

 

Where the minister had stated that, “As far as is possible, 

records should be kept clear of redundancies,” the Act is 

redundant. The initial financial institution anticipated in the Act 

has even changed its name since then, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly there are other financial instruments available to 

producers to seek out the goals of the legislation. 

 

But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of the broader 

scheme of things in this legislative agenda, that in terms of farm 

legislation, this is it. There was a surface rights Act that we 

keep hearing about, but we’ve yet to see it, Mr. Speaker, Bill 

No. 169. That has yet to see the light of day. I know that’s for 

certain a piece of legislation that is of a great deal of interest to 

many producers for the way that they intersect with the oil and 

gas industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that producers, particularly coming through the season 

that we have and the sort of overall trend that we’ve 

experienced, they’re very interested in action on the part of this 



6320 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

government as regards issues around drainage, that we don’t see 

the action from this government. We know that the whole 

question of mitigation is going to only take on greater 

importance, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see any action in that regard 

from this government of yet. 

 

And I guess those are two fronts in particular where the actions 

of this government, where this government needs to stand up 

and be counted for producers, for farmers, let alone the kind of 

asleep-at-the-switch approach that we saw around the whole 

question of grain transportation last year and how that is or isn’t 

working out across the countryside, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we don’t see the legislation coming forward on The Surface 

Rights Act. We don’t see the kind of action that’s required 

around flood mitigation and flood preparation generally, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we do see is The Family Farm Credit Repeal 

Act, again, a fair enough piece of legislation in its own right. 

We’ve got certainly other questions, Mr. Speaker, as regards to 

the kind of volumes that were involved in the legislation itself 

as regards lending. We have questions, certainly, whether or not 

the assertions of the minister are as they . . . whether or not they 

hold water, Mr. Speaker, in terms of any sort of need for a 

similar instrument being taken up by the financial institutions at 

play in the province currently. But those are questions that we’ll 

be seeking to get some answers to when we head out across the 

province in the next months and then back when we further 

consider this legislation come spring. So in that regard, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 159, 

The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 

Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate, An Act to amend The Health 

Administration Act. I understand essentially what this talks 

about is health registration and what we do with our health 

cards. So I wouldn’t mind taking a minute to review what the 

minister had to say about this. 

 

Almost over a month ago, he rose and talked about this, and it 

was very interesting. He talked about 1.1 million people who 

hold health cards. I think that’s important that we understand 

this is a pretty significant thing, that everyone, everyone has 

one here in Saskatchewan, and this is a big deal. And we have 

your renewal stickers, and that’s an important thing, and we’ve 

got to make sure you put them on. 

 

Now this card, you know, is the thing that makes our health 

care system work because it’s the thing that we’ve got to 

present whenever you go to the doctor or the health . . . Any 

place where you’ll get benefits through the government, you 

need to present the health card. It’s a pretty important, 

important document. And so how we manage that, how we 

administer the cards are very, very important. 

 

And so essentially what this is talking about is taking it from 

the Ministry of Health over to eHealth Saskatchewan, and that 

seemed to be what we want to do. Of course I think that seems 

relatively straightforward, and they’ve been looking after that. 

And so this is the legislation that enables this to happen. This is 

a relatively straightforward thing, but of course we will have 

questions. Obviously we intend to have questions about these 

things, and it’s our job as the opposition to ask questions. Is this 

the most effective way? What is the most . . . What’s the current 

thinking with health cards? What are they doing across the 

country? You know, and we’ve just talked about the health 

tissue gift Act. This was something we need to deal with in 

terms of how do we be as efficient and effective so that we 

don’t lose any opportunities when it comes to, whether it be 

corneas or lungs or kidneys or that type of thing. We want to 

make sure that we’re as effective as possible. 

 

Likewise with our health card, and of course there are 

challenges with health cards, particularly with those who may 

not have all the pieces of identification that are needed to get a 

health card. 

 

But it seems that it’s the most responsive. It’s one that I don’t 

see a lot of issues, I don’t hear a lot of concerns about, that they 

have a system of doing it. But I know we’d be very interested in 

hearing more about it. I know for example the idea around 

language. It’s interesting, you know. We were talking about 

human rights today and the fact that if you go to the human 

rights website you can get services in many languages. So I’d 

be curious to know in eHealth how they deal with that in terms 

of making sure people get their health cards in the right way, 

that all the questions have been answered appropriately. 

 

So nothing . . . Again here we were just talking about 

translation earlier, that in fact that we have the translation that’s 

appropriate because, you know, as we see, the diversity in 

Saskatchewan is blossoming and that’s a wonderful, wonderful 

thing. But along with that comes the challenges of 

administration, and we need to make sure, particularly when it 

comes to . . . for services in health, I think this is an important 

thing. 

 

And so I think that we’ll have some interesting conversations in 

committee about this, particularly when it comes to services to 

make sure people are getting appropriate services; they’re 

getting the cards when they should be getting them, that the 

answers are given directly, that nothing is lost in translation. 

 

This seems like a relatively straightforward bill, but we all 

know how important it is to have your health card. So if we get 

this wrong and we’re back yet again in a couple of years, in a 

couple of years, this is not a good thing at all. 

 

So it sounds pretty well straightforward. You know, eHealth is 

to help us, modernize us. And I think that in many ways we’ll 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6321 

have questions, because I think I want to know across Canada, 

what are the different standards? Are we at the top? Are we 

middle of the pack? How is this all running? 

 

So I know that many of us will want to get into this, in the 

conversation. And I know there is lots of work to do tonight and 

so we want to make sure that we get to the other bills. So I 

won’t take long on this bill, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to say, 

it’s an interesting one, an important one, particularly in 

Saskatchewan. So I would move at this point adjournment of 

Bill No. 149, An Act to amend The Health Administration Act. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 148 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter on debate here for Bill No. 148, The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 2014. And I’ve gone through the 

statements of the minister to ascertain what he’s wanting to 

accomplish with this legislation. Some of it sounds reasonable. 

Some of it leaves more questions that’ll certainly be, you know, 

require consultation with many in the province, but also clarity 

from the minister. I know that this bill aims to make it easier to 

submit birth and death certificates, and that certainly seems 

more than reasonable, for example, by using electronic 

signatures. 

 

We just need to make sure that whatever system’s chosen that 

the integrity of that system is protected. You know, and when I 

think of this government and electronic records and these sort 

of things, they don’t have a great record on this front. Whether 

it comes to their outsourcing of fishing and hunting licences to 

an American outfit or on so many other fronts, the camping 

website that they couldn’t run, Mr. Speaker, with the 

outsourced operation. 

 

So when we’re talking about the birth and death certificates, 

these are important that the integrity of the system is there. And 

I know this government has a penchant for giving big contracts 

to American companies and around IT [information technology] 

and other areas. This is certainly one that the government 

should be keeping right here in the province to ensure the 

integrity and ensure the protection of people’s personal data. 

 

Certainly it’s important to modernize legislation to make sure it 

meets up with the current pressures, current demands, and we 

welcome that. 

Increasing the use of electronic documents and transactions is 

certainly reasonable, again just making sure that those 

documents are protected, because this is certainly sensitive, 

private information of people and families. And we need to 

make sure that, as we see this process through, that we, as I say, 

track this with some interest. Because we know this government 

seems to have an interest in passing these contracts to largely 

out-of-country operations, which certainly could compromise 

the security of that information. Let alone, it doesn’t make any 

sense to be doling out those dollars, public dollars to American 

vendors. 

 

[19:45] 

 

This bill also allows people to — other than doctors — to sign 

death certificates. The minister says that this is particularly 

important in rural and remote Saskatchewan where sometimes 

access to a doctor is challenged. And you know, I accept that 

that might be the case. And I certainly think of a grieving 

family and their ability to move forward in a timely way is 

something that’s very important. But let’s be clear that this 

doesn’t take any heat off this government to make sure that the 

doctors are in place where they need to be in rural and remote 

and northern communities across Saskatchewan. And I hope 

what we’re not seeing here is a coordinated effort of watering 

down the needs of having local doctors in place, because we 

certainly recognize the importance of having one available to 

families. 

 

I think that one interesting clause here that we need to check 

and make sure we fully understood, make sure the government 

knows which controls they have on it, is the provision to share 

information with a third party, Mr. Speaker. And that’s actually 

a significant and powerful change. 

 

Now the minister suggests that this would have enabled better 

information flow, I believe, to the Truth and Reconciliation 

Commission, and that seems to be something that we would 

certainly want to support. But I think that we need to just make 

sure we’re fully aware of the controls then on this information: 

who has access, who’s making those decisions, who’s the 

keeper of that information. 

 

Is this available? And this would concern me big time, Mr. 

Speaker. Is this available to the private health companies that 

this government’s starting to work hand in hand with, the ones 

that it’s looking to work with more, Mr. Speaker? I think that 

that private, sensitive information of families is something that 

this government isn’t handing over to some sort of company 

that they could utilize for commercial means or for profit 

means, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the sharing with third parties seems to have a valid reason 

around the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, maybe 

certain important research to the province of Saskatchewan. But 

who keeps that? Who manages it? And who else can access that 

information? Is this something . . . Has John Black and 

Associates — the American outfit that this government’s doled 

out big bucks to, Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars — have they 

had their hands on that personal information already and is this 

a change to address that, Mr. Speaker? These are the kinds of 

questions that certainly I know Saskatchewan people are asking. 

 



6322 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

I know this bill as well probably responds to the broken promise 

of this government and its privatization of a Crown with ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], Mr. 

Speaker, because a portion of this registry itself, the vital 

statistics, would have been managed by ISC and now that’s 

been brought under the umbrella of government. So I wonder if 

government has fully captured the cost. 

 

We know of course when they sold off, broke their promise, 

and privatized this Crown, they forfeited an annual dividend, a 

significant dividend on an annual basis that probably could have 

helped that Finance minister across meet some of the demands 

of Saskatchewan people. And I suspect that one-time, quick 

payment that he took in may not have . . . may have been a tad 

underwhelming in the whole scheme of long-term budgetary 

finances. And it may be a reminder to him about the long-term 

consequences of that sort of privatization and the importance of 

maintaining protection over information, integrity of our 

system, whether they be vital statistics or land titles, but also the 

importance of dividends coming directly back to government. 

 

So there’s a few of the questions that we have here. The 

minister will . . . Certainly we’ll take time with him in this 

Assembly and at committee. But I think this is an important bill 

that people across Saskatchewan take a look at, whether it’s the 

communities related to gender identity as we spoke with today. 

Does this adequately respond to some of their needs? Does this 

put information at risk of Saskatchewan people either to the 

private health companies that this government is starting to 

work away with quietly in the back, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And then importantly when we talk about things like, you 

know, use of electronic signature in documents, these certainly 

seem to be a modernization and be more responsive to the needs 

of families, but then how do we make sure that that information 

is protected, that those systems are protected? We’ve seen the 

mess that this government’s got into when they’ve outsourced 

very simple things like the campsite registries, Mr. Speaker, or 

the fishing and hunting licences to an American outfit if you 

can imagine, Mr. Speaker. I know it outrages many fishers and 

hunters that I know, Mr. Speaker, putting our information in the 

hands of an American company, potentially subjecting it to the 

US PATRIOT [Providing Appropriate Tools Required to 

Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism] Act and sending our 

hard-earned tax dollars to fill the coffers of some private firm 

somewhere in the American . . . in the United States, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So those are some of the questions we have. Certainly some of 

the aims of this bill seem reasonable. We’ll engage in 

consultation. We’ll engage with the minister and we’ll move 

forward from there. But at this point in time I adjourn debate of 

Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 

2014. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 

Bill No. 158, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Act and to repeal The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this bill is a curious one because it basically 

takes a bill that we passed last year and totally supplants it and 

puts this bill in its place. The purpose of the legislation 

obviously is to deal with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which 

was changed by the Minister of Finance to have a different 

format than what was originally there to comply with federal 

laws. And so now what was quite a unique institution in 

Saskatchewan is just another registered retirement savings plan 

that therefore can transfer money back and forth to other plans 

from credit unions, from banks, from other financial 

institutions. 

 

Now when the plan was originally put in place, it was the plan 

for those people who didn’t have a lot of income in a cash form 

that would allow them to meet the rules of The Income Tax Act. 

And so what was often used by women or men who were at 

home where their spouse worked outside the home, it was used 

by farmers and farm families, and it had quite a substantial 

following. It’s still run out of an office in I think Kindersley, 

and it ends up providing a service for the province, but it’s a 

different service than was there before. 

 

Practically, one of the issues was that the provincial 

government was really the total backstop for this plan if there 

were any issues around its solvency. Now according to the 

information provided by the minister, that’s not an issue at this 

stage, and I think that’s probably accurate because they’ve been 

pretty careful investors over the years. But it is a kind of an 

institution that may or may not last into the longer term because 

it is not . . . well it isn’t different than other registered 

retirement savings plans across the province. And so what this 

legislation does is update the plan to reflect modern terms and 

conditions. 

 

Now what’s unfortunate in a way is that this plan reminds us all 

that both the provincial government and the federal government 

have stepped away from a pretty practical solution in dealing 

with the pension plans for Canadian people, and that would be 

to expand the Canadian pension plan. And so rather than do that 

quite practical step that would have given the next generation of 

people who are now contributing to the plan enough money to 

retire, we’re now into a situation where many young people in 

their 30s, 40s, you know, 20s, 30s, and 40s, have to look at how 

their retirement is going to be funded in the longer term. 

 

And we know that this became a political issue in Ontario 

where the Ontario government said, we’re going to try to go 

ahead with something like this on our own. I think the goal 

there was to see if that would be enough to trigger the federal 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6323 

government to get back involved in this. It looks as if that won’t 

happen until we have a change of government at the national 

level, which I guess is looking more and more likely. And so 

maybe, maybe in Saskatchewan we could have shown some 

leadership as well around that particular issue. 

 

But clearly the Finance minister stepped back. He didn’t push 

that issue. The Premier didn’t step forward in the various 

premiers’ meetings around this issue. And so we have this 

legislation which takes further steps to move what unique 

Saskatchewan pension legislation we had closer to this RRSP 

[registered retirement savings plan] issue and basically steps 

away from anything that would have a strong Saskatchewan 

point of supporting an expansion of the Canada Pension Plan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a marker. It’s a step that’s taken, but it 

isn’t a bold step and it isn’t a step that actually will deal with 

the issues that are confronting many of our younger citizens as 

they prepare for their retirements in the long term. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments on this bill at this 

time. We’ll probably have some questions at various other 

points. But I think there’s another one or two of my colleagues 

that still want to speak to this, and so I would move to adjourn 

debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to again rise and enter into the debate on the pieces of 

legislation before us in the House tonight. And it’s an important 

thing that we do. People are at home watching this and have 

questions about what kind of legislative agenda does the 

government have, and of course some have been stronger than 

others. And I appreciate the comments made just prior to me 

about the pension piece, which is very, very important, and I’m 

glad that’s coming forward. We need to continue to have that 

discussion. 

 

But this one before us right now, Bill No. 162, The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014, this is apparently a 

tweaking of the piece of legislation that we had passed a few 

years ago that came into effect in 2012 in May. But at that 

point, because it was a major revision, it was really important 

that . . . And this happens. We understand. You test out some of 

the pieces of legislation. Some of it works; some doesn’t work. 

You find that you need certain things in place; other things are 

problematic. 

 

Drafting legislation is not a perfect science. We wish it was. 

And this is our role in opposition is to look at some of the 

inconsistencies that we have. And we saw even if they are 

things like whether you hyphenate a certain word and they start 

new standards, but now in The Residential Tenancies Act we’re 

going to be seeing the inconsistencies with that. 

 

It’s interesting how, you know, it’s the Ministry of Justice that 

looks after the drafting, but you’d think there would be 

consistencies that would stop these or practices that would stop 

this. But it is not a precise science, whether that’s a good thing 

or not. But all of this has come through the Ministry of Justice, 

so this is not one department and another department having 

problems communicating. It’s within the same ministry. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But regardless of that, they talked about lessons learned and 

some of the ways to address some of the practical and technical 

issues that have been identified by the sheriff’s office and 

public. So we’d like to know, when the minister refers to the 

public, who is he referring to? Is it different groups that may 

have come forward? Because this is a significant piece to make 

sure that when we have money judgments that they are actually 

enforced and the money is going to where they’re supposed to 

be going, and that we’re not seeing unintended consequences 

with people not paying their debts because of a loophole. We 

want to make sure that there is a system of fairness in place. 

 

So he talks about if the notice of a seizure of employment 

income can last for now . . . will it last for a 24-month period as 

opposed to the 12-month period before? So we’ll see what kind 

of impact that has. I know it will include a revised process for 

the sheriff by clear timely title to a third party purchaser of land 

where they’ve agreed to judgment out of the proceeds of the 

sale to address the judgment debt of the vendor. So that seems 

really straightforward. And so many of these pieces seem 

straightforward and technical in many ways. 

 

When I look back at the original piece of legislation that came 

forward in the spring of 2012, it’s a fairly significant piece of 

legislation. And of course it had impact on many other pieces of 

legislation, whether it be The Arbitration Act, The Assignment 

of Wages Act, the builders’ lien, The Cemeteries Act in fact, The 

Cities Act, The Condominium Property Act, and it goes through 

several, several pieces of legislation. So this is one that reaches 

out into many other areas. So it’s got to be done, it’s got to be 

done well. And we think that it’s therefore important to get this 

right, and then we will have questions in committee about this. 

 

And as I said, when you talked about the public, who was the 

public? We know for example one of the pieces of legislation is 

The Landlord and Tenant Act. Now I’m not sure . . . This is one 

Act that I’ll have to look up because I’m familiar with The 

Residential Tenancies Act. You know, I thought that’s what 

guided the landlords and tenants. So it would be interesting to 

take a look at The Landlord and Tenant Act — what does that 

really cover? — and of course The Limitation of Civil Rights 

Act. 

 

And you know, this is what I was saying earlier. It’s interesting 



6324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

when we do these second reading speeches because we uncover 

some interesting things that we weren’t completely aware of. It 

talks about The Labour Standards Act, and of course that Act is 

no longer with us. We have the Saskatchewan employment 

code, and so if that’s been carried over, that’s important. 

 

But again these are the challenges when you’re trying to 

coordinate pieces of legislation. A little bit easier now in the 

age of technology where a lot of this stuff can be searched, and 

it’s much easier to do. I know the folks in the drafting office 

have a lot of work ahead of them when they try to do their best 

with this. But it looks relatively straightforward. 

 

We know this is important. It’s important for a lot of people, 

when debts are . . . when people in good faith enter into 

agreements, whether it be with buying or selling land, renting or 

paying rent, that type of thing, paying deposits. And every story 

has two sides, at least two sides if not more. So we need to 

know more about this, and we will have questions in committee 

about that. That is a given for sure. We want to make sure that 

again we are not going to be back every couple of years. 

 

I understand the challenges here, but I hope that they have done 

all that they can to make sure that it’s as good as it can be and 

that it essentially will solve the issues that the sheriffs have 

outlined. That would have been interesting to hear more about 

that. And also, as I said, the public is a big, big group. Who was 

it that was raising concerns about this? And what were the 

issues that were not dealt with, and why not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that again there will be many people who 

want to get up and speak tonight on other issues and then as 

well to this bill particularly, so I would move at this point 

adjournment of The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 

Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 

sur la faune be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon on Bill No. 161, The 

Wildlife Amendment Act. Certainly this is an important, 

important area of regulation to our province. We have this 

incredible wealth of resources: the 100,000 lakes and rivers, the 

bountiful fish that fill those lakes and rivers, and certainly we 

have world-class angling in this province. We also have 

world-class hunting, Mr. Speaker, and this is legislation that 

governs hunting and fishing in Saskatchewan. 

I want to thank the provincial wildlife advisory committee first 

off for their contributions to this. I want to thank the Wildlife 

Federation of Saskatchewan, Darrell Crabbe, for his 

contributions. I want to thank those that are involved in all the 

local fish and game leagues and wildlife federation chapters 

across Saskatchewan. They really are an impressive network of 

environmental stewards, and stewards that care very deeply 

about our resources but also really create world-class recreation 

and strong tourism opportunities here in our province as well. 

 

The changes that are brought forward, some of them seem 

reasonable. One of them seems outlandish, Mr. Speaker. The 

changes around the enforcement of those that are convicted of 

offences, that’s reasonable to make those stronger. I wonder if 

those are strong enough. I think that’s an area that definitely we 

should be very strong. 

 

The vast majority of hunters and fishers follow the laws and are 

exceptional stewards of the land and care very much about their 

resources. I very much support banning those that are convicted 

or are not able to hunt or fish in other jurisdictions from doing 

so here in Saskatchewan. It should be a privilege to do so in this 

province, so that’s important. And it seems that the changes 

around making sure that any wildlife studies and whatnot are 

done with integrity and don’t disrupt the ecosystem or wildlife 

or habitat in a way that’s inappropriate is very important. 

 

But as a hunter and fisher and someone who adores our natural 

landscapes and has been in every corner of this province doing 

so, I am very disappointed with changes this government made 

to outsource the fishing and hunting licences to an American 

outfit. Sending our hard-earned money to an American outfit, 

putting our information at risk is unacceptable, and shutting out 

so many vendors, so many stores here in Saskatchewan just 

isn’t right, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a detrimental move. 

 

So what I would have liked to have seen in this legislation were 

a few more measures working with the provincial wildlife 

advisory committee to enhance conservation, protection of 

habitat, making sure we can promote this incredible fishery we 

have in this province, to promote the incredible world-class 

hunting we have in this province, to make sure we’re 

encouraging young people from all parts of Saskatchewan to 

become hunters, to become fishers because I believe in doing 

so, they become more conscious and more caring about the 

environmental world around them, better environmental 

stewards if you will, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the decision of this government to put at risk Saskatchewan 

people’s information, to contract an American outfit to do 

fishing and hunting licences doesn’t make any sense. It hurts 

Saskatchewan businesses who have been shut out of the 

equation. I can think of so many in Regina alone, Mr. Speaker, 

let alone the network of smaller outfits and gas stations and 

outfitters across Saskatchewan that are shut out of that activity. 

And I think in a population like ours that’s dispersed across a 

beautiful, vast province, it’s a shame to be shutting out those 

entrepreneurs, those small businesses who help enrich our 

communities and provide services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve been clear on that on the record. I know there’s outrage of 

many fishers and hunters when they’ve gone to go get their 

licence and realize that they can’t go to the desk at Canadian 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6325 

Tire north, as they always have, to get that. And all of a sudden 

you’ve got many hunters — I’ve met with many of them who 

are seniors, Mr. Speaker — looking for ways to be able to get 

their hunting licence. 

 

I know so many of the small businesses as well throughout 

Regina, it’s a really unfortunate move of this government, one 

that exports profits to an American outfit, one that puts our 

hunters’ and fishers’ information at risk, subjects it to the 

PATRIOT Act, Mr. Speaker. And it just doesn’t make any sense. 

 

But to get back to the positive points of hunting and fishing in 

Saskatchewan, we have world-class resources in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And whether you’re in your constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, in by the Moose Mountain or out onto the plains south 

of it, Mr. Speaker, for possibly elk, moose, or mule deer or 

pheasant, Mr. Speaker; if you’re out down in the member for 

Swift Current’s for antelope or mule deer or pheasant further 

south, Mr. Speaker; if you’re up into the far North, catching 

world-class walleye and paddling those incredible rapids, Mr. 

Speaker, from corner to corner to corner of this province, from 

big game to upland game to migratory bird, we have an 

incredibly special resource, one that needs to be managed well, 

one for which the producers of this province do an 

exceptionally fine job of being stewards, and one for which I 

believe we need to continue to encourage and support hunting 

and fishing in this province. 

 

Because it’s those that take up these activities that take a 

specific interest in habitat in the environmental protections, Mr. 

Speaker. I think of all the wonderful fish and game leagues. I 

think of the one down at Weyburn that just released thousands 

of pheasant again here this year and the fundraising activities to 

do that. Or I think of the local chapters all across the province 

that have come together for really meaningful projects, whether 

that’s enabling young people in the high schools to learn how to 

be safe with a bow and effective with a bow, Mr. Speaker, or 

whether it’s bigger efforts, such as protection of land, protection 

of habitat. These are very important stewards and ones this 

government should be working with. 

 

So as I say, I certainly support the stronger enforcement on 

violations. This is critically important. It’s important to note 

though, Mr. Speaker, that the absolute vast majority of hunters 

and fishers in Saskatchewan are law-abiding and respectful 

hunters and fishers who engage with respect with the land 

they’re engaging with, with the animals that they’re engaging 

with, and we certainly want to be cautious when we’re looking 

at this legislation. We want to have firm penalties in place, Mr. 

Speaker, firm penalties, but we want to make sure that we 

understand that the vast majority of hunters and fishers are great 

law-abiding citizens, contributing to our recreation and our 

economy as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think of so many of those small communities, Mr. 

Speaker, that benefit from hunting and fishing activities where 

the motels fill up, Mr. Speaker, and the restaurants are occupied 

and the meals are eaten and the gas tanks are filled. It’s an 

important sector for us to support, all while understanding that 

to make this all happen we need to support good stewardship of 

our resources, protection of our resources, protection of those 

watersheds, protection of those natural environments and 

habitat, understanding of our species and the biology of them, 

and making decisions in an evidence-informed way, Mr. 

Speaker. These are all critically important. 

 

But as an avid hunter and fisher, Mr. Speaker, I could probably 

stand and tell you fishing and hunting stories all night long. I 

suspect that’s not what the members are looking for. But I am, 

as I say, I want to put it on the record one more time how 

disappointed I am in this government for selling out and dishing 

out big bucks to an American outfit to take over our fishing and 

hunting licences in our province, in effect shutting out so many 

small businesses all across Saskatchewan from participating in 

that activity that they always have and shutting out so many 

hunters and fishers, many of those seniors, Mr. Speaker, who 

have relied on those vendors to access those licences, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the member from Walsh Acres is saying, what’s the deal? 

He’s got his hands in the air, and it certainly reflects his 

out-of-tuneness with hunters and fishers in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is good to hear him speak, Mr. Speaker. We 

hear him heckle here tonight, actually quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s nice to hear that because we really don’t hear the 

member for Walsh Acres saying much in this Assembly at all, 

Mr. Speaker. And it was actually kind of nice because he 

moved to the front bench, Mr. Speaker, and I think we also 

learned why he won’t likely be in the front bench any time 

soon, Mr. Speaker. But it was good because we could finally 

fully understand his heckles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

But what would be nice to hear from that member and many 

others is a stronger focus on the issues that matter to their 

constituents. And when it comes to hunting and fishing, Mr. 

Speaker, I just don’t know how any one of those members 

could support doling out the bucks to this American contractor 

to put our information at risk, shut out a bunch of small 

businesses in this province, and put a barrier in place for so 

many hunters and fishers to access those licences, Mr. Speaker. 

But with that being said, I’ll adjourn debate for Bill No. 161, 

The Wildlife Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 163 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always it is a 

pleasure and a privilege to rise in this House to debate bills. 

Tonight we’re talking about Bill No. 163, The Education 



6326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bill that’s been before us . . . This has 

actually been a bit of a pattern here this legislative session 

where we have about four or five bills that have previously, in 

not-too-distant past were before us and are back before us and 

being amended. And not that making amendments is a bad 

thing, Mr. Speaker. Updating legislation is very important. But I 

think the thing that stands out is that this government clearly 

with some of these bills didn’t properly do its consultation and 

its homework. And so consequently we’ve got bills before us 

that need to be fixed, Mr. Speaker, to address the unforeseen 

circumstances that they missed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, I’d like to 

talk a little bit about what this particular Act does. There’s some 

very simple amendments here, Mr. Speaker. The first change 

the minister points out in his second reading speech that’s being 

proposed is to rename section 4.1 to the Education Scholarship 

Fund. And this newly renamed Education Scholarship Fund will 

include the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall 

Scholarship, as well as The Queen’s Diamond Jubilee 

Scholarship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second change being proposed is to amend two expressions 

used in the French version of The Education Act, 1995. And 

looking at the minister’s second reading comments, he points 

out that the first one is to change “home-based education 

program” from “programme d’études à domicile” to 

“programme de scolarisation à domicile,” and also change 

“pupil with intensive needs” from “élève bénéficiant d’un 

programme de soutien intensif” to “élève à besoins 

particuliers.” And the minister talks about “The change is 

[meant] to capture the nuances of the language in the Act so the 

roles and responsibilities laid out are clear and properly 

representative of expectations.” 

 

Another amendment to this Act, Mr. Speaker, is a proposal to 

streamline the borrowing powers of boards of education and the 

conseil scolaire. And the minister talks about how “Currently 

school divisions must acquire a lending rate and receive 

ministry consent to borrow funds in order to proceed with major 

capital projects. However, financial institutions hold interest 

rates for a short period of time, and the turnaround time for 

providing school divisions with consent is not meeting financial 

institution deadlines.” 

 

So the minister points out this results “in school divisions 

having to re-tender for loan rates and getting new resolutions 

passed by boards of education or the conseil scolaire.” So “This 

[particular] amendment will require board or conseil resolutions 

to include only the amount proposed to be borrowed and the 

purposes of the expenditure, with good faith that they will seek 

out the best repayment terms and interest rates.” I think it’s 

good to know and understand that our boards of education do 

have those skills and capacity, and the best interests of their 

students and all citizens and taxpayers in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the minister points out that “Consultations have occurred 

with school divisions in respect to [these] borrowing powers 

with the proposed changes and the proposed changes are 

reflective of what . . . [they’ve] heard.” But in the coming 

months before the next legislative session, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

do some work to prepare further questions and to prepare when 

this bill is moved to committee. And undoubtedly we’ll have 

questions. 

 

I think the interesting piece about this Act, Mr. Speaker, and 

this is where my comments earlier about needing to correct 

something, Mr. Speaker, this particular amendment that is being 

proposed is to allow school divisions to start the school year 

prior to Labour Day when it occurs on or after September 5th. 

So I just want to cast your mind back to the last provincial 

election and an announcement by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, 

saying that they wanted to start the school year after September. 

And this is interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, because this was 

informed by a Tourism Saskatchewan survey of its members 

who found that when the school year started before the Labour 

Day long weekend, that it had a negative impact both on visits 

to their respective resorts or facilities, Mr. Speaker, but also the 

ability to retain staff which are often young people who work 

seasonal jobs, Mr. Speaker. So fair enough, Mr. Speaker. 

Tourism had some serious concerns. 

 

And actually prior to the Sask Party making this announcement 

during the election campaign, I was the Tourism critic at the 

point in time when Tourism Saskatchewan announced the 

results of this survey. And you know, as a parent who has 

school-aged children, at first blush I thought it seemed like kind 

of an interesting idea. I knew that it got my ire up when my 

daughter — at the time I only had one who was in school — 

would be back in school before the Labour Day long weekend. 

For all intents and purposes, it felt like the summer was over at 

that moment. 

 

But you know what I did, Mr. Speaker? I went and I talked to 

the two school boards in Saskatoon. I thought that might be an 

interesting private member’s bill. And you know what the 

school boards told me, Mr. Speaker? That they had actually 

consulted, they had consulted with their families on this 

particular issue and found that it was a 50/50 split. Some 

families really liked the idea of starting after Labour Day, but 

families also really liked the idea of two weeks at Christmas 

and the full week that kids get off in February, Mr. Speaker, for 

all kinds of reasons. Sometimes marriages end, sometimes 

marriages end, Mr. Speaker. And I know with families, 

respective parents like to each have a week with their children 

at Christmas. All kinds of reasons that people expressed 

concern and interest in keeping those holidays.  

 

And the reality is with this particular piece of legislation it 

made it very difficult for school boards to maintain, to start 

after Labour Day and still maintain the 950 hours that they have 

to get for education, Mr. Speaker. This is what school boards 

told me when I thought about bringing forward a private 

member’s bill, Mr. Speaker. This is what the school boards had 

told me is that their folks had mixed . . . Like I said it was a 

50/50 split. 

 

But you know what this government did in an election 

campaign? They made a promise without talking to anybody, 

without talking to educators, without talking to school boards. 

They just plowed ahead with their own agenda, and it came 

back to bite them here, Mr. Speaker. And here we have a bill 

before us trying to rectify that problem, Mr. Speaker. So now 

this bill means that when Labour Day falls on or after 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6327 

September 5th, that executive government can name a date 

where school will start before that date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again there’s mixed feelings about starting before or after 

Labour Day. But I think the bottom line is this is a government, 

this is a government, Mr. Speaker, who plows ahead, who 

thinks it knows best, Mr. Speaker, thinks it knows best and does 

its own thing without talking to anybody, without thinking 

about the unforeseen consequence. You’d think they might have 

flipped forward three or four years in the calendar to see what 

some of the problems might have been coming down the pike, 

Mr. Speaker, but oh no. They passed the legislation without 

thinking of any of those things. 

 

So again I do know I’ve got colleagues who will also like to 

wade into the debate on Bill No. 163, The Education 

Amendment Act, but I think this is a really great example of this 

government’s inability to consult properly and to think ahead 

and do its homework, Mr. Speaker. We have several of these 

bills before us in this legislative session, and I think it is a 

shame. It is always good to amend legislation and improve it, 

but I think the onus is on the government to try to get it right the 

first time, Mr. Speaker. But with that, I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 

Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am rising to speak 

to or enter the debate on Bill No. 164, and this is amendments 

to The Health Information Protection Act. There is a few minor 

changes here that are being made, and then a couple of 

interesting sort of substantive changes. 

 

Basically we know that protection of people’s health 

information is incredibly important. We also saw today in 

question period what happens when people’s information isn’t 

properly reflected and the unfortunate misprescribing of a 

dangerous antibiotic to a senior citizen, Mr. Speaker, which led 

to premature death. So everything about our health information 

is critical as medicines become more complex. And certainly 

people’s health histories, you know, the acuity of people’s 

health is becoming more and more complex as well, as we 

make medical advances. So those that are entrusted with the 

health information must make every possible effort to ensure 

that it’s protected because that’s very important private 

information. And certainly the attempts here in this bill are to 

protect that kind of thing. 

We know that a few years ago, there was a story in the news in 

2011 where, for some strange reason, people’s health 

information ended up in a dumpster without being properly 

shredded. I think a number of . . . There was actually a 

committee that was struck, the health records protection 

working group, and that working group has made a number of 

recommendations. We know that the minister introduced the 

bill and indicated some of the changes he’s willing to make. 

 

But there was another . . . We received a letter, our Health critic 

received a letter on December 1st. It was a copy of a letter to 

the Minister of Health expressing some disappointment that this 

bill did not go far enough in ensuring that the word destruction 

is actually defined. And in their view . . . This is the National 

Association for Information Destruction. It’s a group from 

Ottawa that was formed as a result of the unfortunate incident in 

2011. And they’re suggesting that there should be a definition 

of destruction as the physical obliteration of records in order to 

render them useless or ineffective and to ensure reconstruction 

of the information or parts thereof is not practical. So it’s a very 

specific definition. For whatever reason, the minister chose not 

to include that in this particular amendment, and we’ll be 

interested to find out why. 

 

The bulk of the changes, certainly the first few changes, are just 

changing the name. It used to be called, or it’s currently called 

the Saskatchewan Health Information Network. And the name 

of that is being changed to eHealth Saskatchewan. So that’s sort 

of a non-substantive clause. 

 

But there’s some changes to the penalties. I think that’s very 

important. And they’re calling it . . . There’s a word in the 

description, in the explanatory notes. It talks about what is it 

being attempted here. What happens is if you have a trustee 

that’s responsible, let’s say a doctor, a doctor is responsible for 

the care of the health records, if one of his employees were to 

violate that trust and actually share that information or use it to 

snoop on people, there’s new provisions in this amendment that 

will actually hold that individual responsible. And the fines are 

significant, Mr. Speaker. They can go up to $50,000 or a term 

in jail. So that’s very important. 

 

They’ve also put in a strict liability offence provision which 

requires a trustee to actually protect the records and ensure that 

they aren’t disclosed improperly. They’re calling this a reverse 

onus clause. And what it says is the “change will forgo a need 

to prove the trustee intended to abandon the records.” So the 

test here is that the trustee only has to show that they used 

reasonable steps to prevent the abandonment of that 

information. So if they were reasonable and they ended up in 

the dumpster — I don’t know how that could ever happen — 

but there could be situations where the trustee did everything 

they could that was reasonable but still these records are 

abandoned or not properly destroyed. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So you know, on the face of it I think this bill is pretty 

straightforward. Again, the working group was established. The 

minister accepted some of the recommendations, but we see a 

national group saying the minister did not quite go far enough. 

And certainly we’ll want to ask some questions about that of the 

minister in committee, or perhaps suggest an amendment to 



6328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

suggest that the definition of destruction be very clear. It’s not 

defined currently in the bill and it’s not . . . or in the Act, and 

it’s not defined at all in the amendments either. So maybe that’s 

something the minister’s looking into. 

 

But at this point I think I will . . . well no, I don’t think, I know 

I am going to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 164, The Health 

Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise and join debate on The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2014, Bill No. 165. 

 

This pertains directly, to quote from the minister’s second 

reading speech: 

 

The changes being proposed in the Act will allow for 

implementation of this policy direction. Specifically it will 

allow Saskatchewan to enter into agreements with Canada 

and other provinces regarding direct-to-consumer alcohol 

shipments; allows individuals to import alcohol for 

personal consumption from other provinces where such 

agreements exist; and create regulation-making authority 

regarding issues such as type and amount of alcohol, type 

of seller and province from which the product originated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the initial sort of foray into this particular 

realm featured some bilateral work with the province of British 

Columbia. And this might shock some folks, Mr. Speaker, but 

I’m glad to see that BC was chosen as the first province with 

which we’re going to enter into these kind of arrangements. 

Well if you’re familiar with the Okanagan, Mr. Speaker, or 

even say places like Similkameen and the kind of products on 

offer there, certainly this is a good place to enter into these kind 

of agreements with. 

 

I was glad to see the judicious use of Dill Pickle Vodka from 

Lumsden’s own Last Mountain Distillery used in the diplomatic 

effort to round this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I can 

attest from experience that it does in fact make a fine Caesar, so 

we’re interested to see how this progresses forward, interested 

to see the . . . Mr. Speaker’s claiming no knowledge of such 

events, but we’ll take him at his word for that. 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how this progresses. Again 

the division between legislative authority and things that are 

moved into the regs and into bilateral agreements, province by 

province. But with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 165. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 166 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 

Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise this evening to speak to Bill No. 166, The Local 

Government Election Act, 2014. We certainly know that all 

levels of democracy need to be well protected and scrutinized 

and ensure that, as much as possible, we can engage the citizens 

to exercise their democratic right. And certainly when we see 

low voter turnouts at any kind of . . . any level of election, it’s 

always disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I find the level of engagement concerning at the 

provincial level, and when we see low voter turnouts, we know 

that means a sign that people aren’t following what’s going on 

and/or aren’t engaged, and I think there’s a number of reasons 

for that. Certainly people are busy; people are occupied with 

trying to figure out how they’re going to pay their rent or they 

feel that the government isn’t relevant to them, that the 

government is somewhere else and hasn’t engaged their lives 

and what’s meaningful to them. 

 

But on this bill in particular, the minister has talked a lot about 

the need to modernize this bill. We know that what they’ve 

done is they’ve taken the previous bill, which is called The 

Local Government Election Act, and they have now updated it 

entirely. In fact, they’ve entirely rewritten it and now they’ve 

updated the language and simplified throughout. 

 

Urban and rural provisions are now housed in the same sections 

and combined whenever possible, so that’s very helpful right 

there. Knowing that rural municipalities are now expected to 

follow the same procedures as the urban municipal elections is 

an important piece of consistency. 

 

There’s a number of other items. It’s a fairly extensive bill, and 

then certainly without having an opportunity to have a 

side-by-side comparison of the previous Act, that’s something 

we’ll need time to do, and certainly over the break we’ll have 

an opportunity to do that. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move that we 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6329 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 166, and we’ll look forward to more 
discussion in the new year. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 167 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 
Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And this 
is, as it turns out, the last time I will rise in the Assembly this 
year, in 2014, so I’m very pleased to be able to do that this 
evening. On this particular occasion . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, I’m hoping this is the last time I rise in this particular 
year, 2014, to speak to a bill. I know we’ll have plenty of 
opportunity in the new year. 
 
This bill is just simply consequential amendments to bills that 
are in bilingual format, and therefore it had to be bilingual as 
well. But in order to sort of take advantage of this opportunity, I 
want to share a bit of a poem that I’ve written for the occasion, 
Mr. Speaker. This is my last chance to speak. It’s a short poem, 
I promise you, but I just thought I would share it with the 
House. So here we go: 
 

’Twas the night before Tuesday 
and all through the House, 
members were grumbling, 
and starting to grouse. 
The Speaker would silence them 
all with a glare 
and threaten to evict them 
if they started to swear. 
When all of a sudden, there 
arose a new matter — 
an amendment that got 
the back bench all a-chatter. 
A change to the Act 
to protect human rights, 
a cause that for many 
was a long-fought-for fight. 
Gender identity was now 
on the list of protection. 
This was cause for agreement 
and a time for connection. 
First reading, last week. 
Second and third, today. 
Unanimous agreement 
and a shout of hooray! 

An early gift in this season. 
We can all stand tall, 
and my wish and my hope is 
peace and joy to you all. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 167. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 168 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 
Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . much to do with Bill No. 167. 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise on this evening to introduce such an important 
bill as Bill No. 168, An Act respecting Government Relations 
and making consequential amendments to certain Acts. 
 
And I just want to take a moment to congratulate the member 
from Nutana on that wonderful contribution to the debates 
tonight, and it’s very important that we have that levity as we’re 
heading into the holiday season. But it’s said so well. It’s said 
so well and framed it so nicely. I think I’ll have to get a copy of 
that. It’s a beautiful thing. And I think it really does, and I just 
want to reflect also on that bill just briefly and say, when people 
can work together, it’s a great thing what we can do. 
 
This is an important bill before us and it’s the last one of the 
night. I know we could go on about this last one of the year 
before we pick it up in the spring. But this is an important bill 
and I know that it’s one, as the minister said, it’s how they’re 
working towards framing their work around how to work within 
the municipalities. And this is a very, very important thing. It 
talks about doing four key things: the first is working with its 
mandate, how it reflects to Municipal Affairs, Northern Affairs, 
Public Safety, First Nations and Métis Relations; consolidating 
and standardizing the general authorities; third includes some 
new ministerial authority; and then it will do some 
consequential amendments. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a bill like this, the key thing that 
we’ve got to do is really talk to the stakeholders, find out what 
do they think. I mean, we can make long speeches here and I’m 
not sure what the point of that would be, but really we know 
that there are people out there that have a lot to say about this 
legislation. And this is how this system is supposed to work. 
We get the bills in the fall and then we take them out and talk to 
the stakeholders and say, so what do you think? And if they 
really like it then we can move quickly on it. But if there are 



6330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

questions that we need to ask and things that have not been 
incorporated, then we will have questions as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I think that we need to take some 
time, take some time, ask those questions, read this carefully. 
But tonight I would like to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 168, 
The Government Relations Administration Act, 2014. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask leave to extend some end-of-session greetings. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to make some comments regarding end of this session. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As is tradition in this House on the last day of a 
session, I’d like to extend some thoughts and some greetings 
and some thank yous on behalf of myself and my colleagues on 
the government side of the House. 
 
Certainly we must all begin our thank yous by thanking our 
families for allowing each of us to be here — our spouses, our 
children, our significant others, those that take care of 
everything at home while we’re here doing our work in the 
legislature. It is indeed a heartfelt thank you that we extend to 
each of our families while we are away in the legislature. The 
long hours here that we put in are equalled by the long hours 
that family members put in making sacrifices at home. 
 
But while we are here, we are well taken care of by the building 
staff, and I want to thank the Clerks of the House. I want to 
thank the Pages. I want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his 
staff and people in visitor services and building maintenance 
and each and every person who comes to work here at this 
wonderful, magnificent Legislative Building and helps each one 
of us do our job, a heartfelt thank you. They do their jobs with 
pride and professionalism. That’s how we find everyone 
conducts themselves in this building. It’s a high standard to 
reach and certainly people do that, and it is recognized I’m sure 
by members on both sides of the House. 
 
We’d like to thank the media, though they’re not always here, 

but I’m sure they’re at home watching. And I don’t want to get 
myself in too much trouble here. I’ll be, you know, the subject 
of an article in the newspaper or something like that. But I do 
want to thank them for allowing us to get our message out to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the media as well are very 
professional and do their job in that manner, so I want to thank 
them. 
 
From a government standpoint, we certainly want to thank our 
staff, people that work in our offices and come here and help us 
to do our job. We want to thank them for all that they do. Also 
as individual members of the legislature, our constituency 
assistants who are back in our constituencies and are dealing 
directly with individuals. You know, everybody, I find anyway, 
wants to deal directly with their member, but it’s not always 
possible. And we’re sure lucky to have constituency assistants 
that are there to do the best they can to answer those questions 
and also to get in touch with us when necessary to make sure 
that that’s done. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Also I know members of Executive Council and ministers 
would like to thank their staff, the Executive Council staff, their 
ministerial staff, and our caucus staff for all the work that they 
do. And from my personal perspective, I want to thank people 
in House business, people like Graham Stewart, who is our 
executive director of House business, Jarret Coels, Harrison 
Clark, all of whom do great work for us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a thank you certainly to my 
colleague across the way, the Opposition House Leader, the 
member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. I want to thank him for 
a productive and professional relationship. Co-operation and 
discussion were easily attained, and the operations ran for the 
most part very smoothly. So I want to thank you for that 
professionalism. 
 
To you, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for your wisdom, 
your advice, your co-operation, and all that you do to make this 
. . . Yes, I know you grimace when I say that, but we do want to 
thank you for all that you do here. 
 
And most importantly to everyone, it is the season. Merry 
Christmas to everyone here and at home watching. We certainly 
look forward to an enjoyable Christmas season as we go back to 
our constituencies and take part into the events that happen 
there. 
 
I know we’re all looking forward to coming back. I reminded 
members on our side of the House that March 2nd is a day that 
they have to circle on their calendar, but before that, we’ll have 
a great run-up to the Christmas season and hopefully a very safe 
and enjoyable season. And we’d like to extend that to members 
across the way, to everyone watching in. And, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time, thank you very much for the opportunity to share 
these thoughts and comments with you today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has requested 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6331 

leave to make a statement regarding the end of session. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, also leave to 
adjourn possibly later. But I just want to say a few words of — 
too soon perhaps, Mr. Speaker — a few words of thanks and 
well wishes for the season. 
 
I want to thank first of all the people that make this Assembly 
work. So many give of their time and labour and intellect and 
passion to make this Legislative Assembly go round. To the 
Clerk and the Table, the Clerk’s office, Journals and Hansard, 
broadcasting and IT support, Legislative Assembly Services, 
visitor services, maintenance, thank you for all that you do. 
 
To the Speaker and to the Speaker’s staff and to the Pages as 
well, thank you. Thanks to the press gallery. Thanks to the folks 
in the library and the cafeteria and security. And in this session 
in particular, we’re reminded of the huge debt of thanks that we 
owe to our Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff for all that they do to 
enable us to work in the service of democracy safely and 
securely. 
 
And I want to thank the folks involved in House business. First, 
thanks very much to Katherine Norton and Linsay Martens on 
the opposition side, and indeed all the folks in the opposition 
caucus office for their devotion to service. And thanks to all the 
staffers on the government side, be they in the caucus or 
elsewhere, but a special word of thanks to Graham and Jarret 
and Harrison for the work they do for House business on the 
government side. 
 
And a big vote of thanks to the Government House Leader 
himself. Many things in this House depend on a gentlemen or 
gentlewomen’s agreements, and I want to thank the 
Government House Leader for being a gentleman in our 
dealings, the occasional gentleman’s disagreement 
notwithstanding. But seriously, thank you very much for all the 
good work. 
 
And thanks to our leaders, to our colleagues on both sides, and 
thanks to the folks that keep us all grounded in the constituency. 
And thank you, thank you, thank you to our families. And to the 
people of Saskatchewan: we take the work that has been set out 
before us very seriously, and we strive to be worthy of that 
mission, and we thank you as well. 
 
Lastly, Merry Christmas to all, or if you’re celebrating 
Hanukkah, Chag Sameach. I wish you all the very best of the 
season on behalf of the official opposition. And to those that are 
suffering through loss or illness or other hardships at this time 
of the year, may the spirit of the season lighten some of those 
loads. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the question, I have a few things 
I would like to say as well. So I’ll take this opportunity to thank 
everyone for their hard work in this fall session. Since this is the 
one time that I get to speak, I have a few things I want to say, 
and there will be no heckling by me at this time. 

To the members, for their hours of service and strong 
commitment to their positions as elected officials of the 
province of Saskatchewan, thank you. I would like to thank the 
LAS [Legislative Assembly Service] staff, the Clerks and 
officers, Hansard, the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff, the 
interns, caucus staff, cafeteria staff, Central Services building 
staff. Their hours are often as long or, in the case of Hansard, 
longer than those of the members. Thank you to my 
constituency staff for their diligent work, especially while the 
members — all of the constituency staff — while the members 
are in the Assembly. 
 
I would like to acknowledge and thank the Pages for their 
excellent job that they do for us each day. We appreciate your 
efficiency and your professionalism. This is a learning and 
teaching opportunity that you should read your remarks before 
you deliver them. I would also like to thank my staff, Sheila and 
Connie, for their hard work in keeping the office running 
smoothly. In bold red letters it says, not easy in dealing with the 
Speaker. 
 
At the beginning of this session, we had a security scare with 
the events in Ottawa. Happily there was no direct threat to our 
Assembly. I wish to again pass on our condolences to the 
family of Warrant Officer Vincent and Corporal Cirillo. 
 
One last thank you: a special thanks to my family for their 
support. Have a Merry Christmas and best of 2015. Drive 
safely. 
 
The motion before the House . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Oh, okay. Before the motion, I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. According to rule 3, this House is 
adjourned to Monday, March 2nd, 2015, 1:30 p.m. Have a good 
Christmas season. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:52.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6315 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6315 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6316 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6316 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014  
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6317 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers  
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6318 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6319 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6320 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6321 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6322 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6323 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6324 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6325 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6327 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6328 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6328 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014  
 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6329 
 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6329 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6330 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6331 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6331 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


