




















































Hansard: April 15, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, APRIL 15, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5177 

 April 15, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

colleagues, for the leave to make that extended introduction of 

some very, very special guests who have joined us. Mr. 

Speaker, this day there was a first in the Legislative Assembly 

Building, at least as far as our records show. And that first was 

we had our very first citizenship ceremony right here at the 

Legislative Assembly Building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few hours ago, 47 people from 22 countries 

swore the oath of citizenship, pledged the oath of citizenship to 

our country. Mr. Speaker, each of them is going to be 

introduced by their MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] a little bit later on. And we have many to thank in 

the gallery, including Justice O’Malley who presided over the 

citizenship court. And the member for Sutherland will make 

those introductions, but we’re grateful for all their work to 

make it happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to tell the House that these 47 citizens 

reside in six communities: in Regina, Swift Current, Estevan, 

Carnduff, Vibank, and Val Marie, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

they are among 50,000 newcomers to the province of 

Saskatchewan since 2007 who have settled in 330 of our 

communities and who have undoubtedly made this province 

better, this province stronger, this province more diverse. And 

we thank them for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was the Saskatchewan-born prime minister, the only 

Saskatchewan-born prime minister of Canada, John 

Diefenbaker, who said that we as Canadians are free to speak 

without fear, free to worship in our own way, free to oppose 

what we believe is wrong, free to choose who shall govern us. 

Mr. Speaker, these 47 now can claim all of this for themselves, 

though they have already been contributing mightily to the 

communities they’re from and to this province and to the 

country. 

 

It was just a real honour and a privilege to be a witness to that 

ceremony today. And I want to thank them on behalf of all of 

the colleagues who were there because we were able to see 

Saskatchewan and Canada through their eyes and realize just 

how privileged we all are to be citizens of this great Dominion 

of Canada. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as a larger group before the individual 

introductions — and I have one of those — I would just ask all 

members of the Assembly, not just to welcome these citizens, 

our new fellow citizens to their Legislative Assembly, but also 

belatedly to welcome them to the province of Saskatchewan in 

the great nation of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have two quick introductions while I’m on 

my feet. It is a real privilege for me to introduce as a part of this 

group of 47, Herman and Tarasita Cesante from the 

constituency of Swift Current. They’re joined by their children 

Hanniel and Seth. And I would ask them to give us a wave and 

ask my colleagues to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. It’s good to see Herman and Tarasita here today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And finally it is a great honour and a privilege for me to 

introduce someone who is a close friend of many members on 

this side of the House and the mother to one. She is a 

remarkable lady who may be relocating soon to British 

Columbia to be closer with family, and we will miss her 

desperately when she does. To most she’s known as Arlene 

Heppner. A lot of us are privileged enough to call her Mother 

Heppner, Mr. Speaker. And I want to welcome Arlene Heppner 

to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as we gather as 

a Legislative Assembly today in Treaty 4 territory, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to join with the Premier in extending a 

welcome to the new Canadian citizens who are with us here 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m sure members on both sides share the experience of door 

knocking during the election campaign and coming to a 

doorstep with someone who is not yet a Canadian citizen but 

who has PR [permanent residence] and seeing the enthusiasm in 

their eyes when they say, well soon citizenship is coming for 

me, and next election we’ll be able to participate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why it’s great to see these residents become 

citizens and continue to contribute so mightily to our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to pay a special tribute to the families who are here 

today, because immigration is not an easy thing to do. It’s a big 

emotional change. It’s a big financial change. And, Mr. 

Speaker, immigrant families work incredibly hard, work 

multiple jobs, take on a mortgage, contribute to our society, all 

at the same time caring for family members back home. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to pay special tribute to the hard-working 

immigrant communities that we have in the province and for all 

that they contribute. Thank you for being here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have two introductions. The first kind of follows 

along with what the Premier had to say as far as our new 



5178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2014 

citizens. I do want to quickly tell you that we had a little 

discussion in caucus because there would be a lot of new 

citizens that we’re going to introduce from around the world 

really, and we were wondering should we introduce them by 

name. 

 

The Premier has already started and done a great job by 

introducing by name. I want to introduce a new citizen to the 

constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, and I’m going to 

struggle with his name. His name is Dan Bentley, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to welcome him to his constituency of Indian 

Head-Milestone, more importantly the province of 

Saskatchewan and the country of Canada. Thank you for being 

here. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce a 

group of grade 11 and 12 students from the Bert Fox 

Community High School in Fort Qu’Appelle. They’re here with 

their teacher, Valerie Brooks. They are also studying law 30 

and social 30 classes, Mr. Speaker. They come from, as I said, 

the beautiful community of Fort Qu’Appelle and probably 

surrounding area. It’s a real treasure and a jewel, Mr. Speaker. 

Actually one of our Pages is from that community as well, 

probably not too many years ago may have sat up in the gallery 

and watched the proceedings. So I’d like all members of the 

Assembly to welcome this grade 11 and 12 class from the 

beautiful community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 

introduce Judge Terrence O’Malley, the presiding judge of 

today’s Canadian citizenship ceremony. Mr. Speaker, I 

understand that Judge O’Malley has performed 14 such 

ceremonies in the last month, which I think speaks volumes. I 

think sure it’s quite a honour for him to be the first to welcome 

so many new Canadians to our province and to our country. So 

please if the rest of the Assembly could help me welcome Judge 

O’Malley to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 

it’s a great privilege for me to introduce, on behalf of all Regina 

MLAs, four new citizens of Canada: Mrs. Edna Velasco, Mr. 

Jerome Laquinon, Mr. Rikesh Patel, and Wezenet Anday. So 

would the Legislative Assembly please join me in welcoming 

these new Canadian citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — I’d like to welcome my colleagues in 

welcoming the new Canadian citizens, but I wanted to touch a 

little bit on the people behind the scenes, the people from 

Saskatchewan immigration team. And I’m just going to list 

them. These are the people that are behind the scenes starting 

off the immigration process and were able to participate, some 

of them, in their first citizenship ceremony. And their names are 

Ian Gardner, David Li, Kadine Taylor, Chris Truscott, Michael 

Exner, Crystal Montoya, Jennifer Draper-Forsythe, Judy 

Kobsar, Lidija Ilic, Karen Clark, Kimberly Donald, Michael 

Fink, and Karina Jimenez Rivera. 

 

And I also want to say a special thank you to Richelle Bourgoin 

and Kirk Westgard. These are people that provide leadership to 

the nomination group. And I’d like all members to join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, in the 

east gallery is sitting a gentleman from Prince Albert. I’d like to 

introduce Tony Head. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

Tony wants to see the proceedings and he is interested in 

politics. 

 

Prince Albert was my home when I was growing up, the West 

Flat, and that’s where Tony’s from. So I just want to welcome 

Tony, and get involved in politics, seeing the proceedings here 

today, and seeing if he is going to be interested in it. And I hope 

he is. So I welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Tony to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to join the Premier in welcoming my mom to the legislature. 

Mr. Speaker, 50 years ago, my mom who’s originally from BC 

met a very handsome young man from Saskatchewan and has 

been here ever since. And she has recently decided that it’s time 

for her to go back to her original home, although we like to 

think that mom’s actual home is here. 

 

I have been informed by the Premier and the member for 

Kindersley that cabinet will be passing an order in council 

barring her from leaving the province, and she can fight that if 

she so chooses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has already said, my mom is often 

referred to as Mother Heppner by so many people. She’s one of 

those amazing women who loves being a mom and not just to 

her own kids, but to anybody else who needs a little bit of 

mothering, and is so loved by so many. 

 

She’s my greatest supporter and my fiercest champion, and I 

will be missing her. And I ask all members to welcome her back 

to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in the east gallery, it’s truly my pleasure to 

welcome a remarkable group of young leaders to their 

Assembly here today, and a remarkable teacher as well. We 

have the SRC [student representative council] from Thom 

Collegiate here today, from northwest Regina. 

 

It’s special to have this group here. You’ll hear a little bit more 

about their accomplishments very shortly. It’s special, because 

of course they’re from northwest Regina, but of course I think 

that’s also the place that the member from Regina Elphinstone 

graduated from, and also myself. So it’s a pleasure to have these 



April 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5179 

students here today, as well as a remarkable teacher and a 

friend, Ms. Kam Bahia. 

 

I would like to read into record the students leaders that are here 

today as well: Hayley Wagman, Cheyenne Esmond, Linden 

Leugner, Armin Smajevic, Ashley Hollinger, Kaytlyn Kotylak, 

Jessica Rotariu, Ashley Rotariu, Anita Kotylak, Ashley Beach, 

Amber Holmes, Taylor Haubrich, Natasha LaBar, Jada Baker, 

Shelby Murdoch, Katie Abramovic, Carolyn Moorman and of 

course Ms. Bahia who I referenced. 

 

These are remarkable young people. I also note that as a student 

leadership council, it’s heavily dominated by women, maybe 

something that at some point in time this legislature might look 

a little bit more like as well, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members of 

this Assembly to welcome these student leaders and this very 

fine teacher to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier 

and the member from Martensville in welcoming Ms. Arlene 

Heppner to her Legislative Assembly. I’ve said many times in 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that no member serves alone. You 

do not serve here without the full support and backing of your 

family, and this is by far and away on display in Arlene and her 

family’s case. 

 

I would also concur with the Premier that Arlene is going to be 

desperately missed, not by many members just in this 

Assembly, but by many members in Rosthern-Shellbrook 

constituency, and most particularly in and around the 

community of Rosthern. So I would like all members to join me 

in wishing Arlene the very best in health and happiness and 

welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

join with members in welcoming someone special in their 

Assembly here today, seated in your gallery, and that would be 

Ms. Judy Kobsar, a constituent, a strong public servant, a 

community leader, and a good friend to Stephanie and I. Please 

all join Ms. Judy Kobsar to her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce someone that’s very special in my life. Seated 

in the west gallery is my sister Edna, and Edna’s no stranger to 

the members on this side. She makes a trip up every session, 

and her and I get to spend some time together. So I look 

forward to doing that again for the next couple of days. So I ask 

all members to join me in welcoming my sister to this 

legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you I’d like to introduce to members of this 

legislature a frequent visitor to this House, Gunnar Passmore of 

the sheet metal workers. He’s no stranger to issues of working 

men and women here in the province. I would ask all members 

to give him a warm welcome to his legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It is my pleasure to introduce and welcome to 

the province of Saskatchewan and to the Legislative Assembly 

very special quests from the state of Western Australia. As a 

part of an interparliamentary study exchange program with the 

state of Western Australia, our members and legislative officials 

had the opportunity to travel to Western Australia to study their 

system of government. While there, they were paired with 

legislators and legislative officials and shadowed them 

throughout their daily routine. 

 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan is now pleased to 

reciprocate that visit. They will be in Saskatchewan from April 

the 15th until April 23rd. I would ask our guests to please stand 

as I introduce you. Ms. Wendy Duncan, MLA, member for 

Kalgoorlie, Deputy Speaker; Mr. Roger Cook, MLA, member 

for Kwinana, Deputy Leader of the Opposition; Dr. Graham 

Jacobs, MLA, member for Eyre. 

 

From the Legislative Council, the Hon. Barry House, MLC 

[Member of the Legislative Council], president — Speaker in 

our terms — the Hon. Kate Doust, MLC, member for south 

metropolitan region, Deputy Leader of the Opposition; and the 

Hon. Paul Brown, MLC, member for agricultural region. 

 

From the Legislative Assembly we have Kirsten Robinson, 

Deputy Clerk. From the Legislative Council, Nigel Pratt, Clerk. 

And from parliamentary services, Russell Bremner, executive 

manager. 

 

Please join me in welcoming our guests from the state of 

Western Australia to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 

privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the Government 

of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize health care 

laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 

Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we know that 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at risk 

as health regions lose direct control over health care laundry 

services, and that the privatization of health care laundry will 

mean that fair wage jobs will be replaced with poverty wages 

and public accountability will be lost. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s health care laundry, which will result in 

the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. 



5180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2014 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation; and, furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 

over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 

outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to the 

lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue and their call to have the 

heavy-haul truck traffic that’s inundated Dewdney Avenue 

rerouted off of Dewdney. They note that any further delays of 

that government to address an issue created by that government 

are unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action, as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 

the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many people of this good province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

stand today to present a petition on the highways in northern 

Saskatchewan and all throughout Saskatchewan, as before. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to commit to repairing and 

upgrading Highway 918. 

 

And that’s the highway of course that serves the community of 

Patuanak and the English River First Nation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the people that have signed this petition are all from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition that’s opposed to the government cuts to the harness 

racing industry. And the undersigned residents wish to bring to 

our attention the following: that in 2012 the government 

stubbornly cut the grants for Yorkton’s harness racing industry, 

and the government failed to properly listen or consult with the 

residents of Yorkton. The government’s cuts towards harness 

racing will continue to negatively impact breeders, trainers, and 

other employees, as well as destructively impact the economic 

spinoffs of the harness racing industry. And without the grants, 

Yorkton residents who have contributed through their hard 

work and tax dollars may have to relocate to provinces which 

support the harness racing industry, like Ontario, Alberta, or 

British Columbia. And these cuts have and will continue to 

have a negative economic impact on the city of Yorkton and 

their surrounding communities. Here’s the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

may be pleased to call on the government to immediately 

reinstate the grant funding for harness racing in Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition’s signed by folks from Rama 

and the city of Yorkton. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Saskatchewan a Family of Families 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday evening several of us 

had the opportunity to enjoy a delicious meal, good visits, and a 

great speech by former Premier Roy Romanow at the 

Intercultural Dialogue Institute’s second annual Friendship 

Dinner. The theme of this year’s dinner was Family of Families: 

Sharing the House of Saskatchewan, which is an important 

message in a province such as ours. 

 

The fabric of Saskatchewan consists of those whose families 

have called this place home since time immemorial, families 

like mine that have been here for about 100 years, and families 

that have just recently moved to Saskatchewan from other 

provinces and from other countries. The diversity of our 



April 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5181 

province is a great blessing and something we should always 

celebrate. 

 

I’m grateful for the good work of the Intercultural Dialogue 

Institute, which is working to promote mutual respect and 

greater understanding in order to continue to break down the 

walls that restrict us from experiencing the joys of other 

cultures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

organizers of this year’s friendship dinner and to thank the 

Intercultural Dialogue Institute for their ongoing work in 

making Saskatchewan a welcoming place for all. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Jewish Community Celebrates Passover 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 

the beginning of Passover, a time for people of the Jewish faith 

here in Saskatchewan and around the world to gather with loved 

ones and commemorate the exodus of the Israelites from 

slavery in ancient Egypt over 3,000 years ago. 

 

Passover is a very spiritual time for those who celebrate the 

Jewish faith. It is time to celebrate the resilience of the Jewish 

people in their long history. It’s a time to celebrate community, 

family, and the strength and spirit of a people who have been 

tested through tragedy and triumph. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many special traditions and customs are observed 

during Passover, such as the Seder, which is a special family 

meal that takes place on the first night of Passover. Seder is 

filled with a ritual that can take several hours and includes 

readings from the Haggadah. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Passover also affords us in Saskatchewan an 

opportunity to reflect on the importance of freedom, family, 

faith, and tradition, and turn our thoughts to many blessings that 

we have here in Saskatchewan, and to the millions more around 

the world still struggling for basic rights and freedoms. 

 

It is with this that I ask all members to join me in extending the 

best wishes to the Jewish community during the special time of 

Passover. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Thom Collegiate Fundraiser to Beat Cancer 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for two weeks every year, 

the students and teachers from Thom Collegiate raise thousands 

of dollars through their Beat Cancer fundraiser. This year the 

high school raised almost $20,000 which will go to the Allan 

Blair Cancer Clinic to help those undergoing treatment. The 

tradition started in 1998 when a former Thom student was 

diagnosed with cancer. Since then more than $250,000 has been 

raised. In the past, funds have been donated to the Terry Fox 

Foundation and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

 

Fundraising events were organized by students in the student 

representative council and included taco-in-the-bag, bake sales, 

bottle drives, pie in the face, movie mornings, a dance, and a 

teacher versus student basketball game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $20,000 is an incredible amount of money for the 

Thom students to have raised in only two weeks. It’s inspiring 

to see how students, teachers, and the Thom community all 

pooled their time, efforts, and dedication to raise these funds for 

such an important cause. 

 

This could not have been made possible without the willingness 

and determination of the students to make a difference in our 

community. Special thanks goes out to the Thom Collegiate 

SRC students and Ms. Kam Bahia, the SRC teacher adviser and 

a remarkable teacher. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me to thank and 

congratulate the students, the staff, and community of Thom 

Collegiate for their incredible leadership in their successful 

Beat Cancer fundraiser. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Canadian Western Agribition Scholarship 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 

family of Barry Andrew announced a $25,000 donation to the 

Canadian Western Agribition Scholarship Fund, Lil Farley was 

listening. She heard the Andrew family ask other families 

connected to the long-running agriculture show to donate. And 

she acted. The result of her action was the biggest single 

donation in the long history of Agribition: $50,000 towards a 

scholarship in the name of her late husband. 

 

Like Barry Andrew, Bill Farley was a dedicated supporter of 

Agribition. A seed farmer from Grand Coulee, Bill was active 

in what has become Canada’s premier agriculture show for a 

decade, both as a member of its board of directors and a 

committee Chair. Bill played a very important role in the 

development in its grain show in the 1980s. In 1994 Bill 

received the Chris Sutter Award for exemplary contribution to 

the development and the sustainability of the show. 

 

Students qualifying for the annual scholarship can receive up to 

$1,500. Bill and Lil were both very interested and dedicated to 

post-secondary education. In her words: 

 

We felt that a scholarship would be an incentive for 

students to continue their education, whether it’s at 

university or at an institution like SIAST. We really feel 

strongly and our family feels the same way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of the Assembly to join 

me in recognizing Lil Farley and her late husband, Bill, for the 

contribution to both agriculture and the youth of our province. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



5182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2014 

Support for Saskatoon Housing and Shelter Projects 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the House today to talk about a wonderful announcement that 

took place in Saskatoon last Friday, April 11th at the 

Lighthouse Supported Living. Through the ministries of Health, 

Corrections and Policing, and Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation, our government is providing $1.5 million in 

one-time capital funding towards the $4 million total cost of 

this project. 

 

The funding will be used to support two components of the 

project. The first component is the renovation of 59 existing 

supportive living units at the Dubé Lighthouse. Mr. Speaker, 

the Dubé Lighthouse provides housing for close to 70 

individuals who are some of the most vulnerable citizens in our 

society. They include the working poor, people with physical 

and intellectual disabilities, and people with addictions. 

 

The second component of this project is the development of an 

innovative, 38-bed emergency shelter and wellness centre. This 

emergency shelter, Mr. Speaker, will provide a place for 

individuals who are not able to access other emergency shelters 

in the city. This shelter will provide a safe place for them, 

especially during the winter months when they may otherwise 

access to hospital or police services which put additional strains 

on available resources. 

 

Our government couldn’t reach our goal without our 

community-based partners like the Lighthouse. Today we 

accomplished much more than either of us could individually. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Affordable Rental Units Opened in Regina 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House to talk about a wonderful grand opening this 

morning right here in Regina. Along with our federal partners, 

the city of Regina, and PR Investments Inc., we officially 

opened eight new affordable rental housing units at 1936 

Cameron Street. 

 

Together with the Government of Canada, we have invested 

$320,000 from the Investment in Affordable Housing 

Agreement to assist in the development of these units. And in 

addition to this money, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

has also provided another $40,000 under the rental construction 

incentive to our partners at the city of Regina in order to match 

their funding for this project. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most important thing about these units is 

they are helping to improve the quality of life for the people 

who live there. Providing a safe and comfortable home 

environment for individuals and families in our communities 

should be a priority for all of us no matter where we live. 

 

Since 2011 our government has invested $256 million to 

develop more than 4,500 units and repair more than 24,300 

homes around the province. We are also proud that we have 

implemented a number of initiatives to encourage the 

development of affordable homes. 

 

With these units today, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

has funded 3,158 units that are completed or under construction 

since 2007. We want to thank our partners in the federal 

government, the city of Regina, and PR Developments for their 

dedication to this important project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Remembering Dr. Krishna Kumar 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise in the House to remember the remarkable life of Dr. 

Kris Kumar, a prominent Saskatchewan physician and 

neurosurgeon who passed away Sunday night. 

 

Dr. Kumar was born in Jabalpur, India, and came to Canada in 

1957. He studied medicine in India and then began his studies 

in neurosurgery in Halifax, Edmonton, and Saskatoon before 

calling Regina home. 

 

During his life, Dr. Kumar was awarded the Queen’s Diamond 

Jubilee Medal, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, the Order of 

Canada, and was also named Saskatchewan’s Physician of the 

Year in 2008. Dr. Kumar’s research was largely based on the 

treatment of chronic pain, more specifically through spinal cord 

stimulation, which was the focus of a documentary called 

Living with Pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Kumar was dedicated to his work and to his 

patients. In fact late last year, Dr. Kumar was recognized by the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region as well as by his peers for 50 

years of medical service in the city of Regina. He worked 

tirelessly with his patients to help relieve their chronic pain and 

to help them regain a positive and fulfilling life. His amazing 

work and caring personality touched the lives of every patient 

that he worked with. 

 

We were very lucky to have such a great man and an amazing 

doctor work and live in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have 

lost an incredible physician and a wonderful, wonderful man. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking Dr. 

Kumar for his devotion to his patients of the province, and join 

with me in passing on our heartfelt condolences to his family, 

his friends, and all of his colleagues. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care and Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the Premier 

confirm that his lean pet project is leaving seniors’ care 

facilities without desperately needed supplies, including 

bandages and dressings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm for the House 



April 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5183 

that the lean initiative that’s been working its way through the 

health care system has already saved more money than has been 

invested in lean for the taxpayers. And even more importantly, 

because lean is about improved care, we’ve seen measurable 

improvements in terms of patient care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also said to the extent we can improve the 

lean process by listening directly to health care workers, 

patients, all those involved, all the stakeholders in the system, 

we’ll be prepared to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps news like 

this continually catches the Premier and the Minister of Health 

off guard, Mr. Speaker, because they’re more obsessed with 

promoting their lean pet project than actually listening to the 

very legitimate concerns that are being raised about lean. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that lean has led to significant 

problems with how supplies are managed. This means senior 

care facilities are running out of supplies, desperately needed 

supplies, including bandages and dressings. This means that 

front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, are required to stretch those 

bandages and those items to the absolute limit, and this means 

that these front-line health care workers are forced to call the 

family members of residents to ask if they want to pay extra in 

order to have the necessary supplies for their family members. 

 

My question for the Premier: how is this acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be interested to know 

where these specific instances are occurring. On a cursory 

check by the ministry already, I think 8 out of 12 regions are 

reporting no particular shortages. There’s work under way with 

the other four frankly, and no shortage determination, especially 

necessarily linked to lean. 

 

Yesterday in the House, the member stood up and made some 

allegations about “time-out rooms,” Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 

unable to determine where those have existed. And even when 

the stakeholder group that the member quoted said it was the 

Five Hills Region, the Five Hills Region has confirmed that, to 

their knowledge, it did not occur there either, Mr. Speaker. And 

so we would ask the member to share whatever information he 

has on the specific region because we’re going to make sure 

that supplies are available as they are needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact what we’ve seen through lean is the appropriate 

management of supplies. I would take for example the blood 

inventory system in the province, where before lean we used to 

throw out a lot of blood, Mr. Speaker, because of poor 

management processes. Now we do not do that. Now we have a 

different process that’s saving money and, more importantly, 

preventing the waste of valuable blood. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see with this 

government’s approach to lean is that they dismiss concerns 

when they’re raised. When the nurses and front-line health care 

workers in this province raise concerns, Mr. Speaker, we see a 

dismissive approach. It’s no wonder health care workers are 

afraid to come forward and voice their concerns with the 

approach that we’re seeing from this government. 

 

What Saskatchewan people can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is 

how this government’s priorities can be so misplaced. Here we 

have this government that will spend $40 million on one US 

[United States] consultant to come to Saskatchewan. This 

government spent $17 million a year, Mr. Speaker, on a kaizen 

promotion office. Mr. Speaker, this government flies Japanese 

senseis to Saskatchewan and pays them $3,500 per day. This 

government has untold millions of dollars to force health care 

workers into train where they’ll learn Japanese terminology, 

Mr. Speaker, and how to fold paper airplanes. All at the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, that they are neglecting the basics and not 

even providing the basics for Saskatchewan’s residents and 

patients. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: when will enough be 

enough? When will he stop wasting time on this lean pet 

project? When will they focus on the issues that actually matter 

to Saskatchewan families instead of making them pay more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s consider what this 

government has done in terms of prioritizing the basics in the 

health care system. Mr. Speaker, we inherited the situation 

where members opposite had closed hundreds of long-term care 

beds. We’re now opening long-term care beds in rural 

Saskatchewan. We opened long-term care beds together with 

the Catholic Health Ministry in Saskatoon. They opposed that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s consider that we inherited, from the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] government, a shortage of nurses. Mr. 

Speaker, now fully 1,000 more nurses practising in the 

province. That’s a focus on the basics. That’s more front-line 

resources. We inherited, from the opposition when they were 

government, a shortage in doctors, Mr. Speaker. And while 

there’s still more work that needs to be done, there’s over 200 

more doctors practising today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We inherited . . . We’ll talk about the basics. We inherited from 

that member’s party opposite the longest wait times for surgery 

in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We set out with 

resources and a plan to reduce them, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re in 

the top tier, have reduced the wait times for surgical care. We’re 

on our way to meet those objectives. Those are the basics. 

 

Surgeries that are happening on time to a greater extent than 

they ever did, more long-term care beds instead of closed 

long-term care beds, STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] ambulance for rural Saskatchewan, more health care 

workers — that’s the record on the basics on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, do I oppose $40 million going to 

one US consultant? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Do I oppose 

flying in Japanese senseis and paying them $3,500 a day? 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Do I oppose forcing health care 



5184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2014 

workers into training sessions, Mr. Speaker, where they learn 

how to fold paper airplanes, where they’re taken away from 

providing care to the patients that they want to properly care 

for? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do I oppose this government creating a culture of fear within 

our health care system where nurses, where front-line providers 

are afraid to come forward, Mr. Speaker, because of the tone 

being set from the top, Mr. Speaker? I absolutely oppose those 

measures because they’re not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan patients or health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier is not focused on the basics when it 

comes to health care. We have nurses identifying shortages in 

bandages and dressings that is hurting patient care. Front-line 

workers, Mr. Speaker, have to call patients’ families, ask them 

if they want to pay extra in order to have the bandages replaced 

on their family members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: how on earth is this acceptable, Mr. 

Speaker? To the Premier: when will he end this lean nonsense? 

When will he end the fat cash cow contract for $40 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would just take the opportunity to inform the Leader 

of the Opposition of what we’re doing in the health care system 

is about the patient. It’s not about him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done is we’ve identified, Mr. Speaker, 

that we do need to make improvements within the health care 

system. We know that we have to improve the quality of the 

services that we provide. We need to reduce the errors, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

And that is much of the work that we’re doing throughout lean, 

to the point where other provinces, Mr. Speaker, are looking at 

us, knowing that we have saved more money already than what 

we’ll spend on the four-year contract, a contract which is the 

same proportion, by the way, Mr. Speaker, to the two-tenths of 

one per cent that the member from Lakeview authorized when 

he was the Health minister in Five Hills Health Region. 

 

With respect, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, his 

allegations, what I would hope that he would do is provide 

some more information because when he comes in here and 

provides information that we cannot verify because we don’t 

know when, we don’t know where. 

 

What we do know is, in terms of the supply chain issues that 

he’s talking about, eight of twelve health regions have already 

said they don’t know what he’s talking about. In terms of the 

allegations that he made about Five Hills and time-out rooms, 

Five Hills has said they don’t know what he’s talking about. 

Mr. Speaker, I think we’re hearing a lot about that from the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Notification Protocol 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it took 17 hours for this 

government to notify the public that an inmate with a history of 

violence had escaped from the psychiatric hospital in North 

Battleford. To the Minister of Corrections: why did it take so 

long to notify the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2008, this 

government committed to a timely reporting of escapes from 

any of our correctional facilities. In this incident that the 

members opposite are referring to, the reporting protocol was 

not followed. That said, we take the safety of public, staff, and 

offenders very, very seriously. The ministry is working with the 

Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford and the Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority to ensure timely communication 

when incidents such as this occur. And this particular incident, 

Mr. Speaker, is under review. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government and a minister of 

the government made a promise to the people of Saskatchewan 

that what happened in 2008 wouldn’t happen again. And that 

promise was broken this week. It took 17 hours before the 

government bothered to let people know about the recent escape 

of the violent offender. What assurances can the minister give 

to the people of Saskatchewan that this won’t happen again? 

And can the minister give the people of Saskatchewan an 

update on the status of this escaped inmate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, on the night that this incident 

occurred, the hospital staff notified the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]. They were on-site. However, the hospital did 

not notify Corrections staff at that time. 

 

As I said, we are working the Prairie North Health Region and 

the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford to ensure that the 

proper protocols are being followed. The Ministry of Policing 

and Corrections actually and the head of the forensic unit at the 

hospital have just agreed that we will implement a similar 

protocol reporting agreement that is currently in place, and 

therefore the protocol will be followed. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Membership of Social Services Appeal Board 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the Minister of Social Services: does she think 

it’s important for the Social Services Appeal Board to be fully 

independent and appear to be fully independent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do. 

 



April 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5185 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had concerns raised with 

us about this government’s approach to the Social Services 

Appeal Board. 

 

Clark Puckett, the former constituency assistant to the member 

for Arm River-Watrous and a candidate for the Sask Party 

nomination in Arm River-Watrous tonight, served on the Social 

Services Appeal Board for two years while he was a 

constituency assistant. And we’re told that the Social Services 

minister appointed her own constituency assistant to the Social 

Services Appeal Board in December. 

 

To the minister: how is this acceptable for constituency 

assistants to serve on the Social Services Appeal Board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when we looked at the 

people who had qualifications, we determined that these people 

did actually qualify for the job. But then at the same time, we 

wanted to make sure it was fully independent, so those names 

were removed. And my assistant is not at any meetings as she’s 

not on the board. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our job is to make sure that people who 

bring concerns to our government are looked at fully through 

the eyes of professionals, and we will continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand when 

concerns were raised about the Social Services minister 

appointing her own staff member to the Social Services Appeal 

Board, the minister did do the right thing and removed her. 

 

But then she did the wrong thing, and she appointed a very 

close friend of hers to the board instead. And she actually made 

this friend the Co-Chair of the board, the same close friend who 

went to Ghana and London with the minister, and the same 

close friend who had a $200 lunch with the minister in London. 

And we’ve heard a lot of concerns about the minister putting a 

travel buddy of hers onto the appeal board because that board is 

supposed to be fully independent from the minister.  

 

To the minister: how can you justify this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite is well aware of the lunch and that it was not paid for 

by the taxpayers. That money was repaid. 

 

The people that are on the appeal board are there because they 

are professional people that have the right background. I think if 

the member opposite would be looking at the background of the 

people that were appointed to that board, look at their 

professionalism and their training and where they’ve been 

working for the last number of years, we put people on the 

boards who will do the right thing when it comes to vulnerable 

individuals. They’ll look at their claims as they come forward. 

We know the percentage of people that come forward and have 

their . . . that is actually overturned by the appeal board when 

looked at through their eyes instead of the ministry. That’s the 

type of work that we look at all the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware that there are competent people 

that are friends on this side of the House. And I think there are 

some competent people from that side of the House, and 

they’ve been put on boards as well. Mr. Speaker, we ensure that 

the work that’s being done for the taxpayer of this province is 

done by competent people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Ministry of Education Sector Plan 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the first question reporters 

asked the Minister of Education yesterday was just six words. It 

was a pretty simple question. The minister talked and talked and 

talked and didn’t provide a clear answer. So I’ll repeat that 

question to the minister here today, and perhaps he can finally 

bring some clarity to the people of the province. Is standardized 

testing on or not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

respectful and mindful of the processes that are under way 

through student-first and through the advisors that we have. 

And we are going to respect that process as we work through 

things. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that there will not be any form 

of large-scale computerized testing of all subjects and grades. 

By that I mean there will not be the same test on the same day 

province-wide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we will do is have a continuing discussion 

and dialogue with our sector partners, including teachers, as we 

move forward to try and implement the education sector plan. 

We will build on the successes that take place in other parts of 

the province, and that will include some of the great successes 

that have taken place in Melfort and in Swift Current that are 

based on evaluations of students. We will take those things, we 

will build on those and spread them across the province. 

Because that’s the type of thing we want to do, is look at the 

best practices in Saskatchewan and elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, the minister’s remarkable as 

he continues to change definitions and sort of reframe what he 

calls standardized testing. But when we looked yesterday, the 

minister kept saying that he didn’t want to get into the 

semantics of whether standardized testing is on or off, and he 

didn’t want to speculate as to whether or not this government 

has actually flip-flopped. Well this isn’t about semantics or 

about speculation. This is about a straight-up answer from that 

minister and from that government, something that’s been 

awfully difficult to get to date. 

 

So again to the minister: why won’t he just tell us whether or 

not there’ll be standardized testing for Saskatchewan students? 

 



5186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

member for Regina Rosemont asked questions about the 

education sector’s strategic plan. He referred to it as the 

government’s plan. In fact it’s the plan of the sector. 

 

The sector has worked together, all 28 school divisions. 

They’ve consulted with STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation], with the School Boards Association, with teachers, 

and with everybody that is active and involved. And they have 

actually for the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, come together and 

developed a plan. They will build on the successes and we will 

respect that process. If the members opposite want us to throw 

that aside, he can stand up and say that he does not respect the 

education divisions, that he does not respect teachers. Because 

that’s what he’s doing by saying, do something different. We 

want to work with those people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no mention of 

standardized testing in that plan. It became evident yesterday in 

questioning that the minister didn’t even know this one- or 

two-page plan when he was out before the media or in 

committee last night. We’re now hearing this government use 

terms like common evaluation instead of standardized testing 

because the minister said yesterday that the term standardized 

testing is toxic. 

 

So the question to the Education minister is, how is this 

anything but a rebranding of standardized testing as common 

evaluation or some other cute name? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will work with the 

sector partners. We will let them develop a plan that is 

appropriate for our province, and we will work with them 

unlike the members opposite. Between 2000 and 2007, the NDP 

spent over $8 million on their own standardized testing regime 

to assess hundreds of thousands of students. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I will read from some of their documents. 

 

Since 2000, the department has increased its large-scale 

assessment activity in Grades 4 through 11 in response to 

increased emphases on accountability within public 

administration, and to Saskatchewan’s standing on 

international test results. The Assessment for Learning 

Program has grown from measuring 11,000 students . . . 

annually to over 70,000 students.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the record of the members opposite. We’re 

not going down that road. We’re doing consultation. We have a 

process in place. We will support and work with that process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear what that 

government’s looking at is a province-wide testing scheme, a 

standardized testing scheme that the NDP would never support, 

Mr. Speaker. This is incredibly frustrating for parents, for 

educators, for academics who simply want a straight-up answer 

from that minister about standardized testing. Instead the 

government is giving the illusion of listening, but it’s not 

actually changing a thing. It’s just rebranding. 

 

The University of Regina education faculty has already passed a 

motion against standardized testing. And on Friday, the 

department of education foundations at the University of 

Saskatchewan passed a motion or resolution against 

standardized testing. They wrote to the government saying, 

“We would like you to take a firm stance and reject these plans 

entirely.” 

 

To the minister: why won’t he do that here today? Why won’t 

he finally take a firm stance and reject these plans entirely, and 

put some focus into where it matters on the front-lines of 

education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — This is a government that consults. This 

is a government that listens. We have a plan approved by all 28 

school divisions, a plan supported and approved by the STF, 

SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], and LEADS 

[League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents]. We will work with them to develop 

something that’s appropriate, something that works in this 

province, something that supports the students of our province, 

that recognizes the successes that we’ve had in places like 

Melfort, Swift Current. We’ll build on those and spread them 

out across the province. 

 

That’s what this side of the House is going to do, is work with 

the sector partners, instead of like the throng that they’ve got 

across there, where they went ahead and spent millions of 

dollars and tested hundreds of thousands of students. We’re not 

on for that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again today no answers 

from the minister on a file that certainly parents and educators 

deserve some answers, Mr. Speaker. And in fact if the 

minister’s trying to suggest somehow that the teachers of this 

province or the STF support standardized testing, I think he 

better check his facts on that one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know it’s about time that that minister take some 

responsibility for his file. In fact I think maybe at some time 

that he himself gain some learning, Mr. Speaker, engaged in 

some schooling. So I’d recommend to him, and in fact I call on 

him here today, will he meet as soon as possible with the 

education faculties, the academics at the University of Regina, 

the University of Saskatchewan, so that he can actually learn 

what a standardized test is, and why they’re bad for 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that assessment 

and evaluation of our students is absolutely critical if we want 

to be able to mark their successes and move forward. And 

virtually every teacher in the province is in favour of that. 

 



April 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5187 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote: “I’m not against 

assessment. On the contrary, I’m all for assessment for learning. 

I still want tests in the classroom. I still want students being 

measured as to whether they know certain things or not, and I 

want to have them respond when they don’t know.” Dr. Marc 

Spooner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another quote: “. . . testing itself is not a bad thing. 

I am not an anti-assessment person . . . Problems arise when . . . 

[they] become higher in stakes and include sanctions to teachers 

or schools as a consequence of poor performance.” Pasi 

Sahlberg in his book. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one more quote: “This is something that’s very 

important, that we want our students to achieve. And it’s great 

they’re making that commitment to do that with the additional 

resources to make sure that happens and there is a balance 

between testing and teaching.” The member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the games just continue 

from that minister. For the minister to get up and pretend 

someone like Pasi Sahlberg supports province-wide 

standardized testing is utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker. For the 

minister to get up and misrepresent Dr. Marc Spooner of the 

University of Regina as somehow a proponent, a supporter of 

his plan, he should know is also absolutely nonsense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we know about standardized testing and the positions 

taken by parents and by schools and by academics, is that 

there’s all sorts of issues with this plan. A few for example: 

they are culturally insensitive. They’re unfair to students that 

are learning English. They cause educators to focus on the test 

instead of on teaching and ensuring actual learning. 

 

Why is that minister, why is that government, why is that 

Premier rejecting all the evidence and plowing ahead with a 

plan that’s not in the best interest of students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite 

is doing is absolutely contemptible. He is disrespecting not only 

the teachers of this province, he’s disrespecting the school 

boards, the STF, and the students and the parents in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that’s made major capital 

commitments. We will continue to support those things in a 

financial manner. We will respect the student-first process as it 

goes ahead, and we will respect the student sector plan because 

that is how the direction of this province is going to go with 

education. And we will produce meaningful results. It is the 

first time in 26 years that we have ever had a comprehensive 

program that will go ahead with including all of our sector 

partners. And we’ll take no advice from those members over 

there, none at all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5177 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5177 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5177 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5178 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5178 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5178 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5178 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5178 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5178, 5179 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5179 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5180 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan a Family of Families 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

 Jewish Community Celebrates Passover 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5181 

 Thom Collegiate Fundraiser to Beat Cancer 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5181 

 Canadian Western Agribition Scholarship 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5181 

 Support for Saskatoon Housing and Shelter Projects 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

 Affordable Rental Units Opened in Regina 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5182 

 Remembering Dr. Krishna Kumar 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care and Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

 Notification Protocol 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

 Membership of Social Services Appeal Board 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

 Ministry of Education Sector Plan 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5185 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5185 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


