
























































Hansard: March 24, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 38B  MONDAY, MARCH 24, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4849 
 March 24, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 
recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
Mr. Cox: — Back again by popular demand. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I believe I left off this afternoon talking 
about how appreciative the residents of Saskatchewan were 
with the debt reduction that we’ve accumulated since we’ve 
taken power — interest savings of approximately $1 billion. 
 
I’d like to move on now and talk about the fourth pillar of this 
budget, which is investment and infrastructure. And the fifth 
pillar, this budget invests in people, Mr. Speaker. Now I would 
like to elaborate just a little bit on the last two components of 
this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget outlines how we plan to implement 
many of the commitments featured in our Throne Speech of last 
fall. It is of significance to note here that we have a plan. For 
those in this Chamber not familiar with that concept or even 
how to spell it, that’s p-l-a-n, plan. You know, Mr. Speaker, that 
is what originally attracted me to this party. We have a plan. 
Back I think it was in ’04-05, our leader at that time, and now 
the Premier of this great province, had a plan called a vision for 
the future. Now we have continued our planning with our new 
growth plan, 2020 and beyond. We have set ambitious goals 
and we have mapped a path to achieve those goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a sharp contrast from the members opposite 
with no vision, no plan. Just like several years ago, when then 
Health minister Len Taylor was questioned by media about the 
sad state of health care, he commented something to the effect, 
there’s no sense setting targets because we probably can’t reach 
them anyway. That’s not an attitude you’ll find in this 
government, Mr. Speaker. We set targets. We set goals, and we 
have a plan to achieve them. 
 
Let’s highlight a little bit about our investment in infrastructure 
before I conclude with comments on our investments in people. 
In this summary budget, we see a grand total of $2.9 billion in 
capital investment. That is composed of nearly $887 million in 
government capital projects like schools, highways, and health 
care. We have also committed $2 billion for Crown investments 
like SaskTel, SaskPower, and SaskEnergy. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
we did inherit a huge infrastructure deficit of some $16 billion 
but we are addressing it. Our highways budget alone this year 

will be $664.5 million, with 405 million of that going to capital 
projects. But we know we have more to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a little time to 
reference some of the commitments we have made to invest in 
people in this province. Mr. Speaker, the accounting professor 
opposite says our budget offers crumbs to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I would just like to read a quote here, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is from Murray Mandryk on CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] radio on March the 21st. And he’s 
talking on the budget day criticisms, and I quote: 
 

I thought their criticism generally was really bad. I don’t 
think it was focused. They were talking about families and 
this was a budget that really didn’t hit families hard. 

 
I totally agree with him on that. Mr. Speaker. I took the liberty 
of googling the word crumb and I found two definitions: (1) a 
tiny bit of something, and (2) a small particle. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s take a look at those crumbs, some of those tiny 
bits or particles in this budget. 
 
I wonder if First Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan 
would call the $189 million — an increase of 4.4 million from 
last year — contained in this budget to help improve their 
quality of life, their opportunity for employment, their 
educational achievements, would they call that a crumb? Not 
likely, Mr. Speaker. What about funding such as $1 million for 
pre-K programs for high-needs areas or 15.3 million for 
on-reserve policing or 6 million to address the 
recommendations outlined in the joint task force? Not 
something that they would call crumbs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Something I noted in this budget was $11 million targeted for 
qualified independent schools, historical high schools, and our 
Sakewew First Nations High School located in my constituency 
of The Battlefords. I wonder if the students of those institutions 
would call the $11 million a crumb? I don’t think so. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our programs are working. We are seeing 
progress. In June of 2012, 13.2 per cent of apprentices were of 
Aboriginal descent. As late as mid-February of this year, 2,000 
students at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] were 
self-declared Aboriginals. That’s nearly 10 per cent of the total 
enrolment. And speaking of students, Mr. Speaker, $82 million 
in funding for the grad retention program that benefited some 
55 students, they may not call that a crumb either. 
 
Last week I had a friend of mine come down to hear the budget 
speech, Mr. Speaker, and he brought his daughter with him. 
She’s a second year commerce student at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She was talking about her older brother who was 
graduating I believe this year, very focused on staying here in 
Saskatchewan and very, very much appreciative of the 
opportunity to apply for the grad retention program that can be 
. . . It’s a great program that allows students to stay in this 
province and get up to $20,000 back. Yesterday I met a young 
lady who’s a third year nursing student at the U of S as well, 
and both she and her mother were very excited about the 
prospect of being able to apply to get some funding back. She’s 
looking forward to coming back to The Battlefords and 
practising in our own Union Hospital. I’m very happy to see 



4850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

that. 
 
Add to this funding, Mr. Speaker, $7.5 million commitment for 
the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings and a 
$7 million commitment for the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship. That’s what this government does for our students. 
Coupled with the 134 million in student support programs 
overall, there is an increase in funding for the post-secondary 
institutions, a 3.79 per cent increase or $16.8 million, which 
brings our total investment to $668 million. 
 
Something that school boards in my area have asked for is 
funding to increase a community bandwidth for rural schools. 
We have responded with an $11.3 million to do just that. That’s 
not a crumb, Mr. Speaker. No, I don’t think it is. Nor is the $2.2 
million for 500 new child care spaces or the 2.1 million increase 
for the adult basic education seats, which brings our total seats 
to 8,250. I think those people who have been long waiting to get 
into those adult basic education seats so that they can 
participate in the opportunities available here in Saskatchewan, 
I think they would strongly disagree with that opposition 
member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our funding and our support for social programs in 
this province are making a difference. This year we have 
committed $8.7 million to families, youth, and children at risk. 
That’s a total of 62.5 million since 2011 which, by the way, was 
new funding at that time. 
 
We are ever increasing our support for our seniors with another 
increase in the seniors’ income plan to $260 a month for 
individuals and $225 a month for a couple. Mr. Speaker, this is 
in sharp contrast to that NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government that never increased that rate for 16 long years. 
 
Today a family of four earning $75,000 in this province pays 
the lowest amount in Canada for taxes and utilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this 2014-15 budget, we are committing a total 
of 394.6 million to our municipal authorities. That’s an increase 
of 152.7 million from ’07-08 which represents an increase of 
over 63 per cent. From our last budget in 2013-14, we have 
increased spending to municipalities by $32.8 million. I don’t 
think any of our municipal leaders will call that a crumb. 
 
In my constituency, the amount of revenue sharing to the city of 
North Battleford has increased from 1.16 million in ’07-08 to 
today’s figure of 2.87 million. For the town of Battleford 
similar increases, from $407,000 in ’07-08 to $883,000 today. 
Overall in this province, Mr. Speaker, municipal revenue 
sharing has doubled since the ’07-08 budget. Such funding 
provides much needed support for libraries, policing, 
transportation, parks, rinks, and numerous other programs. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a few comments on this 
government’s commitment to health care for all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. Our 2014-15 health care budget is 
approximately 40 per cent of our core funding. At $5 billion, it 
is up $144 million or 3 per cent over last year. 
 
Spending allocated to regional health authorities is up $107.5 
million to 3.25 billion, a 3.4 per cent increase. Our funding for 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency this year alone is $155.7 

million, Mr. Speaker. And as someone who is keenly interested 
in the work done by that agency, I certainly don’t consider that 
a crumb. 
 
Now again closer to home, I was delighted to see committed 
funding of $2.5 million for ongoing planning for our 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. This is indeed good 
news for all those anxious to see that new hospital become a 
reality. 
 
And speaking of our Saskatchewan Hospital, that brings to 
mind another issue we hear about in this Assembly quite often 
lately. We hear a lot of criticism from the Leader of the 
Opposition and his colleagues about how are our efforts to 
provide the best possible health care to patients in the most 
efficient manner. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I, along with my colleague from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford, have attended three different 3P [production 
preparation process] planning sessions and our Health minister 
attended the final report out. You know what? I have never seen 
a member of that opposition in attendance at any of these 
week-long planning sessions. I really feel that before he can 
criticize our lean initiative he should at least attend one of these 
report outs. He would quickly see that the amount of effort and 
work that front-line workers contribute to this process. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, they are guided by consultants from John 
Black and Associates, who also come and provide much needed 
expertise to this planning. And I must say that at all three of 
those sessions I didn’t see one single paper airplane flying 
around — not one. It is truly amazing to see the interaction 
between various components involved in providing health care 
in that facility. Whether it was doctors, nurses, psychologists, 
dietary staff, housekeeping, maintenance, clerical, and the 
patients themselves, they all had input in how to run the best, 
most efficient hospital possible. I think the opposition would be 
well-advised to listen to some of their comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close I would like to offer my sincere 
thank you to everyone who worked so hard at preparing this 
steady growth budget, from the months of deliberation by our 
treasury board to the hours of meetings and all of the work our 
Finance ministry staff has dedicated, and certainly to our 
Finance minister. 
 
I think Murray Mandryk summed it up best on CBC on March 
the 19th when he said, “I actually love what Ken Krawetz has 
been able to accomplish in this, perhaps his last budget.” Well I 
certainly don’t agree with that final comment, but that’s all 
right. Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, “He might be the best 
Finance minister I’ve seen at managing the line-by-line costs.” I 
certainly agree with that final comment, and I concur 100 per 
cent. 
 
I would strongly urge our NDP members opposite to vote in 
favour of this budget. How could they vote against such things 
as a $2.9 billion investment in infrastructure, funding for 
schools and senior homes in their own constituencies, $189 
million funding for First Nations and Métis people, a highway 
budget of $664.5 million, senior income plan increased to 260 a 
month? How can they oppose $394.6 million in support for 
municipalities, 52.4 million increase in education funding, 2.1 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4851 

million for adult basic education seats, and finally a 3 per cent 
increase in health care spending to $5 billion? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could they get up in the morning and look at 
themselves in the mirror if they oppose this budget? I know that 
I couldn’t do that. So that is why I’ll be voting in favour of this 
motion, and I strongly oppose the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always I’m very honoured to be able to rise in this Assembly 
and have an opportunity to comment on the actions of this 
government, in this particular case on the budget that was 
released last week. And I have a number of comments that I 
look forward to sharing with the Assembly this evening and 
certainly with the folks at home who will have an opportunity to 
view this broadcast or look at it in Hansard at some point in the 
future. So I’m anxious to get on the record and provide my 
comments. 
 
One of the things I thought I’d start with, Mr. Speaker, is 
perhaps giving the rest of the speech that the Finance minister 
never gave. And when we heard him speak last week he spoke a 
lot about the increases in funding that you find scattered 
throughout the budget document. And I thought maybe we 
should look at some of the decreases as well because he didn’t 
speak a whole about those. 
 
So I’ve highlighted quite a few of the areas in this budget, 
because we know it’s a razor-thin budget and I got thinking, if 
there’s that much increase in spending in those areas, there’s 
got to be decreases elsewhere. So I thought, well where would 
those decreases be? And I just went through and highlighted 
quite a few of them, and I’d like to share them with the 
Assembly and certainly to get those on the record as well. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So if you start on page 15 of the Estimates, we see there’s a 
schedule of capital investments by ministry. And the first one 
that jumps out at me is the estimated capital investment 
spending by the Ministry of Education. And there we see a 
decrease of $23 million. So that’s a fairly significant decrease in 
spending. If you go further down the line we see Government 
Relations — and this is just capital investments — there’s going 
to be a decrease in spending there of 3 million. In Health there’s 
a decrease in capital spending of about $70 million. In Justice 
we see a decrease in spending of about $7 million and in Parks, 
Culture and Sport there’s also a decrease of about 2 million if 
you take out the 50 million that’s being used for the new 
stadium. And in Social Services we see a decrease of $3 million 
in capital investments, in terms of what was spent last year to 
this year. 
 
So there’s quite a few decreases there. In Health in particular, if 
you want to break it down a little bit, we see a decrease in 
spending on long-term care facilities of almost $50,000. It was 
70 million forecast last year and estimated this year is 27 
million. So I guess that’s about $43 million there. On hospital 
projects, we see last year was $50,000, this year . . . or $50 

million and this year is down to 16 million. So there’s a fairly 
large decease in capital investments in terms of hospital projects 
and long-term care facilities. 
 
There’s a number of other ones. For example, in Social Services 
we see a decrease in case management project of about $4 
million. We also see a decrease of almost $4 million in the 
transition from Valley View Centre and we know there’s still a 
lot of work to be done there, Mr. Speaker. So those are just 
some of the capital investment decreases that the minister didn’t 
talk about in his speech. 
 
Now if we want to go to the votes themselves, if we look at the 
Agriculture estimate, we see a significant number of decreases 
there. In research and technology, it’s down 1 million. In land 
management, it’s down about 2.3 million. And of course, the 
biggest decrease in the Agriculture vote is in business risk 
management which is down almost $40 million. And we know 
some of the reasons why that is happening, Mr. Speaker. But 
certainly it’s not a good sign when we see those kinds of 
decreases in those kinds of programs in the Agriculture vote. 
 
Then I’m going to move on now to vote 13, which is Central 
Services. Where do we see decreases there? Well vehicle 
services is down, well not a whole lot, about $150,000. 
Courthouses project management, down over $10 million. So 
that’s a bit of a decrease. Property management is down a 
couple of million dollars in the operations of property under 
Central Services. So those are some of the things that the 
Finance minister didn’t talk about. 
 
In the Economy, which is vote 23 in the Estimates, we see a 
decrease there. Revenue and corporate services is down $8.3 
million, Mr. Speaker, so that’s a decrease that the Minister of 
Finance didn’t talk about when he gave his speech. 
 
We do see in the Economy though, on page 41 of the Estimates 
something that is I think a good thing. I’m very happy to see 
and it’s an expense that is long overdue, and that’s the 
remediation of contaminated sites. And we do see an estimate 
of around $5.3 million this year to begin that work. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly think that is a good thing and an increase 
that is one that’s long overdue. 
 
Also in the Economy, we see an actual cut in half of the ethanol 
fuel tax rebate. So rather than it costing $16 million, it’s down 
to $8 million. And that’s an allocation for that tax rebate. No 
indication from the Minister of Finance why or why that is 
occurring, but of course we’ll have an opportunity in committee 
to ask more questions about some of these. 
 
We even see the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
being cut, in terms of economic development, and that’s despite 
what we know this government professes to be in terms of its 
aggression in seeking out new markets for export. So that’s 
interesting. 
 
Also in the Economy, these are some interesting numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. We see $2 million less in youth and adult skills 
training. We see a couple of million dollars less in skills 
training benefits, and we see about half a million dollars less in 
immigration. These are under labour market development 
initiatives. So I’m not sure. I know we have a work shortage 



4852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

here. And why those numbers are lower, we don’t have any 
information from this Minister of Finance. So we’ll have to ask 
those questions, as well, in committee. 
 
In Education we see pretty much a status quo in vote 5, but we 
know that teacher benefits and pensions are a big part of that, 
and that if you see a status quo budget with inflation as it is and 
costs associated with teacher benefits and pensions, it’s 
probably a cut as well. 
 
And I mentioned earlier some of the capital acquisitions. The 
budget for Education is quite a bit down. It’s down $17 million 
in terms of capital asset acquisitions. So it’s on page 45 of the 
budget, if the member opposite wants to have a look at that. So 
vote 5, page 45, capital asset acquisitions last year for 
Education were $38 million and they’re down $17 million now, 
to $21 million. So that’s what it says on that page, Mr. Speaker 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We’re talking about this budget 
and if the member wants to be reminded, we’re in 2014. So 
maybe we should move forward a little bit. Move forward to 
2014. 
 
Also we see a cut in central management and services in 
Education by about $300,000. So there’s another cut that the 
minister didn’t talk about. 
 
Now let’s move to the Environment. There’s some very 
significant cuts here, Mr. Speaker, ones that are quite alarming 
when you hear the rhetoric coming from that side in terms of 
how they’re advocates for environmental protection and saving 
our future environment. And I think this is really appalling 
when you want to really look at it. Climate change, that’s one of 
the top-of-mind issues for many, many people these days and 
we see here a cut in this budget of about $1.5 million. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s on top of a cut of, I think it was around 15 
million if I had my information, from when they first started, 
and they’re now down to $2.8 million. 
 
So it’s really alarming and concerning when you see this 
government trying to blow its own horn on its environmental 
record and then you see these kinds of cuts in these valuable 
programs. 
 
Let’s look a little further. Wildlife management, what do we see 
there? A cut of $6 million, $6 million in wildfire management. 
And this is our North, Mr. Speaker. So it’s something that we 
need to be more protective of and we certainly don’t see . . . 
Kind of hard to hear myself over this rattle, Mr. Speaker, but 
it’s kind of entertaining as well, I suppose. Should I perhaps sit 
down and have a little listen? Interesting. 
 
The other thing I want to point out in terms of the staff 
complement on a lot of these, if you look over the years since 
this government came into control, and I think it coincided with 
their desire to have this lean program, was that they chose an 
arbitrary number of 15 per cent, 15 per cent cut in the public 
service with no rhyme or reason. Just a number pulled out of a 
hat. 
 
So you see these cuts happening all over the place and we see it 
again this year. In Environment there’s definitely a cut in staff. 
The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund staff are now gone 
from that vote, so God knows where the money’s coming from 

for that. I know they’ve off-loaded it onto the fish and wildlife 
folks that are now taking over the management of that fund. So 
those costs are buried somewhere and it’s I guess our job as the 
opposition to kind of try and find out where those costs went. 
But certainly we know that when you see cuts in staff in a 
ministry, the contracts are somewhere out there. So it’s very 
concerning. 
 
Further on in Environment, if we look at something like even 
reforestation, we see a cut of $300,000. This is concerning. We 
know that the backlog in reforestation is decades old. And when 
you see these kinds of cuts, it’s concerning. 
 
We hear some of the members talk about how their children are 
finding jobs here in the province because of this government. 
But this is one of the cases where this government has chosen a 
tendering policy that’s given preferential treatment to some 
out-of-province companies. And in fact, my son won’t be able 
plant trees in Saskatchewan this year because there isn’t enough 
work and the local company he’s worked for won’t be able to 
hire him. So he actually has to go to Alberta to do his summer 
work so that he can go back to university in the fall. 
 
So it’s not all, you know, wine and roses, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think we have to be careful to point that out. That’s certainly the 
role that we serve here on this side, is to shine a light on all the 
activities that are located within this budget. 
 
Another example here of a huge cut in Environment, vote 26, is 
on page 54 and we see the forest fire capital projects cut by $6.2 
million. That’s a very large cut for that kind of wildfire 
management. I mentioned it earlier, but that’s exactly where it’s 
coming out of is the forest fire capital projects. So we’re going 
to have a lot of questions for the minister when it comes to 
committee so we have a chance to find out what exactly is 
meant by all these estimates. 
 
In the Finance vote which is vote 18, there was an interesting 
line, and this isn’t so much something the Minister of Finance 
didn’t talk about because it’s not a decrease, but what it is is a 
tax credit. And it kind of caught my eye because we know how 
much this Premier is against tax credits. He seemed to take 
great exception to it when he eliminated the film employment 
tax credit and was very vocal about his concern about tax 
credits and how detrimental . . . or somehow that it was like a 
grant, and he took great offence to that. 
 
Well there is a $15 million tax credit in this budget under vote 
18 for the research and development tax credit. So somehow 
that may have escaped the attention of the Premier because we 
know he’s ideologically opposed to tax credits. Or somehow 
maybe the Minister of Finance convinced him that this was one 
that he shouldn’t get too upset about and leave it in the budget. 
At any rate, it’s described as a tax credit support for 
corporations that invest in research and development to 
encourage economic growth and diversification in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’re going to want to take a really close look at that and 
see if it is delivering the same kind of benefit that we would 
have seen with the film employment tax credit, which basically 
supported an industry that brought significant returns to the 
province of Saskatchewan, both financially, economically, but 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4853 

also in the other capital that we are so proud of, and that’s our 
sense of self and who we are as a province. So that’s a 
significant loss and we’ll want to ask the ministers, I think, a 
little bit more about why the inconsistency in their approach to 
tax credits. 
 
Vote 30 is Government Relations. Where do we see the cuts 
there that the Minister of Finance didn’t talk about? Well 
municipal and northern engagement is down $12 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s something that’s got to wave a real 
big flag for the folks of the North when we see that kind of cut, 
$12 million cut in that program for Government Relations 
where, you know, we know that the North is an area that 
struggles to begin with, and to see a cut of $12 million in that 
kind of engagement is something that is quite concerning. 
 
There’s more detail on that in terms of the . . . page 71 where 
that line item is described a little bit further. But we see cuts in 
urban revenue sharing, cuts in rural revenue sharing. We see a 
cut in the major infrastructure component of the Building 
Canada Fund. We see another cut in the Saskatchewan 
infrastructure growth initiative. So those are a lot of the cuts I 
think that this Finance minister had to make in order to be able 
to talk to us last week about some of the other funding 
initiatives that he did leave in the budget. 
 
Under Health there’s some interesting cuts. I talked about the 
decrease in infrastructure funding. We see a $77 million 
decrease in provincial infrastructure projects. And there’s also a 
decrease — this is vote 32 on page 75 of the Estimates — we 
see a decrease of $3 million in the drug plan and extended 
benefits. And now I don’t think that people are less sick now 
than they were; at least we certainly haven’t heard this 
government claim that. So I think on a projection basis, in terms 
of the growth in population, we’re certainly going to have a lot 
of questions about why there’s a $3 million decrease in the drug 
plan. 
 
Again, I mentioned earlier that capital asset acquisitions for the 
Ministry of Health are down about $80 million. We know there 
was lots of talk of projects and lots of talk of plans in terms of 
health infrastructure, but we certainly don’t see any of that in 
this budget. So we’ll have a lot of questions about that as well. 
 
In terms of provincial health services, we see a drop of $4 
million to the Canadian Blood Services. We see a drop of $4 
million in immunizations. And again, who knows what’s going 
on? The minister certainly didn’t talk about it in his speech, so 
we will have to ask a significant number of questions on that. 
And I’m sure our able Health critic will be doing exactly that in 
the estimates for Health. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Another one that’s very interesting that I’m really surprised the 
minister didn’t talk about is Innovation Saskatchewan. This is a 
flagship for this government, something they’ve been very 
proud of in terms of being, I guess, innovative. And they also 
had the Enterprise Saskatchewan were kind of their two 
flagships. We saw Enterprise Saskatchewan sink last year I 
think in the budget. It’s now been sunk. 
 
And now Innovation Saskatchewan has taken a huge, huge hit. 

Last year the estimates for programs in Innovation 
Saskatchewan were $28 million. This year they are under $12 
million. That is a decrease in over $16 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a huge change and we see most of that is in the program 
side of the vote. That’s vote 84 on page 90. And we’re going to 
have a lot of questions about why they’re scuttling this ship as 
well because we know it was one of the flagships of this 
government. But why are they cutting it by, what did I say, $16 
million? And when we’re talking about a budget that is 
proposing a surplus of $71 million, you can see very quickly, 
Mr. Speaker, how all these cuts are having a significant impact 
on the bottom line for this government. 
 
Let’s go to Justice, vote 3: major capital projects there also 
down $8 million from last year. So there’s cuts for the Justice 
folks. Although we do see, and this was an interesting one, I 
think my colleague from Lakeview mentioned it when he spoke 
to the budget, but the justices of the peace salaries have gone up 
by $2.5 million. So I think that’s something that’s been long 
overdue. And I keep thinking those are the guys who marry us, 
but they also do a lot of important things in the court system as 
well. 
 
Another vote that’s close to my area and I’m responsible for as 
a critic is the Parks, Culture and Sport vote, vote no. 27. And 
we see a number of programs here that have taken a real hit. 
And certainly I want to be able to have an opportunity to ask 
questions of the minister about these decisions when we have 
the estimates in committee. 
 
We see the Community Initiatives Fund is down $2 million. We 
see building communities is down $2.4 million. We see the 
Culture budget is down $3 million, and we also see the 
Provincial Capital Commission budget is now down $3 million 
as well. And then there is also . . . yes, I think overall it’s about 
$8 million that we see cut from the Parks, Culture and Sport 
budget on those programs. 
 
So we do see a $50 million increase in the Regina stadium 
project, which makes the numbers look a little more interesting 
when you look at the bottom line. But when you drill down into 
what’s going on in the other programs, other than the Regina 
stadium project, we see that there is a loss of about $8 million 
in this one ministry alone, Mr. Speaker. Very concerning, and 
certainly we’re going to have a lot of questions about that. 
 
We’re also just keeping an eye on staffing. We see, you know, 
with the numbers that there used to be several more people 
working in this ministry, and it’s hard to measure from year to 
year because Parks was in and Parks was out and all those 
things. But we know that overall the full-time equivalent 
staffing is dropping, and certainly that means less programs and 
less services available for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We see even in the Community Initiatives Fund — which, if I 
understand this correctly, is the profits from the casino — this 
year those are down a couple of hundred thousand dollars as 
well. So those profits are decreasing or at least whatever is 
being provided to the Community Initiatives Fund. So again 
those are just some of the things we noticed in the Parks, 
Culture and Sport vote. 
 
Another interesting increase that we I think heard the minister 



4854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

talk about a little bit was the vote 86, and that’s the SaskBuilds 
Corporation. And we know this is the way this government is 
managing their expensive P3 [public-private partnership] 
projects. And certainly my colleague from Regina Rosemont is 
being very diligent in examining those things, and I’ll talk about 
that a little bit more later. But there one of the increases is to 
support this government’s efforts to enter in some complex and 
unnecessary P3 projects that don’t have the accountability or 
the transparency that we think that they need. 
 
Social Services, we see some cuts as well. For example in client 
support there’s a $5 million decrease. And why is that, Mr. 
Speaker? We didn’t hear from the Minister of Finance, and 
we’re not sure why, but we’ll certainly be taking a look at that. 
If you go closer, you’ll see it’s in case management project and 
it’s actually down $5 million. So there’s another $5 million. 
 
Also in housing and program delivery it’s also dropped $1 
million. So these are the kinds of programs that a lot of people 
in need rely on. When we see million-dollar cuts in program 
delivery we have to be concerned, Mr. Speaker. And those are 
the kinds of things that the Minister of Finance did not talk 
about when he was making his presentation to the Assembly the 
other day. 
 
So I know that he didn’t have a lot of time to talk about all of 
those things, but you’d think he would have mentioned a few of 
them. But he seemed to focus, as is his right, on what you could 
call the rosy side of things.  
 
But you know, we know that with this kind of thin budget, I 
guess he’s just got to sell it. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. And so 
we know that he’s giving a little rah-rah, and there’s lots of 
cheerleaders over there as well. I think maybe the government 
might want to start handing out pompoms because there’s lots 
of cheerleading going on. But really, we have to take a very 
close look. Why is it that this government’s revenues are . . . In 
fact I can talk about that next because I’m going to move on 
here a little bit. 
 
When I examine the numbers that were provided in the 
documentation, we see that this government is calling this 
budget Steady Growth. But really, Mr. Speaker, the only thing I 
can see that’s growing is the debt. And if you look at it, the 
charts are going way up here. So perhaps people want to take a 
look at this. But if you look at the statements on schedule of 
debt, that’s on page 66 of the . . . What is this called? Steady 
Growth . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I think, yes, the member 
of Walsh Acres might want to turn to page 66 and have a look 
at that. 
 
What do we see for the budget forecast for debt last year? We 
saw about $4.4 billion was last year’s public debt forecast. 
What happened? This year it went up. It’s now at $4.643 
billion. So we’ve lost . . . The debt has gone up $300 million 
just in public debt of treasury board organizations. And then if 
you want to go down to the bottom of the page, and when you 
include the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] Crown organizations, we see that public debt 
has actually gone up, that would be $1.6 billion. That’s just in 
the public debt in the last year. So yes, $1.532 billion is what 
we see in terms of steady growth for this government. 
 

So that’s one of the things that I’ve found really hard to 
understand when we’re talking about steady growth because 
revenues have not increased a whole lot. We see a lot of what 
the deputy minister of Finance referred to as volatile 
assumptions. And if you look on page 36 of the main document 
here, they have indicated that there are several assumptions 
built into the current forecast that present both upside and 
downside risks. Crop production, for example, is significantly 
impacted by weather and is therefore highly volatile. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they went far enough here 
because we know that crop production is volatile but so is crop 
pricing. And if you look at the commodity price assumptions 
for wheat and canola, for example, we see an actual being 
presented for 2013 for wheat per metric ton was $257 per 
metric ton. Last week the price on wheat was $220 metric ton, 
which is lower than this year’s prediction. We’re already a 
quarter of the way into the year. Three weeks ago it was $176 
per metric ton. So the experts that I’ve spoken to feel that these 
assumptions are quite aggressive and quite optimistic. And 
certainly we’ll be keeping an eye on that. 
 
But you know, these kinds of assumptions will have a real 
impact on the bottom line when the actual numbers come in. 
We know that this is a budget and these are simply projections, 
and this government has to do the right thing from their view 
and spin it as well as they can. We certainly saw that from the 
Minister of Finance in terms of what he focused his comments 
on. 
 
But we know that this is a very volatile budget based on some 
volatile pricing. We saw it in the decline in potash prices last 
year. And with the grain transportation catastrophe as it’s now 
sitting, I’m not sure that these prices are going to be ones that 
will hold out. So we’ll certainly be keeping an eye on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another thing that really kind of struck me as odd, and I think 
it’s kind of clever as a matter of fact, is the very bold statement 
that there are no new taxes in this budget. Because there is a 
new tax; it’s called the oil and natural gas well levy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if you look up a levy, anyone who looks up levy, the 
definition in the Collins Thesaurus of the English Language 
says that a levy is a tax. You know, so maybe some of the 
members opposite would call it a tax, but we know that this is a 
tax. 
 
And these are fees that were being paid, prior to this tax being 
imposed on the oil and gas people, it was paid by the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan. It’s directed, it’s a tax that’s directed 
specifically to certain activities but, Mr. Speaker, it’s a tax. And 
I think it’s a bit cute or coy for this government to suggest that 
there are no new taxes. We know that this is going to bring in 
another $120 million, I think, into the coffers. And if it wasn’t 
for this levy, we wouldn’t have a balanced budget, at least 
balanced in terms of how this government describes it. 
 
So a levy is a tax. And I think it’s a bit disappointing that this 
government chose to say there’s no new taxes in this budget, 
when clearly there are. And certainly it’s an appropriate tax. I 
think it’s important for the oil and gas industry to pay their 
share. These are expensive, expensive procedures that have to 
be covered. And as the document indicates, it’s going to help 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4855 

maintain a competitive, efficient, and effective regulatory 
regime. And that’s exactly the kind of thing that these types of 
taxes are for, and should be in place. And in fact we’d like to 
see more action on regulation in the oil and gas area, and we’ll 
certainly be asking more questions on that once we have an 
opportunity in estimates and in the committee stages to do so, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re looking forward to that. 
 
Another disappointing feature, I think, for everyone in 
Saskatchewan was the failure of this government to start acting 
on Peter MacKinnon’s recommendations in the heritage fund 
proposals. And I think a lot of people, certainly people I talked 
to in Saskatoon Nutana are very interested in, why is that 
Norway can do this and we can’t? And Norway has a very 
active oil and gas industry. They have a very strong social net. 
We see that they’re very progressive in terms of issues facing 
people in terms of poverty and addictions and they seem to be 
way ahead of us. And people are asking me, why is it this 
government, with all the money that’s flowing in from all the 
different natural resources that we have, why can’t we have a 
heritage fund too? 
 
So that’s something else that I think this government really let 
the people of Saskatchewan down on. They haven’t been able to 
figure out how to benefit people in the future from the riches 
and the resources that the people of Saskatchewan are 
extracting today. And it’s certainly, I think, quite disappointing 
on the part of this government that they weren’t able to act on 
those recommendations. And based on what we see, they may 
never be able to do it. So there’s something seriously wrong 
over there if they can’t figure out how to get this heritage fund 
happening, considering that most of these resources are not 
renewable and certainly won’t be here in the future once they’re 
extracted. 
 
I know that, Mr. Speaker, you’ll recall that just before the 
budget was released, the opposition listed a number of priorities 
that we were hoping we would see in this budget. And 
disappointingly, I think, others of my colleagues have pointed 
out, only one of the seven on our must-have list actually made 
the list and made it into the budget, and that’s disappointing. 
We were certainly looking for an end to those contracts, the 
cash-rich contracts for consultants when they’re implementing 
efficiency procedures such as the lean program. And we know 
there’s lots of ways to deliver these kinds of programs and 
different ways to implement them. But certainly what we’re 
hearing from the choices that are being made from this 
government on that contract are disappointing and we were 
hoping to see a change of heart there. We haven’t seen it. 
 
Another thing that we were very disappointed was we 
introduced Bill 606 for minimum standards, one-on-one care 
minimum requirements for seniors in long-term care. And I 
think that’s probably the most disappointing for me of all of our 
lists, Mr. Speaker, is the failure of this government to recognize 
the importance of providing those seniors with those rights and 
ensuring that they’re enshrined in the budget document but also 
in recognizing it in legislation. And it’s very disappointing to 
see that this government fails to take those seriously and 
implement something that the seniors can rely on and count on. 
And there’s families as well. We hear stories of people who are 
struggling to find care for their loved ones and in many cases 
are being told there is no options for them. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not where we want to be here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[19:45] 
 
We wanted to see the rerouting of the standardized testing 
money into teaching and assistance for students, maybe 
increasing the number of educational assistants, and what we 
see is just a change of the name. At least that’s something we’re 
going to have to dig into once we have a chance in estimates, 
Mr. Speaker. But disappointed to see that there seems to still be 
some money allocated for testing rather than investing in 
students. 
 
On the education front, we were also hoping, and as we’ve been 
calling for is a plan. That’s spelled p-l-a-n. A plan to reduce 
class sizes. A plan to implement appropriate class-size caps and 
prioritizing early years. We don’t see any kind of plan at all on 
that front, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a void and it’s something we 
called for and we’re very disappointed that there isn’t a plan in 
this budget for that type of priority. 
 
We wanted an acceptance of the transparency and 
accountability bill that we brought in for the P3 system because 
we know that those kinds of systems are going to cause a lot of 
problems for this government. We’re calling it ill-advised and 
we would like to see more thought rather than just firing more 
money into SaskBuilds, Mr. Speaker. Maybe we could do some 
proper research and this government could take a careful look at 
some of the failures in the P3 scheme and make sure that the 
deal that’s for our people and for our students and for our 
children is one that’s appropriate. 
 
We wanted no increase to the education tax. That was the one 
bullet that we were happy to see is that this government sent up 
a lead balloon I guess and thought that they’d float this idea of 
increasing education tax to pay for infrastructure. Obviously 
that was not well received. And I’m not sure of the reason why 
they did that because I don’t think they ever really intended to 
do it but they were just sort of distracting people from some of 
the realities in this budget in terms of the cuts that have had to 
be made and shrugging their shoulders and saying, well you 
know, no new taxes — although there is new taxes. So we’re 
stuck with this hold-the-line kind of budget. 
 
And finally the last bullet we had asked for was an action to 
address the high costs of living and increased out-of-pocket 
expenses for Saskatchewan families who’ve been paying more 
for fewer services from the government. And we know there’s 
seniors’ care is up. There is more for supplies, more for kids’ 
classrooms. SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, they’re all 
getting more expensive. And we really hoped that we would see 
a budget that didn’t only talk about the province but actually 
talk about people and the effect that the rising costs of living is 
having for families here in the province. 
 
So fairly disappointing on that side, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
I think it’s something that we’re going to keep talking about and 
hoping to see an improvement on, but it’s not entirely obvious 
that that’s going to be the case. 
 
I think that’s . . . I’m getting pretty much near the end of my 
comments here, Mr. Speaker, but at this point I just wanted say 
some thank yous. Many of my colleagues are taking the 



4856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

opportunity to do that and I would like to do that as well. 
 
First and foremost, I want to thank my family. So my son Sam, 
he is in grade 12 this year, wrapping up high school and he’s 
doing a great job and certainly able to manage without mom 
around when we’re here. But on that account, I also want to 
thank his dad who definitely holds things together when I’m not 
around, so I really appreciate that. And Sam’s pretty good at 
looking after himself too. So I’m thankful for a good kid to 
leave every time we come down here to Regina. 
 
Also thankful for my constituency assistant, Deb Aitken. She’s 
almost been with me for a year now. She started in April last 
year and she’s definitely made the office a bright place and 
certainly is keen to help out the people of Saskatoon Nutana. 
And she’s done a great job dealing with all of the concerns that 
people bring to our office. 
 
I also really want to pass a big thanks to our caucus staff. And 
as is obvious, we are small in number, and I think I’ve said it 
before, but we consider, you know, ourselves to be fairly 
nimble and we really have to be. I’ve got three ministries that 
I’m responsible for in terms of critic area plus a number of 
Crown agencies and corporations. All my colleagues carry a 
fairly heavy load in terms of the work that we’re asked to do, 
and we wouldn’t survive without our caucus staff. So a really 
big thanks to all the folks back in the caucus office who have 
been helping us out and supporting us as we do our job as the 
official opposition just to hold the light to the activities of this 
government and to continue to shine a light on the activities and 
the decisions that this government makes. 
 
And I also, you know, I think there’s a lot of people who are 
supporting us out in the province and I want to thank the people 
who take the time to bring their concerns to our attention and 
really care about what happens here in the province and 
understand the role that politics and this Legislative Assembly 
plays in their lives. There’s a lot of people who don’t get 
engaged, and I really would like to see more people engaged 
and I’m thankful for those who do. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, based on the comments I’ve 
presented tonight and our disappointment in a number of the 
initiatives that we don’t see in this budget, I won’t be able to 
support this budget and I certainly would encourage the 
Assembly to consider the reasoned amendment that the official 
opposition has introduced. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join in the debate on the budget, Mr. Speaker, and a 
great budget it is. But before I get into the details I’d like to 
speak to specifically tonight, I am going to take the opportunity, 
as the member opposite did at the end of her comments, at the 
start of mine to say a couple of thank yous. 
 
We get to take to the floor to talk about our constituencies and 
the important things that are going on in our province a couple 
of times of year and I think it’s important that we also take 
these times to thank the team that we have to help provide the 
services that all of us do in our constituency offices. Marilyn 

and Caren in my office in Lloydminster do a great service to the 
people of Lloydminster. They provide a service of representing 
the citizens of Lloydminster to the government as opposed to 
what sometimes happens I think, Mr. Speaker, in some 
governments, where you’re representing the government in the 
city which you represent. And Caren and Marilyn are two very 
engaged, involved community leaders and to have them in my 
office is a great pleasure to work with them and I appreciate 
them very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also an opportunity I think to thank those in our 
families that help out a great deal. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that I don’t do often enough and when I do do it, I 
usually screw it up and end up embarrassing both myself and 
my wife and I hear about it when I get home. And I think it 
comes down to, we find it most difficult to thank those that we 
appreciate the most. And I certainly appreciate my wife very 
much and she does so much for me and enables me to represent 
my constituents in a way that I think is appropriate and, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s with her support and her guidance. She’s a great 
giver of advice, I can assure you. On occasion she’s a 
moderating voice, a voice of reason and calms me down, and on 
other points, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that she is a little bit 
polarizing and holds me to account on some of my positions as 
well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’d like to get into some discussion 
in general about the budget. I guess first off, we have a balanced 
budget, a budget that has come about with a great deal of work. 
I have the great pleasure of sitting on treasury board. That is the 
board, Mr. Speaker, that reviews the budgets of the different 
ministries, that has a great amount of discussion, and a 
committee that I think does a lot of good work. It’s a 
committee, Mr. Speaker, that is headed by our Finance minister 
and I’ve had the pleasure of being on his committee, his 
treasury board for three years now. And each year I think that 
the process gets better. 
 
It is a process in which discussion is encouraged, where debate, 
where disagreement is welcomed, and often there is passionate 
disagreement. But it’s also an environment where everybody’s 
voices are heard, everybody’s point of view is thoroughly 
vetted, and I think good decisions are made in that sort of 
environment. And I think that the quality of this budget is very 
reflective of the environment that our Finance minister sets in 
that and the tone that he personally sets on the importance of 
the decisions. The big decisions, the little decisions — they’re 
all big decisions, Mr. Speaker, with our Finance minister. And 
the courage that he brings to that job, it makes all members on 
treasury board, in cabinet, and in caucus, Mr. Speaker, really 
comfortable and allows everybody to put the input that they 
think is appropriate into a budget like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent the constituency of Lloydminster. A 
little bit of an overview on the changes and some of the things 
we’ve seen in Lloydminster in the past year. Lloydminster is a 
great city. It’s one of the fastest growing cities in the country 
over the last few years, even over the last 15, 20, 25 years. We 
are one of largest trading areas in the province. Maybe just a 
little bit bigger than my colleague from Yorkton. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t know. 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4857 

Mr. McMillan: — Well we’d be on par. We’d be very close, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But a couple of stats that I’ve recently come across about 
Lloydminster is, you know, I think a lot of people will know 
that we’ve seen disparity in growth on the Alberta and 
Saskatchewan sides of Lloydminster in the last 25, 30 years. 
But in the last six years, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the 
Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster grow as fast if not faster 
than the Alberta side. And I think that that speaks to a few 
things, but specifically I think it speaks to some taxation policy, 
some development policy, some confidence that people have in 
our province. But some of the demographics that are being 
driven, Mr. Speaker, are very unique. When we look at 
Lloydminster on the Saskatchewan side, the average age is 27.9 
years. When we look at the average age of people in 
Saskatchewan, it’s 38.2 years. People in Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan are a full decade younger on average than the rest 
of the province. 
 
The people on the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster are about 
seven years younger than the people who live on the Alberta 
side of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. Again I think this is 
reflective of tax rates. I think it is very reflective that 
Saskatchewan has the lowest income tax in the country for 
families, that we have the highest exemptions in the country. 
Families recognize this. They build their homes. They put 
investments in the ground following what is best for their 
families. And today they are choosing Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I think that we all can be very 
proud of that. 
 
In the same article in which that number comes out of, 
Lloydminster has an average family income of $109,000 per 
family. That’s a full 20 per cent higher than the national average 
family income. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing very young, 
ambitious people moving to Lloydminster, and I think they’re 
finding opportunity when they get there. They’re certainly 
finding employment that is compensating them in a very fair 
and good manner. 
 
This past year in Lloydminster, we have hosted some great 
events. We had the Hockey Day in Canada. It showcased our 
city, Mr. Speaker. It was an event viewed nationally. And I 
certainly heard from people that I know across the country that 
saw Lloydminster, saw Lloydminster in a very beautiful setting, 
in which it is. And I think that it’s good for our province; it’s 
good for our city to showcase ourselves in that manner. 
 
Lloydminster is a city that can boast being home of Hartnell, of 
MacArthur, a couple of current NHLers [National Hockey 
League]. But it’s also the home of Cory Cross and Wade 
Redden. And at Hockey Day in Canada there was a banquet 
held with a lot of ex-NHLers, and both those gentlemen were 
there along with about 10 other former NHLers — some great 
Saskatchewan boys, Mr. Speaker. And it was just great to see 
these hockey heroes that have been on national TV for decades, 
are idolized by millions, are in Lloydminster, are shaking hands 
and meeting people and they were just class acts. And it was 
something that we hoped our hockey heroes would be this 
gracious and this giving of their time, and I don’t think anyone 
in Lloydminster that night was disappointed. 
 

Mr. Redden had just announced his retirement about a week 
earlier. Wade Redden grew up a little bit north and a little bit 
west of me, and our parents knew each other. So it was great to 
see him there that night, shortly after his retirement, after such a 
storied and successful hockey career, something that I think our 
whole city is very proud of. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, before . . . Maybe I will leave that till a little 
later on. But, Mr. Speaker, we see Lloydminster as it’s a 
growing community. We have one school that just opened here 
this past fall. It’s a brand new, beautiful school. Today in 
Lloydminster we have another school — it’s under construction 
— a great, a great big school, Mr. Speaker, to meet the growing 
population, the young population that’s moving to our province 
and to our city. And projections for our city are fairly dramatic 
as they are for our province, but since, for the last 30 years 
we’ve seen Lloydminster almost double in size, from less than 
15,000 people to today, over 32,000 people in the city of 
Lloydminster alone. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Projections, the low-end projections for Lloydminster, Mr. 
Speaker, by 2030 is just under 50,000 people in the next 15 
years. The high-end projections is over 60,000 people in the 
city of Lloydminster by 2030. Just 15 years. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the school under construction, the one just opened, won’t 
be the last school that we see in Lloydminster. With budgets 
like this, with the bundling of schools that we’re seeing going 
forward, it’s cities like Lloydminster, cities like Martensville, 
cities like Yorkton, cities like P.A. [Prince Albert], Mr. 
Speaker, that need this infrastructure, that need to see the 
developments and the growth and the thinking outside of the 
box as we are building for the great prosperity of which our 
province is building upon and continues to build going forward. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, I just want to go over a few of the 
items that are specifically correlated to the responsibilities that I 
have. I’m going to start off with potash. We see in this year’s 
budget . . . I’m on page 30 of the Steady Growth provincial 
budget document, Mr. Speaker. As I’m reminded by my 
colleague in the front row, it is a summary document. It is the 
first time that we have highlighted summaries, Mr. Speaker. We 
have put out summary financial statements since we formed 
government, but it is the first year that we have gone to 
highlighting them in a full manner. We’re still putting out the 
operating account of government so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can see a transparent view of how we’re 
spending the day-to-day funds which we collect from our 
citizens, but the summaries are now highlighted. 
 
And on page 33, we have the calendar year commodity price 
assumptions that are built into this document. I’m going to start 
off with potash, Mr. Speaker. We see a number of $273.93 for 
potash for the year 2014. Members opposite, members on this 
side of the House, will remember that last year we were 
budgeting at over $400 a tonne for KCl [potassium chloride]. 
We saw some events happen in Russia and Belarus in June, Mr. 
Speaker. They had a marketing organization that was similar in 
nature to Canpotex, which markets Saskatchewan potash. And 
early summer, that organization broke apart and partners in it 
decided that they wanted to fundamentally change the landscape 
of potash in the world. 



4858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

Potash is a commodity traded on the world markets, and this 
had a great effect, not just in Belarus and Russia, but around the 
world and specifically here in Saskatchewan with the great 
resources and great production that we have. Through summer, 
Mr. Speaker, we saw sales dry up as the big buyers in the world 
were looking for the floor. They didn’t want to buy at a price 
that was not at the bottom with the new marketing realities. 
Coming through summer and into the fall, this here was largely 
resolved and we’ve seen prices that were a full 25 per cent off 
of where they were earlier in the year. So from 400 they 
dropped to 300, and that has been fairly consistent. 
 
It seems like there is more stability now in that region, in that 
production coming out of Belarus and Russia. There is new 
ownership in the Russian Uralkali mining company. We think 
that this is positive for long-term security of supply and we will 
continue to monitor it very closely as it goes forward. 
 
But I think it’s encouraging that in this past year when we saw 
prices in the short term make a dramatic drop from over 400 to 
south of 300, Mr. Speaker, we also saw, following that day, we 
saw K+S go to the market to raise funds, to raise enough funds 
to take their mine from development, from construction to a 
fully operating mine. When asked by media, Mr. Speaker, the 
comments that K+S put forward were, we believe in the potash 
industry; we believe in the global population; we believe in the 
wealth that’s being generated in India, in China, in the 
Oceanian countries, Mr. Speaker, and that food and the higher 
quality of foods is going to be something that will drive the 
potash industry for decades to come. And they weren’t looking 
at the short-term price of potash; they were looking at the 
long-term stability of this industry. And they were also looking 
at where they would invest their capital. And nowhere in the 
world would they invest their capital but in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, BHP was asked a similar question. This past 
summer following the actions that were taken in Russia and 
Belarus, BHP also put forward $1.6 billion to finish sinking the 
shafts in their Jansen Lake project. Again their view is that long 
term, medium and long term, this is a great industry to be in. 
Saskatchewan is the only place in the world in which they 
would want to develop a project, a project of this nature. It 
gives them the security of resource. We’ve got tremendous 
geology. But it also gives them security of political climate, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are moving forward with their project and 
continue to hit the milestones in which they’ve put in front of 
them. 
 
We continue to see a lot of development from the juniors, many 
juniors moving projects forward. A press release recently came 
out, I believe it was just this past week, that a potash company 
has found what they think is a terrific resource. It is North 
Atlantic in partnership with Rio Tinto, and they are very 
pleased with the results of their drilling program and are 
looking to continue to move their project forward. We continue 
to see Vale’s interest. We continue see many other projects — 
Karnalyte, Mr. Speaker, putting together a project. So we know 
that we’ve got great resources, we’ve got a great business 
climate, and that these projects are likely going to be very 
important in Saskatchewan in years to come. 
 
Moving on to oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, today we see on the 
world price for oil, around 99, $100 a barrel. In the 2014 budget 

assumptions today, we picked $95 a barrel. And Mr. Speaker, 
we take an average of what private sector forecasters are 
predicting and we use a number that today looks very 
conservative. But we think it’s a very responsible number, it’s 
derived in the proper way, and it is a reasonable number to 
build a budget of this nature on top of. 
 
We also know that this past year, 2013-14, we got off to a slow 
start in the spring with a lot of very wet weather. Rigs could not 
move in southeastern Saskatchewan, but even with that, Mr. 
Speaker, we saw record drilling of horizontal wells. In 2013 we 
had . . . In 2012 we set a record for oil production, all-time 
record for oil production in Saskatchewan. In 2013 when the 
numbers came out, we exceeded that by a fair margin, again 
breaking the record and setting a new record for oil production 
here in Saskatchewan. It’s an industry where technology 
continues to develop, continues to change, change the face of 
the industry on the production side, on the environmental side, 
on the efficiency side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are seeing very interesting things across the province, 
what once would be considered science fiction, that people 
would not believe what you can do a full mile, mile and a half 
underground. Understanding the formation, understanding how 
to heat and move product, how to scrub a formation, how to 
open up fracture lines within very tight rocks to allow oil to 
migrate to a well bore, Mr. Speaker, it really would boggle 
someone’s mind. 
 
I think back to in the mid-’70s. The New Democrats at the time 
passed Bill 72 and it in essence nationalized the energy sector. 
We saw production fall off dramatically, and the thought at the 
time, and I quoted a couple of weeks ago the then premier of 
the province who said we are going to have to start rationing oil 
in Saskatchewan if we want our consumers and farmers to have 
oil in the ’80s and ’90s. If they knew then that today we would 
be breaking all-time records, and then re-breaking those, I don’t 
think they would believe it. 
 
In the Lloydminster area, Mr. Speaker, we deal with an oil that 
is very heavy and viscous, that is very difficult to get out of the 
ground, and over the years again a great number of technologies 
have been utilized. New pumps have come in. Screw pumps 
that can pump pretty much straight sand, oil, and water and 
produce truckload after truckload of actual sand, Mr. Speaker, 
along with the oil, has revolutionized our part of the province. 
 
We also see micro SAGD [steam-assisted gravity drainage]. 
Husky has recently started putting in SAGD plants. They 
produce 10,000 barrels a day and have been extremely 
successful. Where traditionally back in the ’80s we were getting 
3 per cent production, 3 per cent recovery rates out of the 
formations around Lloydminster because of the viscosity and 
difficulty to get the oil to migrate to the well bore, that went up 
to 5 per cent with screw pumps. With the use of heat and steam 
and water floods, Mr. Speaker, and fire floods, we may get up 
into the 8, 10, 12. With the micro SAGD which is being utilized 
currently in two locations in Saskatchewan — Husky has now 
announced two more locations, one in Vawn and one in Edam, 
each of them 10,000 barrels a day — they’re getting up to 60 
per cent recovery rates. Just a phenomenal recovery rate of the 
oil and gas. 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4859 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this does not happen without a great amount 
of research, without a great amount of engineering, without a 
great amount of science. And we see science projects going 
forward in our province where they do things as neat as putting 
down little pill-shaped capsules, tens of thousands of them 
down one well bore, and then pumping another well and 
recovering how many of them can be recovered and taking data 
that . . . Each capsule has a little microchip that can tell where it 
is and how long it’s underground, and when they’re captured, a 
great amount of data can be collected. And what they’re 
figuring is there is wormholes that are created deep 
underground. And when the sand and oil are extracted, how the 
oil migrates through the wormholes is very important because 
they want to move out and get a greater production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a debate here in this House not that 
long ago about pipelines. And over the last year and a half, this 
has been one of the fundamental challenges of the energy sector 
is, how do we get our commodities to market? And this has 
been something that we have been advocates for, we have been 
proponents for, and we will continue to. And I don’t want to go 
into this debate again, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, where 
the rubber hits the road when we start talking about this budget 
is how much differential, how much of a margin is taken off our 
oil before we can tax it and get the royalties which are the rights 
and property of the people of Saskatchewan. It matters. 
 
We in this budget have just around $19 a barrel, Mr. Speaker, 
on the differential. We think that that is a very reasonable 
estimate. But that’s $19 that we collect zero royalties off of and 
that goes back to lack of pipeline capacity, costs of getting oil to 
market, challenges our industry has in getting their produced oil 
out to somebody who can use it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see some great moves forward. The 
Trans-Canada is talking about the Energy East project. They’re 
moving it forward. I heard an ad on the radio this morning 
about an open house here in Regina. That will be a very 
meaningful pipeline, about a million-two barrels a day. Kinder 
Morgan has some further work to do but they’re talking about 
doubling their pipeline. Enbridge has been doing their main line 
expansion for a period of time. That will add substantial 
capacity to the central North American market. 
 
And we had a vote here in the House just a week ago, Mr. 
Speaker, about Northern Gateway. And for all the reasons that 
we put forward on that day, I was very hopeful that the 
members opposite would support an environmentally 
responsible pipeline to the northern gateway. But the members 
opposite chose to vote against it. and though they wanted the 
National Energy Board’s triple bottom line before they would 
support Keystone XL, that same requirement was not enough 
for the Northern Gateway. And one can only surmise as to what 
their challenges in regards to that pipeline are. 
 
But tying back to the specifics of this budget, the member 
opposite who spoke just before me, spoke to the oil well levy 
that is initiated in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. I believe that 
she quoted $250 million of revenue. I would . . . 120. The 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, it’s incremental, about 13 million. It is 
collapsing 10 separate fees and charges that the industry has 
been paying for a period of time and simplifying it. There’s 
something in the magnitude of 20,000 transactions, bills that 

our ministry would send invoices out to industry. They would 
then have to write cheques for 100, $150 and send them back in 
20,000 times. 
 
[20:15] 
 
With this new levy model, Mr. Speaker, we just send them one 
cheque based on the oil production and the well count each 
year. They then send in a cheque that, one cheque per year, and 
it covers the costs of the regulatory oversight. It’s a 90 per cent 
cost recovery for the oversight and the services in which the 
government has in regards to the energy industry. And as I said 
many times on budget day, Mr. Speaker, the oversight does not 
change. The environmental responsibility is uncompromising. 
The need for these permits and this oversight is not in question, 
but being able to do it better, faster, more efficiently is 
something that we need to do and we need to do very well. 
 
At budget day, we had some industry folks here. We had Jay 
Denney, the COO [chief operating officer] of Teine Energy. He 
looked at this and his comments to me were that yes, this will 
cost him a little bit more, but if he had to hire one more staff 
person to keep on top of these fees and charges, it would eat . . . 
The inefficiencies of that would far be made up for with a 
simple one levy system. 
 
He also spoke to the issues of if there are delays because a piece 
of paper gets lost, if a turnaround time is too long, those costs 
can be exponentially larger for an industry, for a rig company, 
for an oil company than having a very efficient system. So the 
new levy system, Mr. Speaker, allows us to put forward an 
enhancement, a package that puts a guarantee to industry on 
how we will operate. 
 
And a few examples will be, routine vertical well licence 
approvals, Mr. Speaker, traditionally of one to three days. With 
the changes that we are making here, Mr. Speaker, those will be 
same day. Routine horizontal well licence approvals, could’ve 
been and would’ve been eight days to 33 days. With the 
changes we’ve made, those will be same day. With the 
non-routine well licencing approval, it could’ve been five to 
eight days; now, one to four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on, but this level of efficiency 
and responsibility for industry is something that they’ve asked 
for, that they said, we want enhanced level of service and we’re 
willing to pay for it. They may come to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and have to go to three different agencies before 
they can get approval to move onto a well and to drill a well. 
They may have to go to Environment and get a certain 
approval. They may have to go to Agriculture. They may have 
to come to Energy and Resources for a single well. We’re 
looking to move to a single window. 
 
We will still need to ensure that they are drilling appropriately, 
that they are in compliance with Agriculture, that they’re in 
compliance with Environment, and that they’re in compliance 
with Energy and Resources. But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t need 
to have officials on their side going agency to agency to agency 
all within one government. We think we can do things better, 
and we have committed to do things better. 
 
And in fact, Brad Herald of CAPP, the Canadian Association of 



4860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

Petroleum Producers has said, this positions us — the industry, 
the energy industry — this positions us for the next decade of 
growth. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is something that 
everyone in this Chamber can be very pleased with because we 
want to see this growth. We want to see breaking of records for 
oil production for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move on to uranium. We had a very 
good year in 2013. And in fact here in 2014 we saw, in the last 
three weeks, the first loads of uranium ore coming out of Cigar 
Lake. The Cigar Lake mine, Mr. Speaker, will be one of the 
largest high-grade uranium mines in the world. It has been 
under construction for about a decade. So to see that first load 
of ore come to the surface is a very important day for the 
industry, but most certainly for this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also in the past year have seen the first loads of uranium go 
to China to fuel their growing energy, electricity system there. 
China is the country in the world, China and India, that have 
some of the largest civilian commercial, industrial, nuclear 
reactor build-outs going on right now. And I want to give credit 
to the federal government who in the past year have signed 
nuclear co-operation agreements with both those countries, 
enabling Saskatchewan uranium to fuel civilian power reactors 
in both those countries. And it’s great to see that our uranium is 
actually already delivering power there. 
 
We have also seen in this past year that under the EU [European 
Union] trade deal, where we had a non-resident ownership 
policy in our uranium mines, that has now been modified to 
allow European companies — specifically Areva who has 
mined here for many years, and Rio Tinto who has bought the 
Roughrider property just a couple years ago — to move projects 
forward on their own, to develop projects and own more than 
49 per cent of them. We think that is very important here in 
Saskatchewan. And we’re already seeing news reports of their 
investments moving forward because of this change. 
 
This past year, Mr. Speaker, we had some great discoveries as 
well. We saw the Patterson Lake South discovery, extremely 
good discovery. It’s being talked about across the mining world. 
It is a step outside of what was traditionally considered the good 
part of the Athabasca Basin, something that did not have a lot of 
interest. And it really came from nowhere. And Alpha Minerals 
made it public shortly after — I believe the day after they 
received the information from the lab — that they have a 
high-grade uranium at low depth. And it had spurred a staking 
frenzy in that part of Saskatchewan, and this past year we have 
seen four times the normal amount of land be taken under 
disposition. And it has really tested our MARS [mineral 
administration registry Saskatchewan], and that is our electronic 
staking system that we put in place in 2013. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to highlight for 
the people of Saskatchewan is the diamond industry. We have 
watched Shore Gold move forward . . . the Fort à la Corne 
property for a period of time. But just a few months ago we saw 
North Arrow make some very impressive results known, and 
that is the Pikoo diamond property, which is about 150 miles 
straight east of La Ronge. This is a phenomenal discovery. It is 
core samples that have actual visible diamonds in it. This is 
very unusual. It’s often that you would get core that would 
show kimberlites that have come from the right depth and the 

right pressure to potentially have diamonds in it, and that is 
enough to move interest forward and to move projects forward. 
In this drilling program they actually found diamonds in the 
core. 
 
And great story: I met the young woman who really 
spearheaded this research and found the diamond mine. And 
she is a world-class geologist that is doing work here in 
Saskatchewan. She started her project by collecting buckets of 
gravel, and working backward with indicator minerals, buckets 
of gravel from the woods — a very laborious project, getting it 
analyzed to work further north because they know that glaciers 
have scraped the overburdened South and that these indicator 
minerals are further south than where the cone where the 
diamond kimberlites may be. So over a couple of years working 
north until they got to the point where the actual kimberlites 
were. It’s a great story and great for our province. And I think it 
holds some real potential. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think those are some of the highlights of our 
budget of the industry that is helping drive this population 
growth, that’s helping drive the growth in our GDP [gross 
domestic product]. We’re projected to be in the top two or three 
in the next several years, Mr. Speaker. And it’s something that I 
think all Saskatchewan people can and should be proud of. It’s 
something that has an effect on their everyday lives. 
 
I was looking through the budget documents again, Mr. 
Speaker, and it showed average weekly earnings. Saskatchewan 
has had some of the fastest average weekly earnings over the 
last several years. When we won the election in 2007, 
Saskatchewan wasn’t even at the national average. We were 
below average in regards to earnings. Today we’re number two 
in Canada. We are the second-highest paid jurisdiction in the 
country, Mr. Speaker, and we continue to see the benefits of 
that. 
 
And I think that that is a metric that’s important, but it’s not 
what’s really important. It helps tell part of the story but not all 
of the story. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was preparing my 
speech to speak to the Northern Gateway, I was reading through 
news articles, and I read through one where the mayor of 
Kitimat was talking about all the activity and what it meant to 
her town and some of the great things that they were doing. And 
what really mattered was they were looking at putting forward a 
ferry service to allow neighbouring communities and 
Aboriginal communities to have access to the growth and the 
construction and the building and the jobs that were happening 
in Kitimat. 
 
What doesn’t matter as much, but what is somewhat symbolic, 
was she also said, there’s things in Kitimat we never thought 
we’d see, and one was a Tim Hortons doughnuts. And I think 
that is a Canadian icon that in some people’s mind — and I 
would say that I am guilty of it too — it kind of means our town 
is on the move or our town has made it. We’ve got a Tim 
Hortons doughnuts. 
 
And when I read that, it made me think of when I first got 
elected in 2007. I know me and many of my colleagues, we 
were full of vim and vigour and we made some pretty 
passionate speeches, Mr. Speaker. And I can . . . It triggered in 
my mind that I spoke in 2007 shortly after the election about 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4861 

hopes and promises and dreams that I hoped we would see in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the small, little things that I spoke about was my 
city and some of the changes that I’d seen in it in recent years. 
And one was that we had three Tim Hortons in Lloydminster. 
And all three of them were on the Alberta side, and one was 
poised right there on the border that you could drink coffee and 
look across the border into Saskatchewan. But the straw curtain 
had been so strong that it had kept out investment. It had kept 
out population, and it had kept Tim Hortons out of the 
Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster. 
 
So when I read that article about the mayor of Kitimat, it 
triggered in my mind that I think I need to update the House 
that in this past year, just months ago, Mr. Speaker, the very 
first Tim Hortons opened up on the Saskatchewan side of 
Lloydminster. And, Mr. Speaker, I do enjoy my double double. 
I enjoy Tim Hortons. But again, it’s symbolic and it doesn’t 
really matter. 
 
But when I’m driving in from my farm into Lloydminster, that’s 
what matters. I’m driving through a community that I have 
known my whole life, that I have known every farmer, every 
rancher, every house on that road, until about five years ago. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 25-minute drive. It’s a beautiful 
drive. You go through what we call the gully that ultimately 
feeds into the North Saskatchewan River. It’s lush and green. 
It’s as beautiful as any part of Saskatchewan. But there are 
houses, hundreds of them, Mr. Speaker, that continue to pop up 
all the way along my drive, and really anywhere you go in the 
Lloydminster area. There are quarter sections of land that are 
great fertile farm land which today are broken into subdivisions, 
rural acreage subdivisions. And it is because people are making 
good wages, that they want to give their family rural lives, that 
they want to live in our area, that they love Lloydminster. 
They’ve got great job opportunities. That’s what’s important. 
 
When I go to my community hall, Milleton Hall, it’s a hall 
outside of, north of Maidstone, halfway — well three quarters 
of the way — between Maidstone and the North Saskatchewan 
River, just a country hall, an old schoolhouse, where my 
grandfather grew up just a mile north of it. And it was a hall 
that for most of my life . . . We were the last generation of kids. 
There was no young people really for school, for field days, for 
4-H days, for community dances. There were a few young 
people, but not like today. 
 
When you go to the community hall, to the New Year’s dance, 
to the Christmas party, there are young people, all sorts of 
young people. And it is because people want to live in our 
community. The young generation that traditionally would have 
possibly gone further afield to find opportunity are today 
finding it in and around Lloydminster, in and around Milleton. 
They’re building homes. They’re raising families. They’re 
growing Saskatchewan. That is what is really important, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier about the Hockey Day in Canada 
which we hosted in Lloydminster. That is iconic of Canada as 
well — hockey, Lloydminster, the great professionals we 
brought out of there, the cultural icon which hockey is. But 

that’s not the only cultural icon that goes on in Lloydminster 
today. 
 
Just two weekends ago, Mr. Speaker, I was invited to the 
festival of Holi where the Hindu faith, Mr. Speaker, celebrates 
the changing of the season with colour. It’s a festival where 
dyes, powdered dyes are thrown into the air, and everyone is 
coated head to toe with purples, reds, just the most vibrant 
colours. It’s followed by ethnic dances, Indian dances. The food 
was served from the Gujarat region of India. And I asked, you 
know, why is this food Gujarat? And one of the hosts said, 
because many of these 250 people that are here tonight, that 
now live in Lloydminster, happen to be from the Gujarat 
province of India. 
 
[20:30] 
 
And it’s very interesting that in my role in Energy and 
Resources, we get to meet people from around the world. I have 
met delegations from Gujarat. They are a productive, 
industrious part of India that utilizes our fertilizer, a great deal 
of it. And we now have a relationship where many people from 
Gujarat live in Lloydminster. Many people in Saskatchewan 
produce potash that is shipped to the Gujarat region, and it 
really makes me think of what a small world we have, what a 
rich world we have. And events like this, people like this really 
enhance life in Lloydminster and Saskatchewan. And I think we 
can all be very proud of our province. We can all be very proud 
of the people that call it home and very encouraged with the 
number of people that want to move to our province and want 
to call it home going forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that largely wraps up the comments I had 
about this budget. I would just want to sum up and say that this 
is a budget that builds on six other terrific budgets. We have 
had a principle of balanced budgets. We will continue to believe 
in balanced budgets. We will continue to believe in budgets that 
are responsible on the spending side. There is no tax increases 
in this budget. There is fiscal constraint, no question. 
 
The member opposite that spoke before me articulated all the 
savings that she found in this budget, and I think she missed a 
few. And I appreciated the detailed work that she went to to 
find where we saved nickels and dimes. We did. She caught us. 
We balanced the budget, Mr. Speaker, not on the backs of 
taxpayers, not on the back of income tax, not on the back of 
property tax. We took a long look at the way we operate, the 
services that we provide, and we made some difficult decisions 
but what we think are responsible decisions, decisions that will 
help grow our province. 
 
And with all that, Mr. Speaker, there are priorities in this 
budget. There is infrastructure spending increases in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. There’s a recognition that this province is 
growing, that this province will continue to grow, and that that 
growth is good for the people of our province and good for our 
future. 
 
Now with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just confirm that I will be 
supporting this budget, and I am very proud to vote for it on 
that day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 



4862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Thank you very much. It’s a pleasure to join in with my 
colleagues and following on the heels of the Minister of Energy 
and Resources, the member from Lloydminster, in providing 
some comments to this budget, a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m going to apologize upfront. My voice is a little raspy. 
I’m on the downside of a cold here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Hopefully you can hear me, and hopefully my voice will hold 
out. I can get through my remarks, and we’ll move through to 
the next speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to getting into my remarks, I just 
would like to make a few comments, not unlike my colleagues, 
with respect to my constituency, the constituency of Regina 
Northeast that I am so honoured to represent here in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a constituency that is comprised of multi-ethnicities, if you 
will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as more and more people move into 
our province from not only other provinces in Canada but from 
around the world. I’m getting to meet folks from all different 
nations across the world that are bringing their talents and their 
skills and their dreams and their desires here to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to our capital city of Regina. 
 
It’s a constituency in the north end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
comprised of Uplands, the residential area; the Ross Industrial 
Park, where the Co-op upgrader and many other manufacturing 
and warehousing facilities are located; and on the east side of 
my constituency, it’s neighbourhoods like Glencairn and Glen 
Elm and Creek Side. And with the redistricting going on, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the new boundaries, I’m going to apparently 
obtain some new areas that are going to make the constituency a 
little bit bigger on the east side. And I look forward to getting 
out this summer and knocking some of those doors and meeting 
some of those new folks that are going to be part of the Regina 
Northeast constituency. 
 
As an example of some of the celebrations that go on in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a couple of Sundays ago 
I was delighted to join colleagues of mine — the member from 
Qu’Appelle Valley and the member from Coronation Park and 
the member from Regina Dewdney — at a celebration of 
cultures, a community of cultures I believe it was entitled, on a 
Sunday afternoon at the Glencairn community centre. It was 
hosted by Phyllis Bamford, a community activist, an organizer, 
and a person of extraordinary talent; and Councillor John 
Findura, a good friend of mine here in the city of Regina that 
serves very capably on the city council. His ward coincides with 
parts of my constituency, and so we get to see each other quite 
often at functions. 
 
At this particular celebration of cultures, on that Sunday, there 
was a number of tables and booths set up. Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor was there, along with members of 
Parliament and, as I said, colleagues from the legislature. And it 
was really a fun afternoon of a celebration of food, of music, of 
entertainment, and getting to know some of the new neighbours, 
if you will, in that area. 
 
And of course it’s always interesting to go to some of these 

events with the member from Regina Dewdney because he is a 
celebrity in his own right. And it’s always fun to watch. The 
moms and dads want to bring their kids up and get their picture 
taken with the Roughrider legend and someone who is so 
gracious in accommodating many of those requests. Even 
though he’s there in a capacity as an MLA, he always falls back 
on the fact that he is a Rider legend. And to watch him interact 
with those folks and see the looks on their faces is always fun 
and interesting to watch. So I just want to thank Phyllis and 
John for organizing I think it’s the third annual community of 
culture event at the Glencairn centre. And it was a lot of fun. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to just give a quick thanks to 
people that make my life a lot easier in doing this job, both in 
my ministerial responsibilities and as a constituency MLA, and 
that’s of course my ministerial staff of Jason and Bob, Michelle 
and Morgan who just do tremendous work on my behalf and on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan in dealing with issues 
with respect to the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport and the 
Provincial Capital Commission. And then of course my 
constituency assistant, Mr. Ron Naidu, who’s a retired 
professional civil servant who has been with me since day one 
of being elected back in November of 2011 and has done a 
tremendous job for me. As I share offices with the member for 
Dewdney and the member for Regina Douglas Park, our 
constituency assistants work together, so just a big thank you to 
them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the third budget I’ve been involved 
in since being elected in November 2011. I believe it’s the 
fourth budget of this particular Minister of Finance in his 
career, this government being elected in 2007. And it’s an 
interesting process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk just for a few minutes about the process of how 
the budget is developed. As a member of treasury board, I was 
privileged to serve on treasury board immediately after the 
election in 2011. In November the Premier asked me to serve 
on treasury board as a private member, and it was a very 
compact time frame at that particular time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because the election happened in November of 2011. And of 
course that moves fast forward everything up into the process 
with respect to doing the budget so it’s delivered in the spring 
session of the upcoming legislative session. So that was a steep 
learning curve for myself and I think some other colleagues on 
treasury board who are new to that process. 
 
And then I was privileged to be asked to join Executive 
Council, the cabinet. In May of 2012, the Premier asked me to 
step off treasury board and take on some other responsibilities 
for the . . . two budgets ago. And then last budget, last year 
around January or so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier asked if 
I would rejoin treasury board and help out with colleagues there 
and doing this most recent budget. 
 
And I think that’s it’s fair to say that the amount of work that 
goes on at treasury board, not only on an annual basis, with 
respect to issues of a financial nature for the government on a 
weekly basis if you will, but the amount of work that goes on 
with respect to the budget development itself is perhaps 
incomprehensible to a lot of people who have never been 
through it. And for the average person out there who has never 
had to experience going through the process of developing a 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4863 

$14 billion budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all the 
complexities associated with government, it is a fascinating 
process. 
 
And I think the work done by colleagues like the member from 
Martensville, the Minister of Central Services; and the member 
from Lloydminster, who just spoke, the Minister of Energy and 
Resources; my colleague, the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford, who spoke earlier on the budget; and the 
member from Arm River-Watrous, who brings a very unique 
perspective to the treasury board table . . . As we all know he’s 
a farmer. And he’s got a great passion for agriculture and kind 
of brings that coffee row mentality if you will, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as to what he’s hearing out there in his communities 
and his constituency. And he does a tremendous job in the 
constituency of Arm River-Watrous. 
 
And of course I think is the longest serving member is the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, who is the Minister of Social 
Services and I think has been on treasury board since we 
formed government in 2007, and has brought a . . . has taught 
me a lot about her perspective in approaching financial 
decisions on behalf of not only the government but on, more 
importantly, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people who perhaps don’t have a voice. And that’s, in a lot of 
cases, the people living with disabilities and the disadvantaged 
and those who are marginalized by society, if you will, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And the member from Kelvington-Wadena, 
the Minister of Social Services provides a great service in 
bringing that perspective and that voice to the treasury board 
table. 
 
And then of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are ably and 
capably lead by the Deputy Premier, the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Canora-Pelly, who I have a tremendous amount 
of respect for. I know the Minister of Energy and Resources 
spoke about his admiration for how the Minister of Finance 
leads treasury board and leads the budget process. But having 
watched this particular minister up close on a weekly basis, if 
you will, when we’re in the budget-making process and seeing 
his attention to detail, his professionalism, his concern for the 
people of Saskatchewan, where we’re making these kinds of 
decisions that are going to impact people’s lives and how 
seriously he takes his job. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because you expect all of 
us to take our jobs seriously, but this is a gentleman that takes 
his job home with him. And he studies those numbers line by 
line. And he is very conscientious with respect to the decisions 
we make at the treasury board table that subsequently get made 
at the cabinet and the caucus table as to what impact that may 
have not only on his constituents but on the people across the 
entire province. And as I said earlier about those people who 
perhaps don’t have a voice in these kinds of discussions, that 
particular Minister of Finance reminds all of us from time to 
time, when we’re at the treasury board table, about who we’re 
here to represent and what our jobs are and what it is that we’re 
trying to accomplish in concert with our growth plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so I think he has just done a tremendous job, not only in 
this particular budget but in the last three budgets before that, in 
representing our government as the Deputy Premier, the second 

in command of our cabinet and our caucus, and then as the 
Minister of Finance and what he’s brought to this particular 
province with respect to controlling spending, not increasing 
taxes, and still delivering services to the people of this province. 
And I congratulate him for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget, budget 2014-15 is entitled Steady Growth, and it 
continues our government’s commitment to our growth plan 
released in 2012, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You might remember 
that. The Premier made that announcement up in Saskatoon at a 
chamber of commerce function and outlined our growth plan. 
And I remind the members opposite again of a plan. 
 
And we’ve had a little bit of fun with this debate back and forth 
with respect to having a plan, and I think it was derisively 
called a booklet by members opposite when it was first 
released. And that’s an interesting perspective on it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because we’ve seen other booklets come in this 
Chamber from members opposite who . . . We can’t find them 
anymore, either on their website or any reference to them when 
they’re making reference to things that they might do in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we do 
have a growth plan released in 2012, and it informs us in our 
decisions with respect to what we want to accomplish here in 
the province of Saskatchewan and moving forward. And this 
budget is in concert with that growth plan, hence the name, 
Steady Growth. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, budgets are an interesting 
document. They’re an interesting compilation of statistics and 
line items and a lot of numbers obviously, and charts and 
graphs. And for the average citizen out there who never has to 
spend time looking at these things, they can be very complex 
and hard to understand. And I understand that and I get that. 
But it’s our job as legislators to explain, when you take all those 
numbers and distill them all down, what exactly it is that we’re 
trying to accomplish with respect to their tax dollars that they 
send to Regina and how we’re going to spend that on their 
behalf here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So they are a fiscal blueprint, if you will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that outlines the government spending plans for the ensuing 
fiscal year as we move into ’14-15 beginning April 1st. But 
they are also a political document. A budget is a political 
document, and it is a political document because it represents 
the choices that a government, a political party makes with 
respect to what they’re going to do with those tax dollars. And 
I’m going to get into a bit of that, the difference between our 
friends opposite and this side of the House when it comes to 
this document with respect to the choices that we’re going 
make. 
 
And I had to laugh when I heard recently . . . And Mr. Trudeau 
who’s the, Justin Trudeau who’s the federal Liberal leader was 
quoted as saying that, when asked a question about, well how 
are you going to balance the budget, and he said, well the 
budget will balance itself. And you know, I’m not trying to be 
partisan with respect to his view of how budgets are done, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I can assure you and I can assure people 
watching and I can assure Mr. Trudeau, if he happens to be 
listening — I doubt very much he is but if he happens to be 
listening, that budgets . . . 
 



4864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

An Hon. Member: — He might be. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — He might be. Budgets do not balance 
themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think we heard the Minister of Energy and Resources, 
just prior to my remarks, towards the tail end of his remarks, 
talk about the difficult decisions that we as legislators have to 
make in order to ensure that that budget is balanced. And that’s 
exactly what we did in this particular document. 
 
I’ve heard for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people criticize 
governments of all stripes, provincial, federal, as to what it is 
that enables them to not balance their budgets. What prevailing 
wisdom do they bring to the table that suggests to them that it’s 
okay for governments not to live within their means? And I’ve 
heard it said many, many times at different social functions or 
in conversations with people and prior to me being elected and 
since I’ve been elected, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is people say to 
me is, you just live within your means. We have to do this in 
our businesses. We have to do this in our households. Why is it 
that government thinks that they can act differently? 
 
And governments really only have several choices with respect 
to their financial blueprint, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they can 
raise revenues through raising taxes. They can decrease 
spending. They can do a combination of those, or they can say 
that in a year or maybe a couple of years where we don’t think 
revenues are going to meet with the expenditures, we need to 
provide, we’re going to go into a deficit position. We’re going 
to borrow money, take out a line of credit if you will, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Households are familiar with those kinds of 
analogies on financial management. 
 
And what people have said to me is that the last thing they want 
to do is see their taxes raised. And the last thing, other than that, 
they want to see is for a government to go into a deficit 
position. So you know how much money you’re bringing in at 
least through our estimates. Why don’t you sit down and figure 
out a plan whereby you don’t spend more than the money you 
take in? And that’s exactly what this particular budget did, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve heard from other speakers and the Minister of Finance 
on budget day that revenues are flat in this province. And that’s 
through nobody’s fault. There’s no particular industry we can 
point at or individual we can point at or group of people we can 
point at to say, well you’re not pulling your fair share here with 
respect to passing on revenues into the provincial coffers. It’s 
just a reality. We are a commodity-based economy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we’re going to see this kind of volatility. 
 
What we’re trying to do is flatten that volatility out, both on the 
revenue side and on the expenditure side, and we’re seeing 
more of that come to fruition now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
these kinds of budgets that we take the approach on a 
line-by-line basis to ensure that we found savings to have the 
budget balanced. So this is a balanced budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with a projected surplus of $71 million, and it has been 
presented on a summary basis. That is the first time in the 
history of our province that this, the provincial budget has been 

presented strictly on a summary basis. 
 
And members opposite had the opportunity for 16 years in 
government prior to us being elected in 2007. They talked a lot 
about it, but they presented their budgets both on a summary 
basis and on a GRF [General Revenue Fund] basis. And since 
they have been in opposition, they have been I guess asking the 
government repeatedly to only present the budget on a summary 
basis, and so that’s exactly what we’ve done this year. They had 
the opportunity to do it during 16 years in office. They refused 
to do it. That was the conscious decision they made, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, sitting around the cabinet table and the caucus 
table. As I said, these are political documents. They made a 
conscious decision to talk about it but not actually change it to a 
summary basis and present it to the people of this province in 
that fashion. We have done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
done that. 
 
This budget also has no tax increases. It’s been talked about 
here. There are no tax increases. As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there is a tax break because of the fact the Minister of 
Finance announced earlier this year he was indexing the 
personal exemption levels to the rate of inflation, which allows 
all of us, regardless of income level, in the province of 
Saskatchewan to receive a benefit by the fact that their personal 
exemption rates have been indexed to the rate of inflation so it 
increases that exemption level. 
 
This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also controls spending while 
at the same time investing in infrastructure and investing in 
people. Those are the primary tenets of what we talked about in 
this particular budget. Now when I say investing in 
infrastructure, people say, well that’s just a fancy buzzword for 
we don’t quite know what that means. Well I think the people 
of Saskatchewan know exactly what that means. And I’m sure 
the Minister of Highways is going to talk about the hundreds of 
millions of dollars we are investing in highways and 
infrastructure in this province. I know the Minister of Education 
spoke earlier today about the amount of money going into 
schools and educational facilities in the province. The Minister 
of Advanced Education I’m sure will talk about post-secondary 
educational institutions and the amount of money we are 
investing into those particular institutions for the benefit of our 
students in this province. 
 
And as a Regina MLA, I’m very proud of the fact that we are 
investing money into the development of a southeast bypass for 
the city of Regina. It’s going to be very expensive, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the hundreds of millions of dollars. I’m sure the 
Minister of Highways will elaborate on that further. It’s going 
to be an expensive proposition, but it’s a necessary proposition 
for the transfer of goods and the movement of goods around our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for safety reasons for the 
people of Regina and for those that are coming into the city of 
Regina on the No. 1 Highway. And I know an awful lot of 
planning has gone into that so far, and it will continue to go into 
that as we develop that particular southeast bypass as it hooks 
up around with the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] and onto 
Highway 11 up to Saskatoon, and Highway 1 west, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now what do I mean by the most important aspect of this 
budget of investing in people? And again, that sounds like it’s 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4865 

rhetorical and it sounds like it’s a nice catchphrase, and it’s 
what all politicians say, is we’re investing in people. But let me 
take that and just put it in context, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
budget here contains spending in the neighbourhood of $14 
billion. That’s 14 with a lot of zeroes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
to put that in context, if you had 1 million people and you gave 
each one of them $1,400, that would be the equivalent of $14 
billion. 
 
We happen to have more than 1 million people in the province 
of Saskatchewan now. We happen to have 1,117,503, I think, if 
the number is correct, but it’s in that neighbourhood, which 
we’re very proud of. Because it’s a metric that measures the 
success of our economy — not the government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but the success of our economy because people want 
to be here. They want to move to Saskatchewan. We have kids 
that are staying here in Saskatchewan and not moving to other 
places because there are opportunities right here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So let’s talk a little bit about where those dollars are being 
spent, as I hope my throat doesn’t give out. When we talk about 
investing in people and what exactly does that mean, I just want 
to touch on a couple of areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Investing in 
people means increasing our health care spending in this 
province by another 3 per cent, just 3 per cent, so that we will 
invest almost $5 billion into our health care system this coming 
fiscal year. 
 
Now some would say on the opposite side, well 3 per cent, 3 
per cent. And some out there watching this tonight or reading it 
in Hansard or listening to some of the media reports or media 
commentary on it think, well 3 per cent isn’t very much. But, 
Mr. Speaker, 3 per cent on a $5 billion budget — or less than 5 
billion because it’s going to come up to 5 billion — is $144 
million more we’re going to spend in the health care system this 
year. And we’re going to spend that money on people. We’re 
going to spend that money in our hospitals. We’re going to 
spend that money by delivering the health care services that the 
people of this province expect us to deliver. 
 
So if you think about $5 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on one 
item, one area, one ministry, the Ministry of Health, out of a 
total budget of $14 billion, it’s almost 36 per cent of the total 
budget this year on a summary basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
going to be spent on the delivery of health care services 
throughout the entire province. I think that speaks volumes as to 
the priority that we place on health care and health care delivery 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Investing in people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also means these 
resources in the health care sector are going to go into the 
surgical wait-list initiative to meet the three-month wait-list 
target. And I think the Minister of Health announced earlier 
today that we continue on track with meeting that three-month 
wait-list target. I know the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is 
still having some challenges in that area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But as I said a while back in a speech I gave, you know, there’s 
nothing wrong with setting goals. I’m afraid of those who aren’t 
prepared to set goals. I’m afraid of those who aren’t prepared to 
tell you what it is they want to accomplish if ever given the 
privilege of being in elected office in government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

And so you set a goal. It might be bold. It might be audacious. 
The critics will come out of the woodwork and say it’s not 
achievable; it’s pie in the sky. And what I say to those critics, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what if you don’t achieve that goal? 
What if you only achieve 90 per cent of that goal? Isn’t that 
better than where you were the day before? Every single day as 
we move towards achieving that goal, aren’t we better than we 
were the day before, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And so when I hear the Minister of Health set that goal out . . . 
And members opposite — and the member from Regina 
Lakeview knows this full well; he was a former minister of 
Health — scoff at the government for setting these kinds of 
goals and then ridicules the government if they don’t quite meet 
the goals in the timeline that they said that they wanted to 
accomplish it. Well this budget continues to invest in that 
surgical wait-list reduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, such that we 
can achieve the goal of having people wait less than three 
months, three months or less for their needed surgery in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I think that’s a laudable goal, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also have $24 million to address the demographic pressures 
that our growing population contributes to our health care 
system. Now some might think that that’s a negative thing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Here we have growth in the province with new 
people moving here and therefore that presents challenges to 
our health care system. I argue differently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The people moving here are adding to the vitality of this 
province. They’re adding to the vitality of our economy and 
yes, at times they’re going to require health care. This budget 
presents $24 million to help out with those demographic 
pressures we’re going to face. 
 
Three point three per cent increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency to help plan, organize, deliver, and evaluate cancer care 
throughout the province — 3.3 per cent. Again we’re going to 
hear some critics say, well 3.3 per cent isn’t very much money. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that represents over $4.9 million, 
additional dollars in the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for the 
delivery of cancer care. And I dare say that there’s not a 
member in this Assembly or anybody out there watching whose 
family hasn’t been touched by cancer in some fashion. And it’s 
a hideous disease, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s affected my own 
family and it’s one that I think that we continue to address here 
in the province of Saskatchewan and continue to invest 
resources in because it is a priority not only of this government, 
but most importantly it’s a priority for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve also added resources for expanding the rural doctor 
locum pool and the rural family physician recruitment program. 
And I’m a Regina MLA, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we are well 
represented from the rural areas in our province in our 
government caucus and I can tell you that there’s not a day goes 
by that we don’t talk about the attraction of physicians to our 
province, not just to the province but particularly to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the former Health 
minister spent a lot of time and attention to it. The current 
Health minister is also doing that. And I know rural members 
continuously bring up that issue, representing their constituents 
in their constituencies, their communities, to the Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health as to what 



4866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

we need to do to continue to put resources towards that priority, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Investing in people also includes a huge increase in the Social 
Services budget, an addition of $66 million or a 7.4 per cent 
increase to help those most vulnerable in our society, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think that speaks volumes to the priorities of 
this particular government. I think that speaks volumes to the 
priorities to the families of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I commend the Minister of Social Services who continues 
to represent those kinds of views at the cabinet table, at the 
treasury board table, and at the caucus table about representing 
those most vulnerable in society that, as I said earlier, perhaps 
don’t have a voice. And I know there are a lot of advocacy 
groups out there and those who work towards helping out folks 
that are less advantaged, and they do tremendous work in our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And our government is listening 
to them. This government is listening to them. 
 
This means increasing the seniors’ income plan benefits, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is an area the members opposite don’t 
like us to talk about. And I don’t blame them for not wanting to 
talk about this particular issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because for 
16 years, for 16 years as I said . . . These are political 
documents because cabinets and treasury boards and caucus, 
government caucuses got together and they made conscientious 
decisions —conscious decisions I should say, not conscientious 
— conscious decisions to where they were going to spend 
taxpayers’ dollars. And for 16 years the members opposite, 
when they were in government, the NDP didn’t increase the 
seniors’ income plan by so much as a dime, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, not so much as a dime. 
 
So you can just imagine that discussion sitting around the 
treasury board table when the minister of Social Services of the 
day would come in and say, I think we need to increase the 
seniors’ income plan. And they looked around at each other, 
and they made the conscious decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
not increase the seniors’ income plan. That went on for 16 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think, shame on you. And I heard about that on the 
doorsteps when I campaigned in 2011, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
People said to me, this party, the NDP, their actions don’t 
match up with their words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They talk a 
good game, but their actions don’t match up with their words. 
 
And so I hear in the House here on a fairly regularly basis the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Health critic raising issues 
with respect to the care of our elderly in this province. And it is 
a priority for this government, and it continues to be a priority 
for this government. And here’s why I get a little perplexed, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here we have a party that was in power 
for 16 years, didn’t raise the seniors’ income plan. The most 
vulnerable seniors in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
didn’t raise their income plan by so much as a dime in 16 years. 
 
Every single day they get up in the House, and they ask 
questions about elder care in this province. This government, by 
the end of this term, through this budget and the ensuing 
budgets, are going to triple the seniors’ income plan monthly 
benefit to our most vulnerable seniors in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And they’re going to vote against it. They’re 

going to vote against that. So every single day they get up and 
ask questions about elder care in this province. Then we 
propose a plan to help out those most vulnerable seniors in our 
province and they stand up and they say, well we’re not going 
to vote for that. We’re not going to vote for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that is the fundamental difference 
between the conscious decisions this side of the House made 
with respect to a political document and a fiscal blueprint like 
this budget, and the decisions those members make and 
continue to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I can assure you, 
when it comes time for the next election, we are going to 
remind every single senior citizen in this province, every single 
senior citizen in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
continue to ignore their needs. They’re going to vote against the 
budget that’s going to end up tripling the seniors’ income plan 
by the end of our term, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to talk about the additional $3.7 million for the 
seniors’ care urgent action plan and an increase to the seniors’ 
personal care home benefit income eligibility threshold. I heard 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who I have a lot of respect 
for — she’s my critic in Parks, Culture and Sport and I’ve 
known her since university days, Mr. Deputy Speaker — talk at 
the end of her speech about caring for people in this province. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just find the incongruity with 
respect to, how can you stand up and talk about caring for the 
people in this province, particularly the most vulnerable? We 
present options through a fiscal blueprint to assist those most 
vulnerable in the province and then they stand up and they say, 
well we’re not going to vote for that though. We’re not going to 
vote for that. We’re not going to offer up any alternatives, but 
we’re also not going to vote for your plan. We’re going to 
remind people of that when it comes to election time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[21:00] 
 
This budget also focuses on people by investing an additional 
$61.3 million or a 55 per cent increase in benefit increases for 
the Saskatchewan assured income for disability program. A 
$20.4 million increase for community-based organizations that 
help Saskatchewan people with disabilities, as well as 
additional funds for the disability tax credit and transit 
assistance for people with disabilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
further confirming our government’s commitment to make 
Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for people with a 
disability to live. 
 
And I know the member for Coronation Park, who’s involved 
with the disability program, talked about that and gave some 
quotes and I think it’s worth repeating one of the quotes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This isn’t the government saying this. We all 
see this on budget day where we go out in the rotunda and we 
hear different municipal leaders and leaders of various groups 
talk to the media, and I have one here. It says, this is Amy 
McNeil, the executive director of SARC [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres] as quoted in the 
Leader-Post on March 20th, the day after the budget: 
 

[We are leading] . . . the country, if not North America and 
the world, in supports for people with disabilities. And it’s 
something the Saskatchewan Party should be very 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4867 

proud of. 
 
This was a deliberate, conscious decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
A deliberate, conscious decision by this government, by 
members of treasury board, by the Minister of Social Services, 
by the members of cabinet and our caucus. It informed the 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s a priority area not just 
for the government but most importantly for people living with 
disabilities. It’s a priority area for people living with disabilities 
who were ignored by the members opposite. And when we’re 
doing these kinds of things, when you have, you know, leaders 
in the disability community standing up and saying, we’re not 
only a leader in North America but perhaps in the world in 
supporting people living with disabilities, I can’t for the life of 
me believe why the members opposite, the NDP, the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, is going to vote against 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just can’t for the life of me see why 
they can’t put partisan politics aside for one vote, for one vote 
on a budget that’s going to help out our most vulnerable seniors 
and people living with disability. 
 
They’re going to have to answer for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When they go on the doorstep with the election coming up in 
April 2016, they’re going to have to explain to families who 
have a person living with a disability why they didn’t support 
increased supports to them. And I’m going to look forward to 
their answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I’m going to be able 
to stand proudly and tell them we have supported people living 
with disabilities and we will continue to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are dozens and dozens of other 
examples of this budget investing in the people of this province, 
and I am sure other members will outline their specifics. I just 
want to touch on two more before I take my place. 
 
There is concrete proof that this government is committed to 
not only building our economy but building this province and 
investing in people, and I think that the one that stands out for 
me the most . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, for years and years in this 
province under successive NDP governments, we saw a steady 
flow of our young people moving away to other provinces, 
primarily Alberta, hitting the No. 1 Highway, and the Premier 
makes light of the fact that the, you know, the most often 
purchased graduation gifts was luggage for people who were 
graduating from post-secondary educational institutions. And 
moms and dads would buy them luggage and help them pack up 
as they moved off to Calgary or Edmonton or Vancouver or 
Toronto or whatnot. 
 
You know, the Saskatchewan taxpayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
would spend literally millions and millions of dollars educating 
these young people, both in the secondary system and in the 
post-secondary system, only to see them leave to get a job or 
create a business perhaps in another province. And the NDP sat 
on their hands and did absolutely nothing even to the point 
where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe a senior cabinet minister 
said, well they’re all leaving. That’s great because that just 
leaves more for the rest of us to share back here at home. A 
flippant comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because families were 
being torn apart. Families were being divided. Young people 
had to move to other provinces to pursue their dreams with 
respect to having a job, getting a job, perhaps getting married, 
putting down roots, and raising their own family, and have to 

come back to Saskatchewan to visit grandma and grandpa. And 
the NDP were making comments about the fact, well now 
there’s more for the rest of us to share. And I thought how out 
of touch can you possibly be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So you 
know it either was the fact that they just didn’t care or they 
didn’t have the wherewithal to come up with a plan to try to 
keep these young people at home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when this government was elected in 2007 under the 
leadership of our Premier and under successive Advanced 
Education ministers, this government sat down to devise 
strategies to try to keep these people at home — our young 
people, our best and our brightest, our future as we always talk 
about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we all get an opportunity to go 
to these high school graduations and meet these young people 
who are unbelievably bright, who are unbelievably capable, 
who are the salt of the earth, if you will, with respect to their 
entrepreneurial spirit and their desire to do better and their 
desire to contribute back to their communities and to their 
province. And yet they had to go elsewhere looking for these 
jobs. 
 
So programs like the graduate retention program that allows 
students to stay here or move back to Saskatchewan after 
graduating from post-secondary institutions and can recover up 
to $20,000 of their tuition costs over seven years, this year’s 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provides for $82 million this year 
for this program — an increase of $18.1 million or 28.3 per cent 
over last year’s budget — proving full well, proving full well 
this program works, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our young people are taking advantage of it. They’re staying 
here in Saskatchewan. They’re contributing to our economy. 
We have 117,000 more people in this province since we came 
to office. They’re not all people who have moved here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They are people who have stayed here. They 
are young people who are getting married. They are young 
people who are having families of their own now in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’re seeing this program 
work. 
 
I recall recently at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] convention during the bear-pit where we 
had, I don’t know, 1,200, 1,500 delegates from across all of 
Saskatchewan, the rural municipal elected leaders, in the 
bear-pit. And cabinet’s up on stage in the bear-pit. And I think 
it’s a 90-minute session where any delegate can get up, ask any 
question of any minister or the Premier. And it’s probably the 
most intense question period we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
much more intelligent than what we see here on a daily basis 
from time to time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And this young lady got up and unprompted . . . I’m assuming 
for many of us. None of us seemed to know who she was. But I 
believe she worked in an RM [rural municipality] office. And 
she got up and there was a question made about young people 
leaving the province and how they’re staying at home here now. 
And this young lady got up and gave a testimony I thought was 
very powerful. And I was sitting beside the Minister of 
Highways, and we talked about that because this young lady 
said it was precisely, precisely because of this program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that she stayed in Saskatchewan. And she was 
now working as an administrator or someone working in the 



4868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

RM office and she thanked the government for it. 
 
And that’s a classic example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what we 
see right across the province for people from small-town 
Saskatchewan to big-city Saskatchewan staying here and taking 
advantage of this program. This budget provides an additional 
$18 million to help those kids stay in this province, and they’re 
going to vote against it. They’re going to vote against it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget also adds an additional 700 seats to the adult basic 
education program as we continue to try to eliminate that 
wait-list and help those people who want to complete their 
education and enhance their prospects at finding meaningful 
employment in our province and contributing to our economy 
— 700 more seats in the adult basic education program to 
eliminate that wait list, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I know my time is running short, and I was going to get into 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Voice is still kind of holding out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Voice is holding up, yes. Talk just a 
couple minutes about some of the things in my own Ministry of 
Parks, Culture and Sport, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I heard the 
hon. member from Nutana, who’s my critic, outline some of the 
things that she saw in the estimates and indicated that she was 
looking forward to asking some questions in committee. And I 
look forward to having that discussion about some of those 
things. 
 
And I think she said that my particular budget is down some $8 
million, if you take out the $50 million. I like how they do that. 
Just take out the $50 million as if it doesn’t exist that we’re 
contributing to the stadium being built here in the city of Regina 
that’s going to contribute not only to this economy but to our 
provincial economy. But somehow let’s just take that $50 
million out. Therefore your budget’s actually down $8 million. 
And they’re going to say that’s a cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re going to say that’s a cut. My budget’s up $50 million, 
but let’s just take that out because it’s for the stadium — this is 
from a Saskatoon MLA — and your budget’s actually down $8 
million. So she looks forward to asking those questions of me. 
 
Well I can tell you, I’m proud of the fact that my budget is 
down $8 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why? Because some of 
those programs have come to an end. Some of them no longer 
exist and don’t need the funding that they had before. Some of 
them are due to timing with respect to, for example, the 
Legislative Building dome, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a timing 
issue with respect to cash flow. And I’ll look forward to having 
that discussion with the hon. member. 
 
But what I can talk about is the record investment we have in 
areas in my particular ministry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For 
example, some $15 million this year into provincial parks. And 
yes, we had some difficulties earlier, a few weeks back, with 
respect to the start-up of the reserve-a-site, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I acknowledge that. As a matter of fact, I briefed the hon. 
member on it personally to let her know what was going on. 
And we went full tilt within the ministry and our service 
provider to work on that particular issue, and I think we’ve got 

it rectified, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will continue to enhance 
that program for next year. 
 
But what I can tell you is that reservations in that opening week 
were up 11 per cent over the year before and we had record 
visitations in our parks last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why? I 
think it’s because the fact that we invested in our parks. We 
have spent some $44 million since coming to office in our 
provincial parks on precisely the things that the people who 
patronize our parks want to see: enhanced service centres, boat 
launches, picnic areas, electrified campsites. All the things that 
they were looking for from that party when they were in power, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who literally walked away from the 
provincial parks in this province. Why? Because they were in 
rural Saskatchewan, and we know that they had a strategy to 
walk away from rural Saskatchewan. They did it in the health 
care sector by closing 52 hospitals. They did it with regional 
parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They just stopped funding regional 
parks altogether. We now provide over $1 million a year in 
capital enhancements for the regional park system in our 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the total capital investments in our provincial parks have 
increased some 244 per cent in the last 7 years compared to the 
previous 7 years of the previous NDP administration. I look at 
other things with respect to the fact that we’ve created a new 
provincial park, Great Blue Heron Provincial Park, up north of 
Prince Albert in the Emma, Anglin Lake area. And I was up last 
summer to Blue Heron Provincial Park up north of Prince 
Albert in the Emma, Anglin Lake area. And I was up last 
summer to cut the ribbon on it if you will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and had a chance to speak with a number of the locals and how 
excited they were that we were creating this provincial park. 
 
And we’re looking at doing another provincial park. Why? 
Because we know the people of this province want to see more 
provincial parks. They want to take advantage of the short 
summer seasons. We have to get out and enjoy the beautiful 
wilderness we have and the environment we have in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this government will 
continue to invest in our provincial parks to enhance the 
experience for people to go out and camp. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget provides a 3 per cent 
increase to the Saskatchewan Arts Board. A 5 per cent increase 
last year, a 3 per cent increase this year. That’s an 8 per cent 
increase obviously over two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
additional funding going right into the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board that’s going to help out artists of all different genres 
across the province. And I can tell you that the Arts Board was 
delighted by that particular increase in this budget. 
 
We’ve also got $7.7 million in Creative Saskatchewan, in 
Creative Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve got 
funding available in there for supporting our creative industries 
in this province. And I can tell you that the last report I had is 
that there was a number of applications went in from all 
different genres of the creative industries, from visual artists to 
publishers to musical artists to filmmakers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, all trying to access money through that particular fund. 
We’re going to continue to support that fund. We’re going to 
continue to support the creative industries in this province, all 
creative industries in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4869 

this budget speaks volumes about that. 
 
We’ve also got $550,000 in this budget for Main Street 
Saskatchewan. Members opposite might be familiar . . . well 
maybe not familiar because it’s in communities outside of 
Regina and Saskatoon. So it’s in the towns of Indian Head, 
Wolseley, Maple Creek, and Prince Albert. And I can tell you 
that the MLAs I talk to that represent those areas, it is a very 
welcome program in those communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I heard time and time again from them, continue the Main 
Street program here in the province. And we’re going to do that. 
We’re setting up the parameters for the next intake on who’s 
going to be eligible for accessing those dollars. 
 
But I can tell you in some cases, I think it’s in Wolseley, for 
every dollar the government provided through the Main Street 
program, $17 came out of the private sector, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — $17. It created jobs. It revitalized the downtown 
main street of that particular community. And it created new 
businesses in that community as it’s doing in all the other 
communities in Main Street Saskatchewan. 
 
ArtsVest, we have another $250,000 in artsVest in this budget, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I was at a launch this morning in 
Moose Jaw with someone you would be familiar with, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a former Speaker of this Assembly, Mr. Hagel. 
Former Speaker Hagel is the Chair of this theatrical production 
company called RuBarb Productions in Moose Jaw, the third 
professional theatrical production company in the province of 
Saskatchewan now. We’ve got one in Saskatoon and Regina 
and now we have one in Moose Jaw. Why, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Because they were able to access money through 
artsVest. 
 
ArtsVest is a matching program that was piloted here in the 
province of Saskatchewan on a province-wide basis — came 
out of Ontario where they did it locally in some communities; 
we did it province-wide — that allows various different artists 
to access private sector dollars because they’re getting it 
matched by the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It allowed 
this production company to come to fruition. And K+S, who’s a 
potash company for members opposite, was there this morning, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to provide I think it was $25,000 that they 
offered up as private sector donation to get this particular 
organization going. So the beautiful community of Moose Jaw 
will now have a professional theatrical production company 
there, and we are proud to be part of that announcement this 
morning. 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on my particular budget, I’m 
proud of the fact it doesn’t show up in this budget, doesn’t show 
up as a line item in this particular budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but it is very important for the sport, culture and recreation 
sector in the province. That’s the extension of the lottery 
licence, the renewal of the lottery licence for another five-year 
period, commencing April 1st of this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what that’s going to do is, I think last year there was some 
$60 million came out of lottery proceeds to be divvied up 
amongst some 12,000 different organizations across the 
province. And the Government of Saskatchewan takes a 3.75 
per cent lottery licence fee out of the proceeds of the sale of 
lottery tickets in the province of Saskatchewan. It was as high 

as 12 to 15 per cent under the previous government at some 
times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they worked around with 
different formulas. At times that they were running surpluses, at 
times that they boasted about having $2 billion in the bank, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they were charging outrageous licence fees to 
take money out of the lottery system in this province for 
General Revenue Fund coffers, and starving the sport, culture, 
and recreation sectors in this province. 
 
[21:15] 
 
This government, in its infinite wisdom, in 2009 signed a 
five-year agreement with a 3.75 per cent lottery licence. And 
what the sector asked us to do was to match that again for 
another five years because it provides stability to those 
organizations. It allows them to hire coaches and managers and 
executive directors with a five-year stability program in place. 
And that’s exactly what we did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
responded to the needs of that sector. They are very, very 
grateful for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m very proud of that. 
 
So as I close off my comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
that I want to compare and contrast again the idea of budget 
development and decision making with respect to budgets and 
the fact that a group of women and men sit around a table, the 
caucus table, the treasury board table, the cabinet table, whether 
it’s an NDP government or a Saskatchewan Party government, 
and they make decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They make 
decisions where they’re going to spend the people’s money. 
They determine those priorities through their discussions at the 
cabinet table and the caucus table, and they have presentations 
from ministers and officials. 
 
It’s not a different process that the NDP went through. I look at 
the decisions that those men and women made during 16 years 
in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I look at the decisions 
that I’ve been privileged to be a part of with respect to this 
Minister of Finance, the treasury board he has led, through his 
term as Minister of Finance, and I see how he has guided his 
treasury board colleagues, his cabinet colleagues, and his 
caucus colleagues to the end points of the decisions we’ve made 
with respect to where we spend the people’s money in this 
province. I can see why the people of Saskatchewan threw them 
out in 2007 and elected this Premier and this government, 2007, 
and re-elected us in 2011. 
 
Now I say, with all due respect to my colleagues across the 
floor, we’ve heard many, many times about transparency. And 
the Finance critic has talked at length about, open up the books, 
we need more transparency. Well, there’s another issue with 
respect to transparency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is, this 
government laid out its fiscal plan for the people of this 
province. It stands by it. It shows it exactly what our priorities 
are in this province. So I thought, well we’re going to hear an 
awful lot of criticism from members opposite as to what they 
don’t like in the budget. Perhaps they’re going to offer an 
alternative view. Perhaps they’re going to be bold enough to tell 
the people of this province, if we weren’t prepared to spend 
money in this particular area, here’s where we would spend the 
money. 
 
We heard from the member from Regina Lakeview a couple of 
years ago where he was going to take money for the film 



4870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

employment tax credit, and that was from agriculture and from 
municipal revenue sharing. He was going to take money from 
those particular areas to put into the FETC [film employment 
tax credit], Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s fine. We can have that 
kind of debate in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So I thought as I was preparing my remarks I would go to their 
website because we don’t hear any policy put forward in this 
Chamber. We don’t hear any alternative solutions put forward 
in this Chamber by members opposite. So I thought, well it 
must be on their website because their Leader of the Opposition 
has been leader for over a year now. Surely to goodness he has 
met with his caucus, fellow caucus members, and has sat down 
and decided what are their priorities with respect to how they 
would spend the people’s money. Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’s nothing on their website with respect to how 
they would spend the people’s money. 
 
So it’s one thing to talk about transparency. It’s one thing to 
say, to stand here and criticize the government for areas that 
they wouldn’t spend money in. But the people of Saskatchewan 
are telling us — they are telling me certainly at different 
functions I go to — well if they don’t like that, what do they 
like? What would they do? Where would they spend our 
money? And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of us on 
this side can answer that. Well I don’t know if any on that side 
can answer that question either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But here’s the difference. This government, this Premier, this 
Minister of Finance, has laid out our priorities very clearly for 
the people of Saskatchewan. We controlled spending, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We did not raise taxes. We invested in 
infrastructure, and we invested in people. I will be supporting 
the main motion and not the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very 
pleased to rise this evening and to support the budget motion 
that was presented by the Minister of Finance last Wednesday 
and supported by the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook on 
Thursday. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too would like to take this 
opportunity to say a few thank yous to my family; my kids, my 
son Terry, my daughter Trish; my four grandchildren, Beau, 
Bailee, Shelby, and Tristan. 
 
As other members can attest to, our families all make terrific 
sacrifices so we can do our jobs. So I just want to let them know 
how much I appreciate their love and support. And also other 
members of my family, Mr. Speaker. I come from a big family. 
I have seven siblings and my mom still lives in Estevan, so I 
also want to thank them for their support. 
 
My constituency assistants, Rosalie is my full-time and Wilma 
is my casual. And first impressions are the lasting impressions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and when the people come to the office I 
am so happy that they treat the constituents with courtesy and 
respect, the courtesy and respect that they all deserve. So thank 
you to them. 

And also to the people of the Estevan constituency for allowing 
me the privilege of representing them for the past 14-plus years. 
Sometimes it doesn’t seem that long. Sometimes it seems 
longer. But I’m very proud of my constituents and the 
constituency I come from. And by the way, Estevan does have 
two Tim Hortons. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also be remiss if I did not thank our 
caucus staff here in this Legislative Building. We have a 
tremendous group of men and women in room 203 that work 
tireless hours to serve the MLAs here, and I would like to thank 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to speak to many people over the 
last weekend, and they were all very, very pleased with this 
budget. They were happy that it was balanced. They were happy 
that this budget had controlled spending, not increasing taxes, 
and also the investment in infrastructure and the investment in 
people. And investing in people is a priority for this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister a short time ago, I believe it 
was in December, announced that an indexation factor of point 
nine per cent would be applied to Saskatchewan’s personal 
income tax system for the 2014 taxation year. This factor fully 
indexes the 2014 Saskatchewan personal income tax system to 
the national inflation rate. And Saskatchewan residents will see 
a $6.5 million in annual tax savings from the indexation of the 
provincial income tax system in this year of 2014. And the 
combined effect of the indexation of the tax system since 2007 
is saving Saskatchewan taxpayers a total of $109 million in 
2014. This indexation is something that will benefit every 
person in this province, and it is also something that the NDP 
would never do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to start my comments by speaking 
about something that greatly affects the constituency of Estevan 
and to say how pleased I am with the announcement regarding 
the twinning of Highway 39 and No. 6. I know I speak for 
everyone who travels on that road south of Regina down to the 
US [United States] border. And this budget included the 
preplanning stages for this busy corridor. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, this corridor does run from Regina down to the United 
States. It’s extremely busy, and it’s the kind of traffic that 
warrants twinning. 
 
I can remember when I was first elected in 1999. When I used 
to go home, the traffic was mostly cars and just half-ton trucks I 
might run . . . or I shouldn’t say run into, I might meet about 40 
semis. And I took special notice last Thursday when I drove 
home, and I met 183 semis that were heading up from the 
border. So the traffic has just increased unbelievably. 
 
And as I said before, this is a major corridor with the US. And I 
think the Portal crossing is one of only two or three in the 
province. I know there’s one at Regway, and I’m not sure if 
there’s one in the western part of the province. 
 
But I was also very happy when the Minister of Highways 
recently announced that Highway 39 would be repaved from 
west of Estevan to Macoun. Of course Macoun is my 
hometown. And last week I saw a letter to the editor that the 
member from Athabasca had written in The Estevan Mercury, 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4871 

and he was saying that the repair of that stretch of highway 
shouldn’t happen. And I certainly hope he doesn’t think he 
scored any points with the local people out there because 
they’ve been asking for this for the last probably year and a 
half. And I am just pleased that the Minister of Highways has 
acted on that so promptly. 
 
And this government has made historical investments in 
infrastructure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this is in part due to 
the fact that when the member from Athabasca was minister of 
Highways in the NDP reign, infrastructure wasn’t even in their 
vocabulary. And I do again want to thank the Minister of 
Highways for this commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investing in people, those with disabilities, 
children, family, and seniors. Regarding seniors, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the NDP have always claimed ownership of issues 
regarding seniors. And when they were in government, they 
closed long-term care beds. They closed 52 rural hospitals and 
the Plains hospital. And many seniors didn’t and still don’t like 
to drive in the city of Regina. So if they had to go to the Plains 
hospital, it was located on the outskirts of the city, and seniors 
felt quite comfortable driving there. 
 
I think of my father. My dad passed away in 2003, but he just 
didn’t like driving in the city of Regina. If he had an 
appointment, he didn’t have a problem with driving out to the 
Plains. But that hospital was closed by the NDP. It was built for 
the people of southeast Saskatchewan. It was closed by the 
NDP with absolutely no consultation with the people from 
southeast Saskatchewan at all. 
 
And I remember there was someone in politics, I think it was, I 
think maybe it was the Liberal leader at that time, was going to 
chain himself to the hospital doors or something like that in a 
revolt of this because of the lack of contact that the NDP had 
with the local people down there. And who knew that a few 
years later that same party would be forming a coalition 
government with them. But their answer has always been to 
either raise taxes or close facilities, and unfortunately, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, sometimes both. 
 
I can also remember when, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were 
going to increase long-term care fees in this province, and I’m 
sure a number of my colleagues will remember that as well. 
They were going to almost double them and just literally kick 
the seniors out of their beds. And then the minister, the then 
minister of Highways, Mark Wartman, was sitting, chirping 
from his seat over here. And he said, yes, it’s the right thing to 
do. And I think that statement kind of haunted him for the rest 
of his political career, Mr. Speaker. And I also think that, I 
think they took him, some money from his highways budget, so 
that was an expensive statement to make at that time. They 
shifted it from highways to health. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, and other members have spoke about this, 
the seniors’ income plan. Under the 16 years of NDP reign it 
was never increased once. It was $90 a month when they 
formed government in 1991. It was $90 a month when they 
were defeated in 2007. And in stark contrast, Mr. Speaker, since 
2007, the maximum monthly SIP [seniors’ income plan] benefit 
has increased from $90 to $250 for single pensioners, and from 
72.50 to $215 for each member of a two-pension household. 

Another increase to the program’s monthly benefit is scheduled 
for July of this year, 2014, when the maximum monthly benefit 
will increase from 250 to $260. So that means by July 2014, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will be an increase of 189 per cent from 
2007, and I know that there isn’t a senior in this province that 
doesn’t appreciate that increase, long overdue and long 
neglected by the NDP. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, other members have touched on or will touch 
on different programs on issues regarding seniors and different 
areas of this budget, so I’m not going to go into every detail. 
They’re all important, but I don’t want to be too repetitive here. 
 
I will just touch on education, that this government is 
committed to the education of our youth. Children are our most 
precious resource, Mr. Speaker, and we have to remember that 
your education is the only thing no one can ever take from you. 
The children are the leaders of tomorrow. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Regina Rosemont has stated many times that 
classes are too big, and that’s one thing the NDP never had to 
worry about when they were in power. People were leaving this 
province in droves. They were closing schools. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they closed over 176 schools. I believe it was a school 
a month they closed. 
 
Regarding Advanced Education, this budget provides increased 
operating funds to post-secondary institutions, investments in 
student support, and funding for key capital projects. Support 
includes tax credits for the graduate retention program, also the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, Student Aid Fund, and 
the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take a minute to talk about 
agriculture. And I am very happy with the expansion of the crop 
insurance program to include livestock, and also investments 
made to the AgInvest program. 
 
And speaking of agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I couldn’t 
believe my ears last week when the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana in question period saying that farmers . . . She figured 
farmers were hoping that they didn’t have a bumper crop this 
year. She was speaking about the backlog of grain, and she says 
that, I’m sure farmers are hoping that they don’t get a bumper 
crop. Like I just don’t get this. I live on a farm and I’m in 
contact with producers constantly, every day of my life, and I 
have never ever heard one farmer say that. 
 
And when you think about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, producers 
are investing hundreds of thousands of dollars, perhaps millions 
of dollars in some cases. They seed the crop. They buy 
fertilizer. There’s pre-emergent sprays. There’s post-emergent 
sprays. The cost of the seed, the fuel. And then later on of 
course there’s swathing and harvest, not to mention their time. 
And they have hired labour and the cost of equipment, the cost 
of the land. And for the life of me I just can’t imagine we’re 
having a conversation with a person involved in agriculture 
when he’s there and, man, I just spent half a million dollars on 
fertilizer and this cost me this and, boy, I hope this crop doesn’t 
grow. Like think about it. 
 
I mean you know, that statement just shows how out of touch 



4872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

the NDP are with agriculture. And of course that statement is 
right out there with that same member’s comment when she, I 
think it was in the spring session or maybe it was a year ago, 
when she referred to community pastures as cow daycare. I 
mean that one did take the cake. 
 
And another thing regarding agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Today 
was the 13th question period in the spring session. I don’t have 
an exact tally in the number of questions that have been asked. 
But the grain car backlog, that’s the most important issue facing 
this province today, and the NDP leader, that member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place, has not asked a single question about 
it. And you know, the NDP took a revenge on rural 
Saskatchewan in 1991 and they are continuing that today by 
that leader totally ignoring the producers of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have lived on a farm all my life. I still live 
on my farm. I consider myself a small farmer. It used to be kind 
of an average farm, but farms are getting bigger and I’m not 
expanding my farm. I rented half of it out, and I kind of help 
with the other half being a gofer. They won’t let me operate any 
of the machinery. It’s something to do with clutches and things 
like that, so they don’t let me do that. 
 
But I’m just so thankful for the leadership our Premier has 
provided, and the Minister of Agriculture, and how they know 
the importance of this industry and have been there for 
producers in the past and will be in the future. 
 
There is so much more I could say about this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but there are also others that want to speak on it. And I 
would just like to read a couple of quotes from people and 
organizations that I thought were very interesting. 
 
Marilyn Braun-Pollen: “We commend the province for not 
taking the easy way out, but instead controlling their spending 
by making some tough decisions.” That was from a release on 
March 19th. And Marilyn Braun-Pollen also said, “It’s 
encouraging to see Saskatchewan deliver another balanced 
budget with a forecast surplus of $71 million.” Steve McLellan: 
“I give it a thumbs up, no question.” 
 
Debra Button, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] president: “The government’s investment in our 
communities will go a long way to helping us meet the demands 
of growth.” And she also had another quote. Pardon me, this is 
David Marit, SARM president, saying, “During a time of fiscal 
constraint, we commend the provincial government’s ability to 
secure a balanced budget while maintaining current funding 
levels for many important programs and initiatives that benefit 
rural Saskatchewan.” 
 
Janet Foord, who I know very well. She’s from the same 
community I am. She’s the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] president, and Janet said, “We’re happy 
that the government’s put the education as a priority this year. 
We knew it was going to be a tight budget, so we’re quite 
happy. We’re also happy to be working with them and having 
the conversations go forward.” 
 
And I’ll just finish with this one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s also 
from Debra Button, SUMA president and mayor of Weyburn. 
And she says, “I do sit on the Federation of Canadian 

Municipalities, and I can tell you without a word of doubt that 
they are very envious of what we have managed to accomplish 
with partnerships we have with our provincial government and 
revenue sharing. Their question is always, how did you do 
that?” 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to thank the Finance 
minister, cabinet, treasury board, and all the officials who 
worked so diligently in preparing this budget. I would like to 
say what an honour it is to serve under this Premier’s leadership 
and the great group of men and women that I have the pleasure 
of working with every day. And I am pleased to support this 
balanced budget motion, and I will not support the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a privilege to join into the debate regarding the 2014-15 
budget, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the opportunity to stand in my 
place since 1999. Sometimes it was over on that side. It’s more 
fun on this side, Mr. Speaker, when you can reply to the Speech 
from the Throne or the budget. Any time you can talk about 
your constituents and the people that allow you to fulfill your 
duties in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege. And that’s 
usually during the Speech from the Throne and the budget. 
 
I have had the opportunity to be part of many budget speeches 
and debates back and forth. Not as many as the member from 
Moosomin and not as many as, for example, yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, but since 1999. But I can tell you, after attending a lot 
of those debates back and forth, and regardless of what time it is 
at night, whether it’s 9:30 at night or 3 o’clock in the afternoon, 
I can tell you that, so far anyway, this budget debate, back and 
forth, has to be one of the quietest ones I’ve ever experienced. I 
mean you would not even know there was an opposition in the 
building, Mr. Speaker, by the response that we’re seeing from 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And I know they’re 
certainly few in numbers but the job of the opposition is to hold 
the government to account and to be part of the budget debate. 
And quite frankly, it is sorely missing. They really have not 
been around. They haven’t hardly been heard, Mr. Speaker. It is 
the quietest one that I have seen since 1999. 
 
Having said that though, Mr. Speaker, it is 20 to 10, I guess, 
and I have been told that I will be the last speaker of the 
evening. Now I’ve also had the opportunity at times to speak 
just before people have waited a long time for supper. That’s 
not a good position. But I can tell you I feel worse on this one 
when people are sitting here waiting to go home but they have 
to listen to me before they get to go home. That’s not a very 
comfortable position for any of the members on this side of the 
House. 
 
But as I said, this is an opportunity to thank many of the people 
that allow us to do the work that we do. I want to start with my 
constituency assistant, Nicole Entner-McCullough, who runs 
the constituency office in Balgonie for the great constituents of 
Indian Head-Milestone, does a great job handling any of the 
concerns that come in, handles them very well herself and refers 
them to me. It’s been a great working relationship for the last 
number of years, for about six years I believe, Mr. Speaker. 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4873 

Also I would like to thank the people in my office: Clay, my 
chief of staff — here in the building I should say — Karalee, 
who is a great admin assistant, keeps us going in the right 
direction; David and Adam who have just joined the staff. I 
look forward to working with them. The first few weeks and 
months have been great. I certainly look forward to working 
with them. And all the staff that I’ve had in the past. A person 
doesn’t realize how reliant you are on that staff within your 
minister’s office or your constituency office, Mr. Speaker, 
because as a minister and as an MLA at times we’re all spread 
pretty thin, and those are the people that really keep the wheels 
on the bus, Mr. Speaker. So I wanted to thank them. 
 
The other people that I want to thank, and it’s very poignant 
because we’re in the middle of the speech, of the budget debate, 
would be the Minister of Finance who has done a great job over 
the last number of years. Of course he was elected just at an 
election prior to 1999 when I was elected. So we’ve had a lot of 
workings back and forth. And he has really been a tower of 
power, a rock, for not only us when we were on the opposition 
side but more importantly on the government side, whether it 
was in the ministry, as a minister of Education, and now the 
Minister of Finance, Deputy Leader, Mr. Speaker, has done an 
excellent job. And I think this budget is very reflective of the 
work that he has done along with the treasury board members. 
 
And I want to also recognize all the treasury board members. 
And there’s a couple sitting just behind me here that have spent 
hours and hours and hours in that treasury board room. I know 
as the Minister of Highways, not nearly maybe as many visits 
as I used to have when I was the minister of Health, where we 
had spent a lot of time in treasury board, but we spent a fair 
amount here as the Minister of Highways. And I think that’s 
only one ministry of all the ministries that they hear from and 
they have to wade through good idea after good idea. 
 
I don’t think there are any of us that go in there as ministers that 
think any of our ideas should be kind of put off to the side for 
next year or any other year. I personally think every idea that I 
come into treasury board with are the ones that should be 
approved. And I want to thank the treasury board members for 
the work that they do, and the Minister of Finance, to make 
those tough decisions. Because as was said many times before, 
it’s never a decision between a good idea and a bad idea. It’s a 
decision between a good idea and a good idea. And they have to 
be the ones that kind of land the budget to where it is. And so 
congratulations to the Minister of Finance, as well as all of 
treasury board. They do a great job. 
 
And finally with my thank yous, I would be remiss if I didn’t 
thank the people at home, my family, Cindy at home who keeps 
the house fires burning when I’m not there for sure. And we 
don’t have to keep the house maybe quite as warm as we used 
to because there’s not as many people around as there used to 
be. It’s a pretty vacant house now. 
 
Of course we have two boys, Craig and Mark, who I’ve said to 
many people that, you know, there’s name recognition and 
there’s popularity. Mark happens to have both. I sure don’t. In 
fact I barely have one of them, as far as name recognition as a 
minister, but Mark certainly has elevated his game, I guess you 
could say, as far as being recognized not only here in the 
province but across the country and maybe around the globe. 

And Craig, our other son — Mark competed, of course, in the 
Olympics and was successful — and our other son, who was 
there, it was kind of interesting to be in Sochi and to be able to 
visit with both of them, one as an commentator and the other 
one as a competitor. 
 
We were watching — just one really quick story and I won’t go 
on on this — but it was really interesting to stand, it’s called the 
bullpen, where you’re at the bottom of the slope run. And 
literally we would look up into the announcers’ booth and you 
could see Craig up there, and then you looked this way and you 
could see Mark coming down on the slope run. So it was a 
pretty, pretty interesting time. And it’s an exciting time now — 
totally nerve-racking at the time. I would never wish that on any 
parent ever again because it was very, very difficult. But it all 
worked out. 
 
And I think probably from my perspective, one of the most 
gratifying things was when we came back home to 
Saskatchewan, and Mark came a week or two later, but the 
amount of congratulations. And it doesn’t seem that you can 
really walk down the street right now, and especially right after 
the Olympics, where people from all over the province were 
just proud and were so gracious commenting on it. And you 
know, we were at SARM, and there was a few hands, rounds of 
applause. 
 
But it didn’t matter. I remember meeting with an RM . . . I said 
I wasn’t going to go on with this for very long, sorry. But I 
remember meeting with the RM around Frenchman Butte which 
is north of Lloydminster. And we were just sitting down to talk 
about a possible road conversion there, and the first thing they 
needed to talk about were the Olympics. And then about an 
hour later I was meeting with the RM of Torquay, pretty much 
in the opposite corner of the province, and the first thing they 
wanted to talk about were the Olympics, which made me kind 
of put it into perspective on how wide a recognition this is. As 
they say, the Olympics are the biggest thing in sports, and if 
you get recognized there, you’re pretty well known. 
 
So we are very, very blessed. But what I wanted to say is thank 
the province of Saskatchewan and really the people across 
Canada that have been so gracious and recognizing the 
accomplishments. Thank you. So to the budget, and again I 
don’t want take too terribly much time, but there are a few 
things that I really think are extremely important that I want to 
talk about. I want to talk about the basis of the budget, that it’s 
balanced . . . [inaudible] . . . there’s no new taxes, controlled 
spending, investments on infrastructure, and investments in 
people. I want to touch on that first of all. Then I want to talk a 
little bit about the highways budget and $664.5 million of 
highways spending, a record amount of spending on highways 
this year. 
 
[21:45] 
 
And then I also want to touch on a little bit of our role as MLAs 
and why we come into this Chamber and what we do when 
we’re here. Because I want to talk a little bit about the 
opposition and some of the stands that they have taken, and 
certain members in particular that have come into this Chamber 
and have had, you know — this is maybe not a fair term — but 
a one-trick pony. They’ve only had one issue, and they’ve been 



4874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

on their feet. And every time they’re on their feet, they talked 
about one specific issue. And I want to touch on that a little bit 
because I’m going to, and it’s no secret, I will be supporting the 
budget and I will be rejecting the amendment.  
 
But I think there needs to be some serious soul searching from 
members on the other side who come in here on a daily basis 
and talk about one specific issue. And if it is addressed in the 
budget, I think they have an obligation to their constituents, Mr. 
Speaker, notwithstanding the tradition of voting against budgets 
— and it hasn’t always been that case with all opposition 
members — but, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that, I want to 
finish with that even though I’ve kind of put half of it out on the 
table here already. 
 
The first piece is a balanced budget. We are truly the envy of 
every other province in Canada. I think it must be a little lonely 
for the Minister of Finance to go to the FPTs, 
federal-provincial-territorial meetings, and be the only Finance 
minister really that can boast about a balanced budget, a budget 
that also looks at dealing with most of the spending issues that 
were faced. But keeping it balanced is extremely important, Mr. 
Speaker. Seven years of consecutive balanced budgets puts this 
province in a position for growth that we have never, ever seen 
before. And it’s truly the hard work, again, of the Finance 
minister, the ones previous . . . the one previous, Minister 
Gantefoer, and of course our current Finance minister. 
 
And that’s not easy when you think of the fact that you haven’t 
had a tax increase, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. It would be very 
easy . . . I’ve listened to the members opposite talk about what 
we haven’t spent. In fact the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
talked about it earlier. She talked about what we are spending 
. . . She didn’t really talk much about what we are spending. All 
she could do is look at what we weren’t spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that if the NDP ever get into power again, and I don’t 
think that’s for a very, very long time, Mr. Speaker. But if they 
ever get into power again, Mr. Speaker, the one thing I will 
guarantee the taxpayers of the province is expect almost all of 
your taxes, whether it’s property tax, whether it’s personal 
income tax, Mr. Speaker, all of those to increase. 
 
Because it wasn’t very long ago that a former minister of 
Finance from that side said, after coming through an election, 
would we talk about increasing taxes during an election? Of 
course not. That would not be popular. He was right there, but 
right after the election, Mr. Speaker, they increased the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. I think that would be exactly what the 
members opposite would be doing if they ever came to 
government again. 
 
That isn’t the case with this government, Mr. Speaker. This 
government’s last resort, very last resort, would be any sort of 
tax increase. And I think the people of Saskatchewan are 
realizing that brand that I think is starting to stick with our 
government is that the very last resort would be tax increases. 
That’s why, on a tough budget when revenues are flat, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no shortage of places that people would like to 
see us spend money. The only way you could ever do that is if 
you increase the taxes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve held them flat, and I 
think the people of the province respect that. And we’ll see as 
we go to the polls in a couple of years how that plays out. But I 

think it’s a good brand that’s certainly in place. 
 
I touched on the controlled spending. There isn’t a ministry or a 
constituent, an MLA that wouldn’t have areas in their 
constituency or in a minister’s responsibility that we couldn’t 
see increased spending — absolutely you could. And they’re all 
very good ideas, Mr. Speaker, for the most part. Mind you the 
couple from the NDP . . . I don’t know about a couple from the 
NDP, but for the most part on this side I can say that every idea 
that’s come forward as far as increased spending has been 
thought out. It’s a good idea. Of course you can’t do them all, 
and that’s why controlled spending is so important. 
 
Investing in infrastructure and investments in people are the last 
two kind of cornerstones of this budget, and they’re very, very 
real. That’s why I want to touch on just briefly about the 
highways budget. As I said, Mr. Speaker, the record amount of 
spending in highways will be going forward — 664.5 million, 
an incredible spend, Mr. Speaker. The budget itself — it took 
me a little while to get to this point — but the budget itself, a 
$14 billion budget. What does that work out to a day? Because 
14 billion seems to be a pretty big number and a lot of zeros. 
What does that work out to a day? It works out to $38.5 million 
spent each and every day. What does that work out? $1.6 
million. 
 
$1.6 million spent every hour in Saskatchewan would equate to 
a $14 billion budget, and from what I’ve heard on that side, it 
just isn’t enough. I don’t know. If $1.6 million per hour in this 
year’s budget isn’t enough, what would be enough for the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker? We’ve never heard that. They can throw out 
numbers and they can throw out wishes. But they never, ever 
talk about what that would be accumulative, other than we 
know that in the last election it was a $5 billion increase in the 
budget of spending, Mr. Speaker, totally unrealistic. 
 
But what does $664.5 billion look like in the Ministry of 
Highways? Well, it includes $405.2 million invested in 
transportation capital, in other words, new infrastructure that 
will be completed around the province. That’s a huge spend on 
new infrastructure. That’s land purchases. That’s building a ring 
road around Estevan for example, who my colleague beside me 
here, the member from Estevan, has been very strong for her 
community, extremely strong for her community, and has raised 
this issue on a regular basis. That’s why we are glad to be able 
to see that move forward because of her strong lobby, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a great project, and we look forward to seeing that 
move forward. 
 
Also, supporting RMs and city municipalities for example, Mr. 
Speaker, an increase of over $500,000 this year to the MREP 
[municipal roads for the economy program] program . . . no, to 
the urban highway connector program, bringing it to $8.4 
million. And of course last year we saw the MREP program 
which is for the rural municipalities increasing by $2 million to 
25.5 million. 
 
Extremely good investment into those municipalities, both 
urban and rural. More to do, absolutely more to do on that front, 
because the rural municipalities are seeing growth. The urban 
municipalities are seeing growth. This money goes to them as 
far as being able to invest in, for example, rural Saskatchewan 
bridges, culverts, that type of thing. In urban Saskatchewan, 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4875 

again bridges and other roadways, such as this year we are able 
to do a section of the Ring Road matching dollars. In fact the 
city of Regina went past the matching dollars and were able to 
repair some of their infrastructure. 
 
$250 million will go to repairing existing roadways that we 
have, whether it’s the thin membrane highways or secondary 
highways recapping; $37 million to bridges, five major bridge 
rehabs and numerous culvert replacements, many initiatives like 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It really is a budget that not only deals with the existing 
infrastructure and keeps it up to date, but also into the new 
infrastructure. For example I can say again, I’ve heard from the 
members opposite and the member from Regina Rosemont who 
would talk about the traffic on Dewdney. And we’re very aware 
of that traffic that’s on Dewdney and some of the challenges 
that that would have. That’s why it’s so important that we 
continue work on the bypass around Regina — east Regina 
bypass or west Regina bypass, depending on which section 
you’re talking about — looking at that as a P3. The member 
opposite opposes P3s even though it will deal with the very 
issue that he’s been raising on a daily basis and how important 
that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also pre-construction work that will be 
done with the twinning of 6 and 39. There will be work done 
with the four-laning between Estevan and Bienfait, also 
between Saskatoon and Delisle. Passing lanes that haven’t been 
used in the province for many, many years between Balgonie 
and Fort Qu’Appelle have been very effective. We’re looking at 
using those passing lanes then from Delisle on to Rosetown 
where the traffic is very heavy, and also work on 16 Highway 
from Saskatoon to Clavet is an extremely important corridor 
that certainly needs work. 
 
Just kind of in closing on the highways budget, because I could 
go on forever, and I’m not going to do that. But it’s interesting. 
Since 2008 we have made 267 kilometres of major highway 
improvements, 1,080 kilometres of rural highway 
improvements. We’ve repaved over 2,300 kilometres, improved 
a total, since 2008, 8,600 kilometres of provincial roadways. 
That’s the distance from Regina to Mexico City, is what our 
government has improved on the roadways. More to do, 
absolutely, and I heard it at SARM. Some of the thin membrane 
highways or TMS [thin membrane surface] highways are seeing 
a lot of traffic, especially within the oil field, and some of the 
work that needs to be done on those. 
 
I’m glad that some of the RMs are looking at conversions, 
moving a thin membrane highway that takes very little traffic 
because people don’t want to drive on it and converting it, 
working together, into a super grid that can haul primary 
weights and, Mr. Speaker, into the future perhaps an asphalt 
surface into the future if that was the case. But at least the 
roadway will be taking heavy traffic, primary weight traffic and 
keeping it off those thin membrane road surfaces. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, just in closing, I really think it’s 
important that we look at the job that we do when we come to 
this building. We stand up for our constituents. We lobby hard 
for our constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, when a government 
listens to those lobbies, listens to the arguments put forward, I 

think it’s incumbent on us to follow through and back those 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can think of three that are very, very evident, Mr. 
Speaker, regarding this past budget. I’ve already touched on the 
member from Regina Rosemont, who I know is going to vote 
against the budget, except he has been in here for about six 
years and he has had one pet peeve. And that pet peeve is no 
more GRF, only summary financial statements. That’s all he 
has talked about when it comes to the finance issue or the 
finance file, Mr. Speaker. He wanted to see summaries. He 
brought it up in committee. He brought it up in question period. 
He brought it up in every opportunity that member had to 
speak. Mr. Speaker, this budget is based on a summary financial 
statement, Mr. Speaker. That member has one duty, and that’s 
to vote where his mouth has been for the last six years, Mr. 
Speaker. We will be seeing on Thursday if that member can 
stand up and vote with his feet instead of just talk with his 
mouth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another member on that side, Regina Elphinstone, 
has talked about a couple of schools, and day after day he will 
read petitions on those schools, whether it’s the petition 
regarding a gym at Sacred Heart — very good rationale 
absolutely, and he’s got all the arguments behind it. Also he’s 
lobbied hard for Connaught, Mr. Speaker. Those have been the 
two issues. If you were to ask him what are the issues in his 
constituency, Mr. Speaker — even though I don’t believe 
Connaught is in his constituency or maybe Sacred Heart; if they 
are or not, it doesn’t matter — he has got one issue in his 
constituency, and that’s the shape of those two schools. And 
he’s brought it to the government’s attention day in and day out, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s on petitions. He hasn’t asked any 
questions. He’s had his member from Regina Rosemont ask 
those questions. 
 
But he has got a duty to stand up for his constituents in this 
House on Thursday, Mr. Speaker, when this budget is voted on 
because the two issues that he raised, the two schools that he 
raised have been mentioned in the budget. There is money in 
the budget to fix them, Mr. Speaker. If he stands and votes for 
the amendment, and not in agreement with the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, each and every one of his constituents had better know 
that, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly he has not raised 
another issue in this House except education, whether it’s 
through petitions. And he doesn’t have the nerve to stand and 
vote for his constituents, what would be best for his 
constituents, Mr. Speaker. His constituents will remember that 
in the next general election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my final point, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cumberland. Now you know, not to be too negative, but if there 
is a one-trick pony, if there is a one-issue MLA, I don’t know 
who else it would be. Because in fairness to the member from 
Regina Rosemont, he’s raised some other issues. Even though 
summary has been his main one, you know, and Dewdney is 
certainly becoming his issue, he’s raised other issues. The 
member from Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — No. Elphinstone. The Regina 
Elphinstone, in his fairness, has raised only the two schools 



4876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

recently, but has raised other issues in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
To fairness, he can try and rationalize, even though this covers 
what he should be doing, this budget, he can rationalize not 
standing in his place and voting for the budget. 
 
But for the life of me, I cannot understand how a member could 
make the drive down from Cumberland for the last six years, 
Mr. Speaker, for the last six years, and raise one issue in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. And it was either in this House . . . And I 
remember for a number of years when I was the minister of 
Health, Mr. Speaker, we’d sit in committee, and every day in 
committee when we were talking about the budget, he would 
come in and he’d ask his set questions, when are you going to 
put a long-term care facility into La Ronge, Mr. Speaker? That 
was his issue. 
 
In fact, you know I can tell you as Minister of Highways, he’s 
the critic for STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. 
He’ll weave it in. What about an STC bus to La Ronge and if 
we had a long-term care facility in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. That 
is all he has talked about for six years in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. Well the budget addresses his very issue. 
 
Now I understand that he’s going to be whipped on that side 
and you better stand up for the motion. But if he was to stand up 
for his constituents and not for the member, whoever the Whip 
is, I guess it would be Regina Lakeview . . . 
 
[22:00] 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s him. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Oh, it’s him. Well now he’s really 
conflicted, Mr. Speaker. He’s really conflicted. I wonder what 
he’s talking about right now. He’s saying, you know the guy 
makes a good point. I think I should stand up for my 
constituents, except I’m the Whip. I can’t. Because the leader 
has told me it’s a whip vote and I have to stand on behalf of the 
party. 
 
Well I could tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ve been to La 
Ronge a number of times. I certainly don’t profess to know it. 
But if the people in La Ronge were to vote, should he stand up 
for his NDP party or should he stand up for the constituents of 
La Ronge, I bet you it’s 100 to 1 for the constituents of La 
Ronge, Mr. Speaker. So that member has a duty. Whipped or 
not, that member has a duty to stand up for his constituents on 
Thursday as other members do on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can tell you . . . My last story here because I’m going too long. 
But my last story, Mr. Speaker, is the member from Regina 
Rosemont said to me . . . Oh I was saying that the member from 
Cumberland has to vote for this budget, and the member from 
Rosemont said, oh come on. You know, you’re an MLA on that 
side. You’re the member from Indian Head-Milestone. You 
never voted for a budget. And I go, guess why? They closed 
seven schools in my constituency. They didn’t open up one 
long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. They let the highways 
crumble. And you wanted me to vote for an NDP budget? Had 
they addressed some of those issues that I had at that time — 
and if I wasn’t the Whip at that time, thank heavens — I would 
have maybe even thought about it. But when you’re a one-horse 
pony and you come into this place and you lobby day in and 

day out and you’ve only got one chance to vote for it, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s see whether he stands up for his constituents or 
he stands up for the NDP. 
 
I’m standing up for this government and a budget that’s as good 
a budget as anywhere in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an honour to stand here today and speak about the 
2014 budget debate. But first of all as everyone else has done, I 
should thank my family: my husband, Doug, and all my 
extended family, the four children and the daughter-in-law and 
son-in-law and our six beautiful grandchildren. And they are the 
great support at home. They keep me very grounded, so I am 
blessed to have them. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my CAs [constituency 
assistant]. I have a satellite office in Big River and Jason Beebe 
is there looking after things. And in my main office near Prince 
Albert just north of the city, I have Marcus Abrametz. And 
thank you to Joan and Bev and Cora. They are also helping out 
at the office when we need them. 
 
I’d also like to thank the people of Saskatchewan Rivers for all 
the support they have given me over the seven years that I have 
been elected. And I’d like to describe how this budget will 
affect them. I was very grateful for my colleagues giving a lot 
of support and dialogue regarding the budget. So thank you to 
the member from Canora-Pelly and the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook who seconded it. 
 
Saskatchewan Rivers is home to many scenic areas and parks. 
Our constituents are very, very lucky to live in that beautiful 
area, but we do have a lot of tourists and travellers coming 
through. So consequently I am very interested in what happens 
in the environment and the parks. 
 
And I was very proud to see that our government has invested 
in the parks by increasing 244 per cent in the past seven years. 
Provincial parks have had an attendance record of 3.7 million 
visits in 2013. The first new provincial park to open in nearly 
20 years occurred in Saskatchewan Rivers; the Great Blue 
Heron Provincial Park was designated in 2013. Mr. Speaker, I 
think Saskatchewan provides high-quality holiday times for all 
families, and we are investing in people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is also investing in safe and 
reliable health care. I’d like to make mention that our 
government’s next major health facility investment will be in 
Prince Albert, with the 2 million provided to begin planning the 
renewal of the Victoria Hospital which serves so many people 
in Saskatchewan Rivers and beyond. 
 
Cecile Hunt, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Prince 
Albert Parkland Health Region said, “It’s a very supportive 
gesture to the needs of Prince Albert and surrounding area. As a 
health region — I speak on behalf of my board of directors also 
— we’re very pleased.” That was regarding the budget of 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with my colleagues from Batoche, Prince 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4877 

Albert Carlton, and Northcote, I had the privilege and honour of 
sharing in the celebrations of the grand opening of the Prince 
Albert Carlton gym. This was a great day for the community of 
students, as the whole area will benefit from access to this 
state-of-the-art facility. It’s also a fitness and activity centre, 
and I think the individuals and different sports teams will have 
enhancement and quality there. This will also be able to host 
major provincial tournaments, and I think it will be a financial 
boon to the region in Prince Albert area. Also, the majority of 
the work was performed by local contractors, which was a great 
benefit to our local economy and area. 
 
The overall investment by the government for the provincial 
school infrastructure since 2007 is approximately $700 million. 
This new Carlton gym will have a great future, and our entire 
area will benefit from this facility. More students will have a 
greater opportunity to explore, learn, and achieve in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And over the winter, I had the opportunity to speak with several 
school groups. Mr. Speaker, thank you for attending the group 
in Debden regarding parliamentary democracy in legislation. 
Our young people are in need of a lot of information, and I 
think you provided some good things for them that day. 
 
Our government has also appointed a delegation to address 
grain transportation, and we have met with grain companies on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan producers to deal with the backlog 
of the grain movement. Working with producers and industry 
associations have been a top priority to ensure the challenges of 
grain producers are addressed. 
 
I myself met with the northern fringe grain producers in 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and I was able to address their concerns. 
The grain movement remains a top priority with our 
government and we will continue to work with them and the 
federal government. Whether you operate a farm in rural 
Saskatchewan or across Canada or across the world, you need 
grain transportation, and I think our government is addressing 
it. 
 
We value the farmers of Saskatchewan, and we measure our 
success by their success. We will focus on the work ahead, and 
we are dedicated to reaching the full potential of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, this agriculture budget of over 371 million will 
help the grain and livestock producers have the support they 
need to keep the farming industry strong and to continue to feed 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I had the honour of presenting a 
constituent of mine with the Saskatchewan Award of 
Excellence at the district of Lakeland where he works. Reeve 
and council were on hand to share in our congratulations to this 
very humble man. Ernest Locke went above and beyond during 
the 2013 flooding that we experienced in the Saskatchewan 
Rivers constituency. He worked almost non-stop around the 
clock in one community, and he displayed a lot of compassion 
and great empathy for those affected, the distressed residents of 
this district. And I would again like to thank Ernie for his 
dedication to his community because volunteers do strengthen 
our province. Our government is investing in people living in 
rural municipalities, just like this fellow, across Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 

This particular budget provides over 394 million of direct 
provincial support to municipalities like Lakeland. And I would 
like to quote about revenue sharing from Debra Button, the 
SUMA president. “As the president of SUMA today I’m very 
pleased with the amount of revenue sharing we are still 
getting.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, another wonderful example of the people of this 
province and right here in Saskatchewan Rivers is the Buckland 
Fire and Rescue volunteers. They received the Exemplary 
Service Award for their decade of service with fire departments. 
Those being honoured have volunteered at the fire halls for 
more than 20 years. And one of them is Tony Yungwirth, my 
neighbour, with 40 years of volunteering for this department. 
Buckland Fire and Rescue started with one truck and now have 
grown to 10. One volunteer described what he likes about being 
a fire hall volunteer. 
 

Brotherhood, it’s the biggest thing. It doesn’t where you go 
. . . a brother’s a brother’s a brother. I can go into any fire 
hall at any time and if you need help with anything you just 
walk in and they’ll more than help you . . . 
 
That’s . . . being a volunteer, living in a rural community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this budget contains investment in people and 
infrastructure: 124 million for important municipal 
infrastructure, 37.6 million to renew bridges and culverts in 
municipalities, over 25 million to support economic growth and 
safety on rural municipal roads. This budget is about people, 
and it’s about people like the ones I’ve described in the 
Buckland Fire and Rescue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern employment at mine sites in 
Saskatchewan set a record for the highest levels ever. Employed 
at northern mine sites are over 1,900 northern workers with 47 
per cent of this workforce coming from northern-based 
company and contract workers. This budget provides almost 
6.69 million for post-secondary institutions, educating and 
training people as skilled workers. 
 
Earlier this month, I took the opportunity to visit and tour with 
President Bill Kordyban at the Big River saw mill. And through 
this visit, I was able to see first-hand and listen to the 
employees the impact Saskatchewan’s economy is having on 
our towns and villages. It is so good to see the jobs and the 
towns thriving. Their second shift actually started today, with 
approximately 80 staff employed at the mill site and additional 
men and women working at harvesting and trucking the 
product. 
 
Our government is investing in infrastructure to help people 
work in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan major Crown corps are 
projected to spend 2 billion on capital projects, up 100 million 
from the last. This will improve people’s quality of life at home 
and work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are a province of immigrants. We are the children, 
grandchildren, and great-grandchildren of the ones that wanted 
a better life. This budget reflects that in our ability to have 
steady growth investing in people. This budget contains 2 
million to begin planning the renewal of Prince Albert Victoria 
Hospital which treats so many of our Saskatchewan Rivers 



4878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, jobs flee because of factors like excessive 
taxation, top-heavy regulations, and misguided policies. This 
budget does not micromanage Saskatchewan people’s lives or 
use the nanny state to control or become caretakers — in 
Margaret Thatcher’s words, a state that takes too much from us 
to do too much for us. Mr. Speaker, this budget projects a future 
for unlimited possibilities, responsible spending, controlled 
spending, and no tax increases. This budget is about steady 
growth while not overspending and incurring future debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe Saskatchewan’s best days have not yet 
been lived. Her greatest deeds will be fulfilled by the next 
generation to come. Education is the investment our generation 
makes for the future, and that is why this budget contains 
investment in student success, putting students first, providing 
24 million in funding for preventative maintenance for the 
many schools across Saskatchewan. We are building a 
foundation for good education. This government will not be 
spending our children’s inheritance on failed stimulus plans or 
other misguided economic theories. 
 
This budget contains funding to invest in learning opportunities 
and licensed child care spaces. This budget provides an increase 
of 1.2 million to support new pre-kindergarten programs as our 
families continue to grow, and this is of specific importance to 
all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget strengthens our economy by balancing 
the budget and encouraging the growth of the private sector. We 
are allies of business, which grows jobs and economy and the 
dignity of work and strengthens family values. Mr. Speaker, 
this budget allows men and women to flourish based on their 
hard work, their own vision, and their own personal 
responsibility. 
 
Saskatchewan people are telling us they want a leaner and less 
intrusive government, where the government is subject to the 
people, not the other way around. Mr. Speaker, what I learned 
growing up on the farm was a way of life that was centred on 
hard work and thrift. Those values have stuck with me 
throughout my life. 
 
This budget demonstrates balancing between the needs and 
wants of Saskatchewan people. Good government involvement 
leads to independence, good schools, quality roads, and health 
care. Mr. Speaker, a budget containing provisions for the 
vulnerable is the true test of a good government. There are 
increased benefits in seniors’ income plan, personal care home 
benefits, and Saskatchewan assured income for disability. 
 
When the government is spending your money, Saskatchewan 
people want, need, and deserve the government to be fiscally 
disciplined and accountable. This budget is about tapping 
Saskatchewan’s energy to create prosperity and security. 
Ensuring a balanced budget is fundamental to building a strong 
economy and creating jobs. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I strongly 
believe it is our responsibility to guard the future of 
Saskatchewan. And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I support this 
budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly an honour 
and a pleasure for me to stand here in this Assembly today and 
enter into this debate on our 2014-15 balanced summary budget 
delivered by our Finance minister in this Assembly last week. 
 
I’d like to just acknowledge a few people. I would first like to 
thank my wife, Sheila, who has been there for me and supports 
me at all times. When I first decided to try and get elected, she 
helped me and supported me on each attempt. Finally after 
several attempts, the good people of Saskatoon Meewasin 
constituency gave me the opportunity to represent them in this 
Assembly. Mr. Speaker, my wife, Sheila, has supported me 
through each campaign, win or lose, and today she still supports 
me, even though I’m gone so often, and Sheila has to rebalance 
her time to cook meals and take our three dogs for a walk every 
day by herself, and I am grateful to her. My wife truly is my 
best friend and she is my rock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my daughter Shanaya, 
who has always supported me and has been door knocking with 
me during every election since she was 12 years old — that’s 
10 years. 
 
I would like to thank my CA Matt Donlevy for his help and 
assistance. Lastly I would like to thank my constituency 
executive who work tirelessly supporting me and our 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third budget that I have taken part in 
and, Mr. Speaker, it’s the third balanced summary budget I’m 
proud to participate in. Mr. Speaker, the 2014-15 agriculture 
budget of 371.6 million will help to ensure farmers and ranchers 
have the support they need to keep the agriculture industry 
growing strong after record production levels and exports in 
2013. Mr. Speaker, the budget is highlighted by nearly 79 
million for strategic initiatives such as research and market 
development, an increase of 7.5 million from the previous year. 
Saskatchewan producers harvested a record crop of 38.4 million 
tonnes in 2013, surpassing the 2020 growth plan target of 36 
million tonnes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan students and post-secondary 
institutions continue to benefit from strong provincial support in 
this budget. Mr. Speaker, the budget provides an increase in 
operating funds to post-secondary institutions, investments in 
student support, and funding for key capital projects. The 
Minister of Advanced Education will receive 817.8 million, an 
increase of 24 million or 3.7 per cent over the last year to 
support operational increases and several key investments at 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget makes post-secondary education more 
affordable by providing 134 million in student supports, 
including 82 million in refundable and non-refundable tax 
credits for the graduate retention program, an increase of 18.1 
million; 7 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship; 
7.5 million in funding for the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings; 32 million for the Student Aid Fund to 
support grants and bursaries through the student loan program, 
which all of us know is important from when we went to 
school. Mr. Speaker, the budget also provides 32.6 million to 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4879 

capital investments in support of post-secondary infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Economy will allocate 500,000 for 
the establishment of the manufacturing centre of excellence 
which will focus on productivity improvement, innovation, and 
workforce development for the provincial manufacturing centre. 
Mr. Speaker, the total value of Saskatchewan manufacturing 
shipments for 2013 was approximately $15.2 billion, a new 
record for the province, up from 14.2 in 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall funding for education has increased by 3.1 
per cent. School operating funding which includes money 
collected from the education property tax will be 1.82 billion, 
up 42 million or 2.4 per cent from last year. This budget also 
continues to address the challenges of growth that some school 
divisions are facing by providing 19.2 million new funding for 
student enrolment increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is continuing to invest in learning 
opportunities and licensed child care spaces. This budget 
provides an increase of 1.2 million to support 15 new 
pre-kindergarten programs and 2.2 million in increased funding 
to create 500 additional licensed child care spaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will invest 5 billion in health care 
in this budget to continue the health system Patient First 
transformation and support improved access to high-quality 
care for the province’s growing population. The funding is 144 
million or a 3 per cent increase over last year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget includes investments to reduce surgical 
wait times and emergency department waits. Advanced key 
capital projects develop additional collaborative emergency 
centres, improve services for seniors and rural physician 
workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, capital investments total 95 million, funding for 
ongoing projects, including 16 million to complete the new 
hospital in Moose Jaw and 27 million to continue construction 
of long-term facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, Kipling, Maple 
Creek, and Prince Albert. 
 
The province has earmarked 4 million to reduce emergency 
department wait times and improve patient flow. This includes 
an emergency department wait time initiative, development of a 
program to provide house calls to seniors with complex needs, 
and implementation of the hot-spotting concept. Mr. Speaker, in 
the coming year a hot-spotting pilot program will begin in 
Saskatoon and Regina to identify and assist these high-cost, 
high-use patients, helping them receive the care they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also invests 60.5 million in surgical 
wait-lists to support achievement of a three month wait time 
target in all health care regions by the end of 2015. Mr. 
Speaker, the 2014-15 budget provides investments and 
long-term care, home care, acute care, prescription drugs and 
other services for seniors. It also provides an additional million 
for improvement, 7 million for improvements to seniors’ care 
including funding for the Home First/Quick Response pilot 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities will use 3.25 billion, an 
increase of 107 million, to provide services through its cancer 

centres in Regina and Saskatoon, offer prevention and early 
detection programs and conduct research. This represents a 4.9 
million or 3.3 per cent increase over last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget released by the Finance minister last 
week announcing there would be no tax increases in this 
budget, no personal tax increases, no education tax, no property 
tax increases, and no increases to the credit unions’ tax 
incentives, Mr. Speaker, in fact nearly 112,000 people no longer 
pay any provincial income tax at all since 2007. The people of 
Saskatchewan have had the largest property tax reduction in the 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was reported that the Saskatchewan population 
continued to grow in the year 2013 by 20,000 people. This now 
means that Saskatchewan has a population of 1,117,500-plus 
people. This makes our province the second fastest growing 
province in all of Canada and puts us on our way to the growth 
plan goal of 1.2 million by the year 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget also sees the government 
moving to a summary focus which was recommended by the 
Provincial Auditor. This budget has forecasted a surplus of 71 
million, taking into account all government business enterprises 
including commercial, Crown corporations, government service 
organizations which include ministries, boards of education, 
and health regions among others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 2014-15 is projected at 14.07, revenue I mean, 
for 14.07 billion, down point seven per cent from last year, 
while expenses is estimated to be 14 billion, down point two per 
cent from last year. This year’s budget invests in the 
infrastructure and people aligning with the goals and priorities 
of the Saskatchewan plan for growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan municipalities are receiving 394.6 
million in direct provincial support in this year’s provincial 
budget to build communities and enhance the quality of life for 
their residents. Overall municipal revenue sharing is more than 
double what it was in 2007, up 129.7 million. Saskatchewan’s 
largest city, Saskatoon, will receive municipal revenue sharing 
of just under 46 million in 2014-15, up 159 per cent from 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all of the schools that are going 
to be built, 18 in both NDP land . . . And let’s not forget the 176 
schools the NDP closed. I hope that they vote for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that said, I will be supporting this budget 
which was introduced by our Finance minister last week. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The time now being 10:30 p.m., this House is 
adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 



  



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4851 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4856 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4862 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4870 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4872 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4876 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4878 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


