
























































Hansard: November 05, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5737 
 November 5, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly and to guests, 
it’s an honour to introduce some very special people who have 
joined us in your gallery. Earlier this day the Minister 
Responsible for SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
announced the advent of Memorial Cross plates, licence plates 
with that designation for those that are eligible for this great 
honour, Mr. Speaker. And we have some that have joined us 
today in the House who are among the first recipients. 
 
I want to introduce to you and through you, someone that’s no 
stranger to the Assembly, again. The Usher of the Black Rod 
for all of us, Ben Walsh, is here. Susan and Charles Shipway, 
Janet Mould, I believe are here, and then Kathleen, Terry, and 
Sharon Callaghan are here, Mr. Speaker. They are here 
honouring respectively Master Corporal Jeffrey Walsh, killed in 
2006; Sergeant Scott Shipway or Prescott Shipway, killed in 
2008; and also Rifleman John Callaghan who served in World 
War II, Mr. Speaker. Not present are the family, the Memorial 
Cross recipients for Corporal David Braun who was killed in 
2006 in Afghanistan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a very grateful province that presents this 
small designation, these licence plates along with what is 
already the Memorial Cross for these individuals that have 
joined us today. And if I may just very briefly quote from the 
famous Bixby letter that the US [United States] President 
Lincoln wrote to a mother that had lost much in terms of 
members of her family, sons, to battle. He wrote, and I offer it 
today through you and through members of the House: 
 

I pray that our Heavenly Father may assuage the anguish 
of your bereavement, and leave you only the cherished 
memory of the loved and lost, and the solemn pride that 
must be yours to have laid so costly a sacrifice upon the 
altar of freedom. 

 
I ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming these families, Mr. Speaker, who have given so 
much, who have experienced pain that few of us could relate to 
or will experience, but who have gone through a great amount 
of suffering and a great amount of mourning, but also, Mr. 
Speaker, families who have, and rightfully so, a huge amount of 
pride for what their children and their loved ones have done and 
what they have sacrificed. 
 

So on behalf of the official opposition, we once again want to 
say thank you to these families. And with the advent of the 
licence plate brought today, Mr. Speaker, when it’s looked 
upon, may it bring a smile to the families’ faces and remember 
the good memories that were shared with their beloved 
children. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the legislature, it is my 
privilege to introduce some guests up in your gallery. Today we 
have four incredible special athletes: Kelly McRuvie, Jillian 
Kulbida, Ryan Darmokid, and Tammi Stevens. They’re joined 
by Special Olympics volunteer Barb Fredrickson and Special 
Olympics staff Jennifer, Chelsea, and Faye. 
 
The Special Olympics movement is a tremendous example of 
how sport can enhance lives, change attitude, and strengthen 
communities. It is truly an honour to introduce these athletes 
and all the volunteers and staff that are in behind them. I ask all 
the members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 
these amazing athletes and the coaches and staff that are with 
them here today. 
 
What you do and the value of the sports program that you’re 
involved in is something that’s important to everybody in 
Saskatchewan. We want to congratulate you for the hard work 
and would like to welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 2007 the 
population of Saskatchewan has risen by more than 120,000. 
It’s my privilege today to introduce one of the newest 
Saskatchewanians who is with us today: Jacob Dallas Graham. 
He is the son of Chad Glascock and Jenn Graham who, Mr. 
Speaker, is well known to all of us as a reporter for Canadian 
Press. 
 
To Jacob, I would like to say this about your mother. She reads 
things thoroughly. She remembers them forever, and she can 
cross-examine like a fine courtroom lawyer. To you, young 
man, I would suggest that you toe the line, obey curfews. And if 
she treats you as she treats us, you will not get away with 
anything. 
 
Seriously, Mr. Speaker, Jenn is a highly regarded, superb 
reporter, somebody who is very much valued in our province. 
And I would like to on behalf of all MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly], welcome Jacob and Jenn to their 
legislature and wish them the very best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



5738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming Jacob Dallas Graham to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we each have our individual families 
that do so much for us and that we love dearly. But for those of 
us that work in this building, whether we’re on government side 
or opposition side, whether we’re at the Clerk’s Table or the 
staff or the press gallery, there is also a larger legislative family. 
And so it’s appropriate that we welcome and recognize an 
important event like the birth of Jacob. And we want to simply 
wish Jennifer and Chad all the best as they settle in, and as 
Jennifer is at home during this year of leave that it would be a 
wonderful time with her son. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
official opposition, we welcome this new arrival to the 
province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the 
west gallery are three representatives that I’ve met with a little 
earlier today from the Western Development Museum. And 
give us a little wave here when I say your name: Ken 
Azzopardi, the board Chair; Joan Champ, the CEO [chief 
executive officer]; and Cal Glasman, the CFO [chief financial 
officer] for the Western Development Museum. 
 
They’ve got some pretty exciting things on the horizon, and 
they’ve done some great work in not only promoting this 
province but a lot of our histories. And on behalf of this 
government I thank you for that, and welcome to the legislature 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Oh there, 
I can see you now. Want to welcome these individuals from the 
Western Development Museum to the Legislative Assembly, 
and in particular Joan Champ who is the head of the Saskatoon 
Western Development Museum, which is in my riding of 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
And I had the pleasure this summer of going to the threshing 
demonstration that they host every year at the Western 
Development Museum. It was a fascinating display of the 
history of combining in our province, and the grade fours of 
Saskatoon were very fortunate to be there that day. 
 
The Western Development Museum plays an integral role in the 
preservation of our history in Saskatchewan, and I congratulate 
these folks and all their staff for the hard work they do and 
would like to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 25 grade 5 students who are seated in the east 
gallery. These students are from Ethel Milliken Elementary 
School in Regina Lakeview, and they’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Chantel Sebastian as well as chaperones, Ms. Eden 

Sampson and Ms. Kailyn Smith. So I would ask all members to 
welcome them to the legislature. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
When asked to explain how the government could allow the 
private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without 
any penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, 
“You are assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 
people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 
realities within our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 
Avenue as it relates to heavy-haul truck traffic and their failure 
to plan appropriately. We call on the government, the 
petitioners call on the government to immediately take action to 
ensure safety. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5739 

petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. And the people who signed this wish to bring to the 
attention of the Legislative Assembly the following: 
 

Whereas the government knew about major safety 
concerns related to its smart meter project; whereas the 
government ignored those safety concerns and plowed 
ahead with its program; and whereas the safety of 
Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk; we, in 
the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
take responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 
information about safety concerns with its smart meter 
program, including through the immediate resignation of 
the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, and a fully 
independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 
that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Regina and 
Kelvington, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present 
a petition for a private bill on behalf of petitioners from Mohyla 
Institute. The prayer of the petition requests to amend an Act to 
Mohyla Institute to amend the requirements upon the winding 
up of the affairs of the corporation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to amend an Act 
respecting Mohyla Institute, being chapter 106 of the 
Statutes of Saskatchewan 1958, accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the Chair, Vice-Chair, and executive 
member of the board of directors of Mohyla Institute, and I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Anniversary of Landmark Ruling 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Ten years 
ago today, Saskatchewan’s Court of Queen’s Bench declared 
that marriage is the “lawful union of two persons to the 
exclusion of all others.” This landmark ruling, brought on 
behalf of five couples who challenged the law, finally allowed 
the legal marriage of same-sex partners in this province. It was 
an exciting day that showed Saskatchewan is a place where 
equal rights are valued. 
 
Unfortunately, six years later this government felt that the 
marriage commissioner should be able to refuse a same-sex 
marriage on religious grounds and referred their draft 
legislation to the courts. The Court of Appeal disagreed and had 
this to say about the government’s draft bill: 

The potential for psychological harm . . . to individual 
same-sex couples . . . is . . . significant. 
 
More important, however, is the affront to dignity, and the 
perpetuation of social and political prejudice and negative 
stereo-typing that such refusals would cause. Furthermore, 
even if the risk of actual refusal were minimal, knowing 
that legislation would legitimize such discrimination is 
itself an affront to the dignity and worth of homosexual 
individuals. History has established and jurisprudence has 
confirmed the extreme vulnerability of this group to 
discrimination and even hatred. 

 
There is more work to be done. We still need changes to the 
Human Rights Code in order to provide better protection for all 
Saskatchewan residents through the inclusion of the terms 
gender identity and gender expression as prohibited grounds for 
discrimination. But, Mr. Speaker, today we celebrate this 
landmark ruling 10 years ago and vow to continue the equality 
struggles for the LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender] 
community. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Memorial Cross Recipients 
Receive Commemorative Licence Plates 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today, along with the Minister Responsible for SGI and a 
number of our MLAs, I had the honour of presenting special 
commemorative licence plates to some very deserving 
recipients. Our government unveiled and presented the very 
first of these special plates designed to honour recipients of the 
Memorial Cross. This licence plate is available to Memorial 
Cross recipients by contacting SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Memorial Cross is an award that has been 
granted since 1919 to the loved ones of Canadian Armed Forces 
personnel who died in service, or whose death was a result of 
their service. Ben and Margaret Walsh of Regina each received 
a Memorial Cross in honour of their son, Master Corporal 
Jeffrey Walsh, who was killed on August 9, 2006, while serving 
in Afghanistan. 
 
Susan Shipway from Churchbridge, Saskatchewan was awarded 
the Memorial Cross after her son, Sergeant Prescott Shipway, 
was killed in the line of duty on September the 7th, 2008 while 
on a second tour in Afghanistan. 
 
Mrs. Patty Braun received the Memorial Cross when her son, 
Corporal David Braun, was killed by a suicide bomber in 
Kandahar in 2006. 
 
Kathleen Callaghan and her son Terry from Regina each 
received the Memorial Cross when they lost Rifleman John 
Callaghan, Kathleen’s husband and Terry’s father. Rifleman 
Callaghan served as a medic during World War II. He 
contracted an illness during his service and later passed away 
from that illness in July of 2010. 
 
To Mr. and Mrs. Walsh, Mrs. Shipway, Mrs. Braun, and the 



5740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Callaghans, our government offers its sincere and heartfelt 
gratitude to your family members for their ultimate sacrifice in 
protecting our great nation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

North Central Lakers in City Finals 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the 
House to bring attention to the remarkable achievements of the 
North Central Lakers, a local team in the Regina Minor Football 
League. 
 
On Thursday, October 30th, the Lakers played in their first city 
championship since they were founded eight years ago. Though 
they lost the game to the Renegades — and my compliments to 
them — the Lakers have many reasons to celebrate. 
 
The Lakers’ coach, Brandon Brooks, spoke about their unique 
team with the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news, 
saying, “This team is about different guys coming from 
different parts of the city and establishing a brotherhood. That’s 
what we accomplished this year more than anything, even if we 
didn’t win a trophy.” And “I’ve got guys from all across North 
Central of different ethnicities. And you know what? We’re a 
beautiful team.” 
 
The Lakers represent Saskatchewan at its best, teammates from 
all different backgrounds coming together to pursue a common 
goal. They’re the embodiment of our province’s motto, “from 
many peoples, strength.” 
 
I’m proud to represent the constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre where many of these players live, and I’m 
sure that they are proud of their achievements as well. I hope 
that all members will join me in congratulating them on their 
success and wishing them all the best next season. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today I, 
along with several other colleagues, will have the great pleasure 
of taking part in a soccer match with the members of the 
Special Olympics Saskatchewan at Mosaic Stadium in Regina. 
 
As a father of a special Olympian, my connection to the 
athletes, volunteers, coaches, and staff has grown over the 
years. Mr. Speaker, Special Olympics Saskatchewan has been 
enriching the lives of people with intellectual disabilities in our 
province by delivering world-class sport programs in 
communities across Saskatchewan for over 40 years. They offer 
programs to children, youth, adults of all ages and abilities. 
Sport and physical activity programs range from daily training 
and local competition to high-performance competition on an 
international stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beyond improving and expanding the quality and 
accessibility of sport to individuals with intellectual disabilities, 
Special Olympics Saskatchewan strives to change attitudes to 

create more inclusive society and strengthen our communities. 
 
Trained coaches and dedicated volunteers help to deliver these 
programs to our athletes throughout the province. These athletes 
benefit greatly from the programs, which instill confidence, 
self-esteem, and other life skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in acknowledging the 
great work of Special Olympics Saskatchewan, thanking all the 
dedicated coaches and volunteers, and wishing the Special 
Olympic athletes continued success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Saturday, Yorkton Plumbing & Heating was awarded the 
Business of the Year award at the 31st annual Achievement in 
Business Excellence Awards, or ABEX Awards gala. I’m 
happy to announce that N.L. Construction Inc., also of Yorkton, 
took home the 2014 ABEX Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce Growth and Expansion Award. The ABEX awards 
are organized by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
Seven hundred and fifty people attended this year’s award 
ceremony which was held at the Delta in Regina. 
 
Justin Yawney, president of Yorkton Plumbing & Heating, 
accepted his award. The company has experienced continuous 
growth since it started by Mr. Yawney in 2007. Beginning with 
just one employee, the company now employees 62 people, 
who also play a large role in the success of the business. In 
2011 Justin Yawney received the ABEX award for Young 
Entrepreneur of the Year. 
 
N.L. Construction and Yorkton Plumbing & Heating are great 
examples of the success and growth the people and businesses 
of Saskatchewan have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justin moved to Alberta in the ’90s because he 
could not find work in Saskatchewan, but returned to 
Saskatchewan in 2007, opened Yorkton Plumbing & Heating, 
and has been successful ever since. At first the company mainly 
served the residential market, but has since expanded to the 
commercial market which now makes up over 70 per cent of his 
business. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Yorkton Plumbing & Heating and N.L. 
Construction Inc. on receiving the ABEX Awards. I wish them 
both continued success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Family Medicine Residents to Train in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in July of this 
year, four young doctors became the first family medical 
residents to train in Moose Jaw. Dr. Rob Haver, Heather 
Konkin, Brenton Janzen, and Amanda Waldner will live in 
Moose Jaw for the next two years, training in clinics and 
rotating through a number of specialists including obstetrics, 
general surgery, and geriatrics. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine recently 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5741 

expanded the family medical residents training program to 
allow physicians to train in smaller centres as part of 
Saskatchewan’s distributed medical education initiative. The 
expanded family medicine residents program is now offered in 
Saskatoon and Regina as well as Prince Albert, Swift Current, 
North Battleford, La Ronge, and now in Moose Jaw. More than 
430 U of S [University of Saskatchewan] medical residents are 
currently being trained across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative will help with physician recruitment 
and retention in smaller and rural communities as doctors are 
more likely to set up their practices in locations where they’ve 
received their training. Residents in smaller centres will benefit 
from greater opportunities for hands-on experience and 
one-on-one training than that may be available in larger centres. 
 
It’s my pleasure to acknowledge the College of Medicine for 
their commitment to supporting the health needs of our growing 
province and to congratulate Moose Jaw’s newest doctors in 
beginning their residency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatchewan Construction Association Gala 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 
October 23rd, I had the privilege to attend the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association 50th Anniversary and Member 
Awards Gala. In 1964 representatives from the Saskatoon, 
Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw construction associations 
and members from the Road Builders Association came 
together to discuss the formation of a provincial association. In 
1965 the Federation of Construction Associations was formed 
with the goal of advocating on behalf of the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Construction Association has 
been instrumental in acting as a compassionate and integral 
voice for the industry. Its commitments to its members can only 
be matched by their fortitude and dedication to growing our 
province. Mr. Speaker, it has been a pleasure working closely 
with the Saskatchewan Construction Association, and our 
government continues to look forward to building upon what 
has been to date a successful relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, honoured at the event for the Lifetime 
Achievement Award was Mr. Darrell Kincaid, president of 
Kincaid Interiors Ltd. The Lifetime Achievement Award 
recognizes an individual whose significant efforts have 
enhanced growth and development of the association and 
industry while keeping in focus association priorities and its 
members. Mr. Kincaid has over 40 years of experience in the 
construction industry. Kincaid Interiors began in 1974 working 
in the residential drywalling. Today it focuses mainly in the 
commercial sphere, offering many interior services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and all members of this Assembly 
please join me in congratulating Mr. Kincaid for his Lifetime 
Achievement Award as well as the Construction Association 
industry for 50 years of building Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier: 
does he know what the lean go-team is and how much 
Saskatchewan people are paying for it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it won’t be a surprise to any 
members in the House or anyone that has been watching the 
Throne Speech debate that our government intends to continue 
with lean, not just with respect to the health care system, but 
throughout government where we’ve seen significant results in 
terms of reduced times for permitting efficiencies in the 
Ministry of the Economy with respect to that, Mr. Speaker, 
where we’ve seen almost $60 million saved with respect to the 
actual leaning out of the health care system and, Mr. Speaker, 
improved patient experiences, including the elimination of 
cancellations for certain appointments, Mr. Speaker, the 
reduction in wait times for emergent care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve already saved more than the contract will cost when it 
comes to an end, which is a total of $35 million, Mr. Speaker. 
And it is something we’re going to continue with on this side of 
the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was whether or not 
the Premier knows what the lean go-team is, and whether or not 
he knows how much Saskatchewan people are paying for it. 
 
This government’s Health Quality Council has an internal 
newsletter called Nemawashi News. Now, Mr. Speaker, we 
didn’t know what nemawashi meant so we looked it up. It’s 
apparently — surprise — a Japanese term, and it means quietly 
laying the foundation for a project by gathering support. 
 
This newsletter, Mr. Speaker, is for the kaizen network, and 
we’ve obtained a copy of an issue that was sent out just 
yesterday. It says this, Mr. Speaker: “Fall session of the 
legislature has begun. Opposition came out swinging. Go-team 
has not been used yet to address criticisms. This is because the 
politicians have been speaking to issues.”  
 
But the email, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t specify what the go-team 
is, and the audio from the kaizen network conference call that 
was included with the email also doesn’t specify, Mr. Speaker, 
what the go-team is. So my question, specific question to the 
Premier: who is on this secretive lean go-team, and what 
exactly is its mandate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have at my fingertips 
the membership of the go-team. And as soon as I have that, I’ll 
certainly provide it to the member who has asked the question, 
along with an invitation to him. 
 



5742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that the Leader of the 
Opposition, who has obviously . . . who opposes the lean 
initiative in health care, who opposes the contract — and that’s 
absolutely a fair point of debate in this House; it should be 
debated — he opposes the specifics around the JBA [John 
Black and Associates]. I invite him, and I’ll go along with him 
to experience what is experienced by front-line workers in 
terms of lean, to follow through a project to see what results 
come, to see how the front-line staff are engaged and hear from 
them directly, both what they like and what they may not like. 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is a reasonable, it’s a reasonable offer. 
 
We have different positions here in the House. We’ve pointed 
to the savings from lean, almost $60 million. He doesn’t believe 
they’re there. We’ve pointed to improvements in the health care 
system from the patients’ perspective. He doesn’t believe 
they’re there, Mr. Speaker. I think one good way perhaps to 
come together on this, to find out exactly how we can improve 
it further or who might be right in all of this, is for us to tour 
together, to experience it together. Will he do that? Will he join 
me and have an upfront look at what lean is doing in the health 
care system today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, will the go-team plan it? And will 
I get my own translator along the way is the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was invited by front-line health care workers to 
go to lean exercises and guess what, Mr. Speaker. Guess what? 
Senior health officials didn’t allow it to happen because they 
don’t want to see the truth exposed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here we know this lean go-team, Mr. Speaker, this government, 
has spent $40 million on one US consultant. And a huge 
amount of that, Mr. Speaker, as we see in the Premier’s 
responses, is about being consumed with and about the optics. 
We know by John Black’s own email to senior health officials 
that he says he spends 25 per cent of his time dealing with the 
optics and the politics of this toxic and wasteful contract, Mr. 
Speaker. But now we know, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has a secret, internal go-team team that is waiting to be 
deployed in order to deal with the optics for this Premier and 
for this government. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: how much time, 
how many staff members are devoted, how many dollars are 
devoted to this lean go-team? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
respect to the lean initiative in the health system and the 
contract with JBA, we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, improvements in 
inventory management with respect to vaccine products — 1.3 
million in savings. Savings from a range of other initiatives 
around inventory — 4.8 million saved in lean events. Sixty 
million saved on the long-term care centre that’s going to be 
built in Swift Current alone. Millions more because of the 
leaning out of the new hospital in Moose Jaw. Millions more 
because of the leaning out of the children’s hospital. At the 

emergency room at RUH [Royal University Hospital] in 
Saskatoon, we’ve reduced to zero the number of patients that 
have been left without being treated, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
Mental health addictions appointments had been cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we obviously don’t agree with respect to lean, the 
Opposition Leader and myself, the Minister of Health. I invite 
him again, I invite him again to look at lean up close. The 
health care quality council, the health care quality council has 
invited the Leader of the Opposition to come check out lean 
first-hand. He’s refused. I’m not sure he’s even responded to 
their letter. Maybe he has; I don’t know.  
 
Will he accept their invitation to have a look at lean? We can 
maybe even go meet the go-team if he wants to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll accompany him. We’ll find out together in terms 
of the improvements lean is affording, and continue the 
discussion, having had an upfront look at lean as per the 
invitation of the health care quality council. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re getting more of these 
Premier’s notorious go-forward answers here. I was invited by 
health care workers to go on lean stuff, and guess what? This 
government didn’t allow it to happen, Mr. Speaker, because 
they want to control, they want to handle everything. For them, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all about the optics.  
 
There’s so much about this government’s lean pet project with 
John Black that does not pass the smell test for Saskatchewan 
people. It is toxic, Mr. Speaker, and it is wasteful. And the 
immense amount of time and resources being poured into the 
optics of this JBA contract are absolutely appalling. The email, 
Mr. Speaker, talks about the outcomes, talks about the 
outcomes of John Black workshops, how we can make them 
sound extra special. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to John Black’s pay schedule, 
each of these workshops cost $47,000. My question to the 
Premier: for $47,000 a pop, doesn’t he think every workshop 
should be extra special? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding what 
happened on his previous attempts to tour health care facilities 
in the province, I make the invitation now to him. Will he come 
and see lean upfront in the health care system? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I have heard the truth from 
front-line workers. I have heard the truth, Mr. Speaker, from 
senior health administrators. I have heard the truth from the 
Minister of Health who says that the John Black contract isn’t 
even tailored for Saskatchewan’s needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we see from this Premier is an attempt at deflection. What 
we see is his ongoing pursuit about optics and damage control, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that all they’re concerned about with the 
John Black contract are the optics. They had the opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to get out of the contract, but they chose not to, 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5743 

Mr. Speaker, because they were concerned about the optics. 
Internal documents have shown that clearly. 
 
Now we have in this email from the go-team, Mr. Speaker, the 
lean go-team, they are actually hiring, this government is 
actually hiring a freelance reporter to go around and to try to 
document and drum up support for their lean pet project. Do 
you know why? Because for them, Mr. Speaker, there’s no 
cheque that they won’t sign when it comes to the optics of lean. 
They’re happy to shovel the millions out the door and we see 
that today. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: if John Black 
spends 25 per cent of his time and budget just dealing with the 
optics, if we have the lean go-team devoting so many internal 
resources and dollars to this PR [public relations] exercise, why 
is this Premier plowing ahead with it when all the evidence says 
it should be scrapped? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like the member to calm 
down. We know the NDP [New Democratic Party] . . . We’ve 
made a lot of mistakes this week when they get a little too 
ramped up, Mr. Speaker. We saw that from the Leader of the 
Opposition. We saw that from the member for Nutana. The 
bottom line is all the evidence shows that lean is delivering 
results in the health care system. It’s providing savings in the 
health care system. That’s what the evidence shows. 
 
With respect to the go-team, the most recent obsession of the 
Leader of the Opposition, I can offer this information. This is an 
informal group, I’m told, I’m advised, pulled together by the 
Health Quality Council — those are the same folks that invited 
the member to come and have a look at lean and he wouldn’t do 
it — to coordinate opportunities to profile stories of lean 
progress and successes. Mr. Speaker, there is no cost associated 
with the group. It’s composed of a half a dozen existing staff 
members from across the province. So now that we know what 
the go-team is, does he want to come and meet them? Does he 
want to come and look at lean upfront to find out for himself? 
Will he take a tour with me? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the invitation was allowed, Mr. 
Speaker, if the invitation was allowed from the nurses who 
asked me to attend their lean events; if, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 
filtered through the PR optics, the PR machine of this 
government, of this Premier; if the exercise was listening to 
front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, like the nurses who have been 
told to go into time out rooms, Mr. Speaker, I would go to that 
event. But we have seen with the track record of this Premier, 
it’s about control. It’s about PR, and it’s about suppressing the 
truth. It’s not about allowing it to come out. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, technically there wasn’t a 
question in all of that. There was no question. But I’ll provide, 
so I don’t know what I should answer, except I’d provide this 
observation. Based on what we’ve seen in this House, I would 
probably advise the Leader of the Opposition to actually let the 

deputy leader ask the questions next time when his set is 
complete, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Smart Meter Program 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, even after Sensus 3.2 
meters had catastrophic failures, Sensus denied that there was 
any problems with those meters. Then came along the Sensus 
3.3 meters which we learned were physically identical to 3.2 
meters. When those meters had catastrophic failures, Sensus 
again denied there were any problems with those meters. The 
only thing worse than the pathetic track record of Sensus is this 
government continuing to trust that manufacturer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: how many times do we need to get burned by 
this American manufacturer before this government will finally 
stop trusting Sensus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that the minister and I 
would expect that the accusations were true of me yesterday, 
that we couldn’t upon looking at them, I couldn’t tell the 
difference between the meters, version 3.2 and 3.3. Mr. 
Speaker. I couldn’t do that. But neither, based on what we’ve 
seen, could we tell the difference between Lingenfelter 1.0 and 
2.0 because, Mr. Speaker, this particular line of questions 
follows on conduct in question period, Mr. Speaker, where the 
member for Nutana, supported by the Leader of the Opposition, 
inferred that the minister said something in committee that he 
never said, that was said by the officials in answer to a question 
she never asked. 
 
So the deputy leader and the leader and the member for Nutana 
will, I think, excuse us on this side of the House if we check all 
of the facts, Mr. Speaker, before we take them as read by 
members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And I guess it doesn’t make an ounce of 
difference to that Premier that that minister was sitting in 
committee knowing full well there were safety issues and not 
clarifying any record, Mr. Speaker. Act like a Premier. 
 
It’s interesting because the Philadelphia electrical company 
PECO learned lessons pretty darn quickly. After Sensus smart 
meters were lighting on fire on the sides of people’s homes in 
Philadelphia, PECO pulled the meters, ended their contract with 
Sensus, and switched to a Swiss-made meter instead. But this 
government took the manufacturer’s word, its sales pitch, at its 
word, and plowed ahead. And even though we’ve had over 359 
failures with these Sensus meters, including at least 18 meters 
that have burned, this government is proceeding with Sensus. 
 
Again to the Premier: after at least 359 failures, including 18 
meters that have burned, why would this government not follow 
the lead of other jurisdictions and end its relationship with 
Sensus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 



5744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to all of the technical questions around 3.2 or 3.3 or any 
of those technical questions, I would just remind the member 
opposite when he was asked about those kinds of things he said, 
those are technical questions that politicians wouldn’t be in a 
position to be directing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked SaskPower officials to be available to 
take any of those types of questions that are around the whole 
3.2, 3.3, the meter socket device that detects whether there’s 
heat in them or not, all of those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
They can better explain it than anybody in this Assembly 
possibly can, Mr. Speaker. And we would allow the SaskPower 
people to do just that if the media has any questions around that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, nothing more than more 
hiding from accountability from that minister. This government 
isn’t just continuing its relationship with this failed 
manufacturing, but this government is actually giving them $5 
million of ratepayers’ money for supposed research and 
development. 
 
So Sensus has delivered us 3.2 version meters. And they ended 
up being dangerous fire-prone duds, and they had to be ripped 
off Saskatchewan homes. Then Sensus delivered 3.3 version 
meters, and not surprisingly those meters also turned out to be 
dangerous fire-prone duds. And they are now in the process of 
being ripped off 105,000 Saskatchewan homes. 
 
And now after repeatedly being burned by this American 
manufacturer, this government is going to give $5 million to 
Sensus to help it improve its meters. How on earth is this 
acceptable to the Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, here’s how this has unfolded 
right from the very outset. The meters were ordered by the 
Government of Saskatchewan to be removed back in July. In 
addition to that, we took steps to immediately start negotiations 
through SaskPower officials with Sensus to recover all of the 
money around this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was $24 million that was going to be immediately 
refunded. There was another amount of money that was going 
to be refunded to SaskPower if the meters that were developed 
in the future wouldn’t be used. And yes, there was $5 million 
that was going to be used for research and development into 
meters here in Saskatchewan to test this meter and any other 
meter that we may use in the future with respect to smart meters 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is the responsible thing to 
do to ensure that meters meet the rigorous standards that 
Saskatchewan has in terms of weather, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the record: first 
meters, first one’s a dud. Second one’s a dud, so here’s $5 
million? That’s this government’s record of standing up for 
Saskatchewan people? It doesn’t make any sense. 
 

The SaskPower minister keeps claiming that it’s very important 
for this government to invest in a new sort of technology that 
can withstand our unique climatic conditions — I guess the 
wind, rain, a bit of snow. In fact when media asked him why 
Saskatchewan ratepayers should have to pay for research and 
development on a new smart meter that can work in 
Saskatchewan, the SaskPower minister actually said, “Because 
no one else is doing it.” Well perhaps the SaskPower minister 
has forgotten the briefings he’s received about the smart meter 
program that Saskatoon Light & Power runs, because they use a 
German-made smart meter and, I understand, report no 
problems. 
 
To the Premier: does he realize that Saskatoon has the same 
unique climatic conditions — bit of rain, bit of snow, bit of 
wind — as the rest of Saskatchewan, and they’ve been using 
German-made meters for years? Haven’t been reporting 
problems. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
the test phase that was done at Hanley, Saskatchewan, out of a 
possible 28,654 metered days, there was an achievement rate of 
99.2 per cent achieved, Mr. Speaker. That was significant 
enough that SaskPower recommended that the meters continue 
to be used going forward. And that’s exactly what transpired, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Subsequent to that, obviously there was a lot of problems with 
these meters, Mr. Speaker, and, as a result of that, the 
government made the decision that these meters need to be 
removed. In addition to that, we also made the decision that if 
we’re ever going to use meters here in Saskatchewan, that they 
needed to be tested, Mr. Speaker, particularly the Sensus meter 
and any other meter that might be used in Saskatchewan. 
 
We do have unique climate conditions here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon Light & Power does use a different 
meter, Mr. Speaker. In retrospect, it probably would have been 
advisable if SaskPower would have done more testing with 
respect . . . but of course that didn’t happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. 
Philadelphia abandoned Sensus meters and goes with a Swiss 
model instead. Saskatoon Light & Power doesn’t use Sensus 
meters and reports no problems with the German model they 
use. But this government is paying its failed manufacturer to fix 
its product so that it might possibly work in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government needs to end its relationship with Sensus and 
it needs to stop putting families at risk. And this government 
importantly needs to fight to get the $23 million back from 
Sensus. To the Premier: why won’t he do just that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always one standard for 
the NDP and another standard for everybody else in this 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5745 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. When asked questions of a technical 
nature, when asked questions of a technical nature, what did the 
member opposite say? He said those are technical questions that 
politicians wouldn’t be in a position to be directed, Mr. 
Speaker. But when it comes to everybody else he has a much 
greater, different, and completely different standard that he 
believes everybody else should meet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps he should employ that same kind of standard, Mr. 
Speaker, to some of the failed investments that the NDP made. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, no accountability, 
dragged through court for six years before they finally got to the 
bottom of it, Mr. Speaker. Not one dime ever recovered of the 
investment that those members made, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
track record of that government over there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Provision of Social Housing 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Sask 
Party candidate in Lloydminster said she doesn’t think the 
government has a role to play in social housing and it should be 
left up to the private sector. And we already know how the 
Minister of Social Services feels about housing. She doesn’t 
even think there are desperate, homeless people in our province, 
and prioritizes her relationship with private developers over the 
needs of families. 
 
So the Social Services minister probably agrees with the Sask 
Party candidate in Lloydminster, so my question is to the 
Premier: does he agree that the government doesn’t have a very 
important role to play in social housing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just about an 
hour ago I spoke to the candidate from Lloydminster and she 
clarified that she was referring to provincial involvement and 
land development, Mr. Speaker. But she does recognize and 
support our government’s commitment to social housing to 
assist with our low-income individuals and families. 
 
As for the remark that the member opposite referenced that I 
had made some time ago, I was speaking to the reporter about a 
particular initiative and we were talking about families on the 
wait-list. And, Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to say that our 
families on the wait-list in Regina are not homeless. They are 
all housed. We will make sure that they continue to be housed 
until an appropriate house is available to them, Mr. Speaker. So 
that is positive news, although the members opposite don’t want 
to hear any positive news. 
 
Our record, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself loud and clear. We 
have invested $475 million in social housing in our province. 
That is over 8,300 units. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, I appreciate . . . Mr. Speaker, I can 
imagine the candidate in Lloydminster appreciated the advice 
on how to spin quotes here from that minister. So for the record, 
here’s the exact quote from the Sask Party candidate in 

Lloydminster, and she said this during the debate last night: 
 

When governments get involved in owning land and being 
the gatekeepers of social housing, we all know things don’t 
work. I think that belongs to private industries for 
development, and that’s where it should stay. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan families and many people 
in Lloydminster are struggling to get ahead. They’re struggling 
with the rising costs of living, and they’re especially struggling 
with the cost of housing. On this side, we believe there’s a role 
for government in delivering social housing and affordable 
housing. But that government cares more about its relationship 
with the private developers than it does about Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
To the Premier: what will it take for this government to realize 
that the public sector has a crucial role to play in delivering 
social and affordable housing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, and again our record 
speaks very loud to our commitment to social housing, 
including the community of Lloydminster — $475 million, Mr. 
Speaker. We will not take advice from the NDP because that is 
a 480 per cent increase over what the NDP spent in social 
housing prior to the election. 
 
Vacancy rates are now moving provincially to 3.3 per cent, 
which is a healthy market vacancy rate, as opposed to when the 
members opposite were government. When that member was 
sitting at the cabinet table, the vacancy rate in his city was less 
than 1 per cent. And what did he choose to do when he had the 
opportunity to make decisions, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. He 
didn’t even recognize there was an issue in housing. Mr. 
Speaker, I will take our commitment to social housing over 
what the NDP did any day of the week. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Swift Current to Host 
Women’s World Curling Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise with pleasure today to inform the Legislative Assembly 
about some exciting news that will have a strong economic 
impact on our province and the city of Swift Current. The city 
of Swift Current has once again been awarded the 2016 Ford 
Women’s World Curling Championship. This marks the second 
time that Swift Current has been chosen to host this event and 
the third time that world women’s championships have been 
played right here in Saskatchewan. This event gives us the 
opportunity to showcase Saskatchewan on a world stage. As 
well, this event will bring people from across the province, the 
country, and the world to watch this world-class event. 
 
Saskatchewan has a strong legacy of supporting these events, 
with volunteers and fans helping to make this possible. Tourism 
Saskatchewan has a sponsorship agreement with the Ford 
Women’s World Curling Championship for $150,000. Through 



5746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

this sponsorship, Tourism Saskatchewan will receive in-ice 
logos, television broadcast, and social media benefits. 
 
This sponsorship agreement is part of Tourism Saskatchewan’s 
event hosting strategy. The event hosting strategy looks to make 
Saskatchewan a preferred destination for local, national, and 
international events. This hosting strategy is part of a 2012 
Saskatchewan plan for growth, vision 2020 and beyond. Swift 
Current hosted this event in 2010 and had attendance of 52,000 
people with an economic benefit between 9 and $10 million. 
This time we’re estimating the economic benefit to be between 
10 and $12 million, with hotel, food, food service, retail sales, 
and transportation. 
 
It’s events like these that show that we have a strong 
Saskatchewan, but not just shows that we can host international 
events, but Saskatchewan is the best place to live, work, and 
raise a family. I ask all members to congratulate the city of 
Swift Current, the organizing committee, and the Swift Current 
Curling Club for being awarded this very prestigious event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to congratulate the city of Swift Current on 
being a successful choice for hosting the 2016 Ford Women’s 
World Curling Championship. Certainly a very exciting event, 
and I’m very pleased to see it being held in Saskatchewan and 
in the city of Swift Current. 
 
Certainly we all know the importance of the curling rink. 
Anybody who grew up on the farm or in a small town knows 
that curling is really the heartbeat of a lot of communities here 
in Saskatchewan. And certainly with a thriving sport in every 
city and every community in Saskatchewan, it’s a great thing to 
see these kinds of events coming. 
 
The minister spoke about the economic benefit that this type of 
event brings, and we’re very pleased to see the government 
recognize economic benefit of this type of event. It’s 
unfortunate when we see what happened to the film industry. 
They didn’t see the same kind of benefit, an economic benefit 
that the film industry brought to Saskatchewan. Certainly 
Tourism Saskatchewan recognized that when they supported the 
film WolfCop this year, which made a lot of sense to see those 
kinds of spin-offs and the economic spin-offs that are so 
important to the people of Saskatchewan and so important to 
the use of the world-class sound stage that we have here in 
Regina. 
 
But at any rate we are glad to see the government recognize the 
economic impact of curling and certainly the work that Tourism 
Saskatchewan is doing. So we look forward to this event. And 
all I can say right now, Mr. Speaker, is hurry hard. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 42 through 60. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 42 through 60. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Victims of Domestic 
Violence Amendment Act, 2014. Members will recall that 
Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to introduce 
victims of domestic violence legislation back in 1994. Since 
then this Act has served as a successful model throughout 
Canada for emergency protection order legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in broad terms the purpose of this Act is to 
provide an additional tool to a responding police officer to 
separate individuals who represent an imminent risk of injury to 
each other. It’s critical to the functionality of the Act that police 
and victims are able to immediately seek an emergency 
intervention order by telephone. 
 
This Act strikes a balance between the risk to an individual who 
fears violence and the procedural rights of the respondent. The 
operational success of this legislation has been in providing a 
tool to the police and to shelter workers that allow them to 
provide an immediate response to calls for assistance without 
permanently affecting any status or legal rights of the 
respondent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as several other provinces have subsequently 
implemented similar legislation, additional matters have been 
addressed in their Acts that now merit consideration in our 
province. These changes in the bill provide for an incremental 
increase in scope of the application of the Act and clarification 
of when the Act should apply to a particular situation. It also 
provides for procedural changes to address concerns that have 
been identified by the victims services branch in their ongoing 
operations under this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments would first change the name of 
the Act to The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Act which will 
promote that the Act should be considered by victims and the 
police in a variety of circumstances beyond the traditional 
domestic scenario in order to protect a broader range of victims 
and of violence. It will extend the scope of the application of 
the Act to caregiving relationships regardless of cohabitation. It 
will modernize the Act to provide prohibitions on electronic 
contact between parties. It will expand the definition to include 
harassment and deprivation of necessities within the scope of 
prohibited interpersonal violence. 
 
It will broaden the scope of factors that the Justice of the Peace 
may take into account when granting an emergency intervention 
order. This includes consideration of past contacts by the 
respondent with other family members, as well as immediate 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5747 

circumstances with the respondent such as recent release from 
jail or being fired from a job. 
 
It will list matters that shall not preclude an order being granted, 
such as the absence of criminal charges or the victim having 
previously returned to the relationship. It will clarify the 
non-contact provisions for emergency intervention orders to 
include prohibiting contacts at schools and workplaces of the 
victim and family members. And, Mr. Speaker, it will update 
the victim’s assistance order provisions to make corresponding 
changes to those being made to emergency intervention orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence of any form in our province is 
unacceptable. Unfortunately we realize that violent incidents do 
occur and that’s why it’s important that we continue to be 
leaders in offering additional supports for the victims of 
violence. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment 
Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to of course stand in my place again today and give our initial 
comments on this particular bill, Bill 144, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no question on this side of the Assembly: it’s really, 
really important that we find every way and means in which we 
can strengthen our family and protect those that we love. This is 
obviously a statement that many, many people in Saskatchewan 
obviously have shared for many, many years. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And certainly from our perspective as an opposition, we want to 
be able to ensure that the police are able to do their job to 
protect those that may be threatened or those that they feel 
might become threatened at a later stage of a problem. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is something that obviously we within the 
opposition want to pay very, very close attention to. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that we 
want to find out. I don’t think that the opposition themselves are 
going to be opposing anything that protects families better. 
That’s obviously the end goal here. 
 
There is certainly a number of questions we have, preliminary 
questions as to what is meant when he had the name changed 
from domestic to interpersonal. Obviously the minister alluded 
to it a bit in terms of expanding the extended family situation 
that has occurred from time to time in these situations. So there 
is . . . And we’re assuming that interpersonal is expanding the 
definition of people that are impacted by these unfortunate 
domestic events. 
 
It’s obviously very important, Mr. Speaker, that you look at 
ways and means that the communication in the instance of a 
dispute, that anything to protect the victim and to empower the 
police, to put the proper measures in place, whether it’s 
electronic communication, Mr. Speaker, prohibiting school 

contact, these are some of the valuable tools that we think will 
also add to the protection of the victim. And what’s really 
important, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that there is the means and 
the language necessary to make sure that the victims are 
protected and that they are certainly afforded as many rights as 
possible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we want to make sure is that, again as 
I mentioned at the outset, we want to know questions like what 
is meant in terms of the expansion of the types of families. We 
want to know why is it a requirement for the parties to have to 
live together, you know. This is one of the things that we have 
to find out if there’s a complicated arrangement, Mr. Speaker. 
These are some of the issues that we have to certainly ask of the 
bill itself. And as I said at the outset, nobody on this side of the 
Assembly is going to be argumentative at ways and means in 
which we can empower the police and of course, Mr. Speaker, 
protect the innocent people as best we can. 
 
So all the questions we have, who will benefit from the 
changes? We want to make sure that there’s a lot of good 
benefit for the victims. Is there a particular case that this bill 
would help or a series of cases that this bill would help? We 
wouldn’t mind asking those questions. As well as the 
amendments: like what consultation did the government 
undertake to achieve or to ask for the changes to the Act? And 
these are some of the things that are really important. 
 
And the biggest thing is, what type of family members were 
asking for this? Was it the parents? Was it the grandparents? 
Was it the children? Was it in concert with the police? Was 
there some evidence-based issues within the Justice department 
that suggested this bill would be the appropriate bill to go 
forward with? Certainly again the biggest question we have is 
the name change of domestic to interpersonal. We need more 
information and clarification on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly I think it’s really, really important that, as I said 
at the outset, when you have all of these different living 
arrangements, if you will, because many people . . . There’s a 
lot of couch surfing. Some people may live in separate units but 
still have a relationship, Mr. Speaker. So these are a lot of 
questions that we’re asking on this particular bill. 
 
And it’s important that we totally understand what the 
government is trying to achieve so that we’re able to assist in 
this regard in the sense that we are doing our very best to 
protect those that are being victimized and to ensure that we 
close off every avenue of abuse that may exist now, and to 
empower the police to protect those victims, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nobody on this side of the House is going to argue with that, 
but we do need to know what measure the government is taking 
to achieve this and if there’s an opportunity to add to it and to 
get advice from the different players out there that assist in this 
effort. That I think is also important, that a lot of advice should 
be sought on these matters to make sure that the legislation 
itself is as effective and as solid as can be. And that’s our role 
as the opposition. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of the discussion we want to 
have on this particular bill, a lot of questions, and on that note, 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 144, The 



5748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Victims of Domestic Violence Act. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 144. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Victims of Domestic 
Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a bilingual companion legislation to The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The bill simply amends the bilingual Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 
to update the reference in that Act from The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act to The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Act. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? Sorry. I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
on Bill 152, as indicated in the bill title itself, which is An Act to 
make a consequential amendment resulting from the enactment 
of The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014, 
what we’re merely doing, as the minister has pointed out, Mr. 
Speaker, is to certainly reflect that the bill has to be translated 
into a number of languages, in particular French. 
 
But it is hoped on that front that we can do as much as we can 
to encourage the government to recognize of course French, 
being our second national language in terms of the importance 
of recognizing French, but there’s a lot of different countries 
that are . . . where people that are from different countries that 
are moving to Saskatchewan. So we would suggest that perhaps 
as a result of the requirement by law to have both bills in 
French and English, that we should make some effort somehow 
through time that we’re able to translate the bill itself to a 
number of other languages that may be an effective means and a 
tool to communicate with many of the new Saskatchewan 
people. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that is probably a good step 
in the right direction. 
 
But certainly from this particular bill, for the folks that might be 
listening, what this bill entirely does, it just simply meets the 
requirement that the bill be printed in French, which is by law 
in Canada that all information that we have when it comes to 

legislation and laws of the government should be printed in 
French and English. 
 
And from our perspective again as we mentioned, the original 
bill, 144, we’ve identified the issues that we wanted to ask 
about and talk about. This consequential amendment Act is 
primarily a complementary bill to that bill, but we want to hold 
both of them up till we’re completely done with them. So on 
that note, Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on Bill 152, 
An Act to make a consequential amendment resulting from the 
enactment of The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 
2014. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 152. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Fee Waiver Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill will create an updated fee waiver program in 
Saskatchewan allowing for the waiver of administrative fees at 
courts and tribunals for lower income litigants. The Act will 
implement various enhancements to the existing fee waiver 
program. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, there’s no fee waiver program at the 
small claims court. In addition, although the Court of Appeal 
will accept fee waivers issued for the Court of Queen’s Bench, 
there’s no process to obtain a new waiver at the Court of 
Appeal. The Act will allow individuals to apply for a fee waiver 
at all three levels of court. 
 
The Act will also apply to tribunals that regularly adjudicate 
matters for members of the public. At this time the Automobile 
Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential 
Tenancies are specifically included under the Act. However 
there will a power to subscribe additional tribunals and 
government bodies in the future where they may be appropriate. 
 
The Act will transfer administration of the fee waiver 
applications from the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission to 
individual courts and tribunals. Court and tribunal officials will 
have authority to administer application processes, will have 
discretionary authority to refer applications to the court or 
tribunal for determination where appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, application processes will be kept simplified in 
order to ensure that eligible individuals as well as courts and 
tribunals are not negatively impacted by administrative 
processes or delays. Eligibility for fee waivers will be based on 
simplified criteria set out in the regulations. However, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be discretionary authority to grant fee 
waivers in special circumstances to individuals who do not meet 
regular qualifications. This approach ensures that the fee waiver 
program remains flexible enough to respond to the unique 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5749 

circumstances of individual litigants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under current rules, a litigant must apply for a fee 
waiver for the Court of Queen’s Bench prior to taking any other 
steps in a proceeding. As a result, individuals who are unable to 
apply for a fee waiver prior to issuing a claim are prevented 
from receiving a fee waiver even if that individual does not 
have the means to pay the court fees. The new Act will remove 
this rule and allow litigants to apply for a fee waiver at any 
stage of the proceedings. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act will also allow self-represented 
litigants to apply for fee waiver certificates, which is consistent 
with the approach taken in Ontario and British Columbia. 
Currently, fee waivers are only available to individuals 
represented by legal counsel. In practice, this generally limits 
fee waivers to individuals who obtain pro bono counsel or who 
are represented by Legal Aid in family law matters. Extending 
fee waiver eligibility to self-represented clients will help these 
individuals gain greater access to justice through participation 
in the court process. 
 
Finally, the Act will grant courts and tribunals discretionary 
authority to determine if costs should be awarded to or against a 
litigant who has been issued a fee waiver. In making this 
decision, courts and tribunals may take into account special 
factors including access to justice and fairness to the parties. 
This approach maintains a balance between promoting access to 
justice and deterring meritless or frivolous litigation by 
individuals who have been issued a fee waiver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act has been informed by the work of the 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan and the recent 
decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Trial Lawyers 
Association of British Columbia v. Attorney General of British 
Columbia. The Ministry of Justice has also consulted with the 
Saskatchewan legal community and has found widespread 
support for the changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes demonstrate the government’s 
commitment to enhancing access to justice in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Fee Waiver Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
certainly thank the minister for providing some of the 
information that the bill is all about. And what I want to point 
out is that these, some of these bills that are coming forward, 
it’s very, very important for the opposition to really, really 
begin to research the intent of this particular bill. 
 
Now we listened to some of the language that was mentioned in 
terms of the access to justice and to doing away with frivolous 
legal actions. Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that, 
from the perspective of what many people call swift justice, 
there’s no question that there is a lot of merit to a lot of the 
discussions people have around that particular concept. But we 
mustn’t forget that, as a civilized society, we have to ensure that 

there is due process allowed to everyone. And many times, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s important that we have that balance, because 
sometimes, as humans, there are errors made. And what you 
don’t want to do is go on this rant about people’s rights and 
certainly people’s opportunities to defend themselves. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a really important bill that we need to 
pay a lot of attention to, because obviously we see a lot of 
evidence from time to time of how the court costs are high and 
the process to administer justice is long and it’s very tough on 
victims of crime. And we all see those kind of actions. And 
obviously from our perspective, as the NDP opposition, we 
want to ensure . . . The simple thing is that there is certainly 
respect for many of the victims of crime and we want to make 
sure that there is swift justice, but to also ensure that we’re very 
thorough as a civilized society to ensure that those that may be 
causing harm or actions against other people that are contrary to 
our laws, that they’re also given the opportunity to defend 
themselves. And that’s the balance that we see when we talk 
about justice. And it’s really, really important we keep those 
components and trains of thought in our mind, primarily 
because it is a just and civil society that will hope to achieve 
that. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this particular 
bill, it talks about administrative fee waivers which is a small 
component of the overall court system. So it’s important to 
know what exactly, what kind of fees are we talking about? 
Obviously, you know, as the minister alluded to, it’s designed 
to ensure that people have access to justice and that money 
should not be an issue when it comes to access to justice. And 
thereby, they’re waiving some of the administrative fees that 
the courts probably asked to be waived. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to know what kind of dollars 
are attached to that waiver. Is it a significant amount of money? 
Is it 3 million? Is it 5 million? Or is it 50,000? We don’t know 
what some of the costs and some of the fees that the minister is 
making reference to . . . We need to know what those fees are. 
 
And the minister also went on to say that in many cases some 
are applying for fees and others are not. We need to make it 
more open and transparent and accountable. We need to talk 
about the fact that the new waiver is available in all three levels 
of courts. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out exactly what 
caused this particular action and who asked for the action. 
 
And what’s more important as well, Mr. Speaker, to point out is 
that when the minister spoke about widespread support from the 
legal community, and they mentioned the word consultation, 
that’s exactly our point. There’s a significant difference from 
our perspective when you talk about consultation versus the 
word agreement. Now what I wouldn’t mind knowing — and 
through the process of this Assembly is to ask the questions 
during committee — exactly what would the minister determine 
widespread support from the legal community? Is that 80 per 
cent? Is it 70 per cent? Is it 51.2 per cent? 
 
These are some of the things that we need to make sure that the 
work in the background has been completed and that there is, if 
the minister says widespread support, that we’re satisfied the 



5750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

number is high enough to justify that particular phrase attached 
to the level of support that he said he received from consultation 
with the legal community. 
 
These are important questions that we have in the Assembly 
and we have in the opposition. So there’s no question that if 
there’s ways and means in which we can make the justice 
system more aligned with what the costs should be, that we 
don’t allow people to have frivolous lawsuits. We don’t allow 
people to use the justice system to delay some of their court 
cases even though they know that they’re wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the Saskatchewan people want to see that action and see 
that justice system be swift, but they also want it to be fair. So 
that’s the most important thing. And part of the fairness, Mr. 
Speaker, of course is affordability. Part of the fairness also talks 
about doing away with frivolous lawsuits. And certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve looked at the fee waiver that’s out there, that’s 
being proposed in this particular bill. If it’s designed to help 
certain groups of people, we would like to know which groups 
of people that it is designed to help. 
 
These are some of the basic questions we have, and it’s our 
process as the opposition to scrutinize what the government is 
proposing. We plan on doing that with this particular bill 
because there are so many things and there are so many 
questions and there are so many moving parts to the justice 
system, Mr. Speaker. We know that one reaction in one area 
causes action in the other area. And sometimes that action and 
reaction don’t really necessarily mean the swift, administrative 
justice system that we all aspire to achieve as Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
So I think it’s important that we look at the cause and effect of 
some of these changes. It’s really important that we ask, who 
asked for some of the fee waiver changes? Was it the actual 
justice system itself? Was it the judges themselves? Was it the 
groups of people that are involved with the low-income people? 
These are some of the questions that we have as a result of the 
fee waiver changes that is being proposed here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out, as I said at the 
outset, the consultation that the minister alluded to, exactly 
which groups and organizations were consulted and what was 
their initial response. Is there an avenue, an opportunity for 
them to come back to actually consult more and to ask more 
questions? And this is obviously something that I hope that the 
ministry would offer, but from the opposition’s perspective, we 
would offer that to the venue we have when we start enacting 
laws through the Legislative Assembly, that we would 
obviously ask for their advice, ask for their input, and ask them 
to contact us to give us that particular information. Because 
good advice from many, many quarters is also very valuable to 
us as an opposition. 
 
So we need to do careful analysis of this particular bill. There 
are a lot of questions we have of it. And as I mentioned at the 
outset, it’s important for the opposition to take the time and it’s 
important for the opposition to make sure that the government 
does what they intend to do by some of the wording they use in 
some of these bills. And we obviously have had evidence at this 
session that they like to do things in totally different ways, and 
yet they put out these magical, comforting words to people, and 

yet their actions don’t follow what their words are in this 
Assembly. 
 
And that’s why it’s important to have a good, strong opposition, 
and a good, strong opposition that’s well informed is also an 
effective tool for people out there in Saskatchewan that may 
want to have input and say, well hold it. This particular bill has 
this problem. So bring that information forward because it 
makes the bill stronger. It makes our laws better and it makes 
— what I think is really important, what the people of 
Saskatchewan want — a justice system that operates efficiently, 
that’s effective to protect victims, but it’s also fair to allow the 
process to the courts to find the guilty parties guilty and that 
they do have the opportunity to defend themselves. 
 
So that’s something, these are all principles I think people 
understand throughout Saskatchewan. So it’s very, very 
important we pay very close attention to bills of these sort, 
because we do have a lot of questions as a result of some of the 
information that we received today on some of these bills. So 
on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 145, An Act respecting the Waiver of Fees and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 145, the fee waiver amendment Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la 

loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Fee Waiver 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Mr. Speaker, the 
purpose of this bill is to make bilingual consequential 
amendments to The Court of Appeal Act, 2000, The Queen’s 
Bench Act, 1998, and The Small Claims Act, 1997. 
 
The bill adds a new section to each Act to clarify that any fee 
charged by the Court of Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, or 
the small claims court is subject to The Fee Waiver Act. These 
changes will help inform legal counsel and self-represented 
litigants of the fee waiver program when reviewing the laws 
and procedures of the individual courts. The Fee Waiver Act 
and its regulations will provide specific rules and fee waiver 
application procedures and eligibility requirements. Mr. 
Speaker, the new fee waiver program will ensure that lower 
income litigants have increased access to justice. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5751 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again, as I mentioned at the outset, the consequential 
amendments to this particular Act are attached to Bill 145. And 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, some of the questions that we had in the 
original bill, that obviously there is a lot of issues that we have 
to pay attention to and pay very close attention to because that’s 
our role as the opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are five parts of this particular bill, five 
pages of this particular bill. And when the bill itself talks about 
consequential amendments to the previous Act, which I’m 
assuming has to do with the French version of the actual bill 
itself, there are a few other changes in there that we want to pay 
very close attention to. Like five pages to simply direct all the 
departments to translate this particular . . . the bill previous, the 
Bill 145 into French. It begs the question as to what else is 
being included in this particular consequential Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again as I mentioned at the outset, we want to 
make sure we take the time to look at these bills and to point 
out to people that are out there in the legal community, that do 
have some information and are able to help in this regard, that 
any advice and direction and awareness that you want to share 
with us on the whole Act, Mr. Speaker, and certainly on the 
justice system itself, the opposition is really, quite frankly is 
opening the doors to making sure that people know there is an 
opportunity for them to participate and give us advice. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll use that advice to ensure that 
legislation, any Act that we empower and certainly put through 
this Assembly, that these bills and these Acts and the intent are 
done not only with a sense of urgency, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to the justice system, but they’re done as thoroughly as 
possible. That is the key message we have on this particular bill 
and any other bill. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 146, An Act to make consequential amendments 
resulting from the enactment of The Fee Waiver Act. I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 146. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 
Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again today to move second reading of The Class Actions 
Amendment Act, 2014. Mr. Speaker, class action litigation, in 
appropriate cases, serves several important functions in our 
justice system. Class actions allow for more efficient use of 
court resources by consolidating similar matters into a single 
claim. Class actions also increase access to justice for groups of 
individuals who lack the means to pursue litigation on their 
own. Defendants can also benefit from class actions by 
defending multiple claims through a single set of proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when class action legislation was first introduced 

in Saskatchewan, the court’s normal discretion to award costs in 
the regular course of proceedings was removed. This was done 
out of concern that the threat of large cost awards could deter 
legitimate claimants from participating in class action matters. 
Alberta and Nova Scotia’s class action legislation has 
demonstrated that a more balanced approach can be taken rather 
than prohibiting cost awards outright in class action litigation. 
This bill is based on the approach taken in those jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will provide courts authority to award 
costs in class actions in appropriate circumstances. In allowing 
costs to be assessed, the bill will also provide the judge 
discretion to take into consideration the following factors when 
deciding whether to award costs: the public interest, whether 
the action involves a novel point of law, whether the action is a 
test case, access to justice for members of the public using class 
action proceedings, and any other factors that the court 
considers appropriate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments to The Class Actions 
Act will restore the discretion to the courts to control their own 
processes, as in regular litigation matters, while still addressing 
the unique access-to-justice concerns that arise with class action 
litigation. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 
reading of The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Certainly for the opposition, we look at this particular bill, Bill 
147, and being that we’re obviously getting all the information 
today as to what is being presented in the particular bill, we, as I 
pointed out with all the other Acts, this is our first opportunity 
as the opposition to look at the Act, hear what the changes are 
being proposed by the government, and certainly begin the 
process of researching what each of the components of each of 
the changes would really mean to the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about the cost to the 
courts. And he mentioned a number of different avenues that 
are available for the courts to determine when they don’t have 
to charge court costs to people that are frivolously using, in this 
case, class actions to try and prove a point. He’d mentioned 
novel points of the law as one instance where the courts could 
certainly not put costs on the people that are trying to sue 
others, or a test case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that is really important is that we need to 
understand some of the changes in this particular Act. And 
there’s no question. I don’t think people in Saskatchewan would 
support any political interference with the justice system. 
Because obviously when you look at the whole sentiment that 
the minister spoke about in his closing comments, that the 
courts could control their own process, to me I think having the 
courts control their own process is really good evidence that, 
you know, this would separate the justice system from the 
political system. I think when you look at the design of the 
political system versus the justice system, there should never be 
politicians determining how the courts do their business. So 
anything to afford the courts control of their own process with 



5752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

the principles of course, as we mentioned earlier, that they be 
fair, thorough, and that they administer justice in a very 
transparent way, I think the opposition would generally agree 
that it’s important to separate the justice system from the 
political system. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But one of the things we’ve picked up here, Mr. Speaker, that 
was kind of worrisome was, why are the changes here 
retroactive? We don’t know what the purpose of the change is 
here because obviously when you propose a bill, you obviously, 
likely know what the bill is from this date forward. We’ve made 
some errors in the previous Act, and thereby we’re making 
some changes to the Act to strengthen the Act and to make the 
Act more modern or make it better for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when the government itself comes along and says, well on 
this particular bill, on The Class Actions Act, we want to make 
it retroactive, the biggest question we had instinctively as we 
looked at the bill is why is there a retroactivity clause or option 
available to this particular bill? Is there a case that the 
government is currently involved with that requires them to 
come along and change a law to accommodate their inaction or 
their lack of homework? We don’t know that. Is there a 
particular issue that is concerning and causing the justice 
system great angst at this time? We don’t know that answer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the glaring issues that arose as a result of us 
reading through this bill is why is there a retroactivity clause in 
this particular bill? Because most bills that we deal with are on 
a go-forward basis, and this is what’s really . . . And now I’m 
using the Premier’s language here. But anyway, most bills that 
we deal with, we’re talking about what we need to improve on 
these bills and where the mistakes are made and how we can 
make it better, make these bills better. So as you look to move 
the bills forward, to make the necessary changes, this particular 
bill has the option of going retroactively to some — I don’t 
know; I’m assuming — some case or some issue before the 
Justice department that the government wants to handle or 
address. 
 
So these are some of the questions that we want to ask, Mr. 
Speaker, on this particular bill. It’s a class action Act, you 
know, and there’s a lot of different folks out there that are using 
the class action option to sue industry or sue government or sue 
different organizations. And it’s a very important point of our 
justice system where people can get together and say, well it 
affected all of us, so we’re all going to take you to court. And of 
course the process will unfold. 
 
Now what I would . . . Again the biggest thing is, who asked for 
these amendments? Now if these amendments were asked by a 
specific group, then they might be able to tie the argument as to 
why the government’s making it retroactive. Now I think from 
our perspective, you know, it is kind of worrisome that you 
don’t want to have support for some of these things unless you 
have the answers that the opposition needs. 
 
So some of the immediate questions we have on this bill: who 
asked for these amendments? Why did they ask for those 

amendments? And why is there a retroactivity clause attached 
to this particular Act when in many, many other Acts that we’ve 
been involved with doesn’t have that clause? Is there a 
particular case, as I mentioned, that the government has been 
involved with or doesn’t want us to know about? We need to 
know those answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s also, quite frankly, you look at some of the options 
available. You want to make sure, as I said at the outset, that the 
court costs operate as efficiently and effectively as possible. By 
efficiently I’m talking about reducing as many costs as you can; 
by effective, in making sure that people have access to the 
justice system when they need it. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a huge 
balance to try and maintain all the interests of everyone. 
 
So what happens in this particular Act, again there’s some 
glaring, glaring issues. For example, you look at some of the 
points that I would raise. The questions I would ask is, what are 
the downsides of these amendments? What would be the 
downsides? People need to know that. Why would you want to 
assign the penalty to one single person in a class action suit? 
Does that deter that individual from becoming a leader within a 
group of people that want to address an issue that has obviously 
affected them wrongly? And so this person is going to stand up 
on behalf of a wide group of people. Why would that court, The 
Class Actions Act, allow that person to be singled out? We need 
to know if that is the case or if that’s not the case. So it is really 
important that we get that particular advice from the number of 
people who are impacted by this. 
 
And again the question that I’d ask on the retroactivity clause of 
this bill, and it’s the third time I’m asking: is this the reaction to 
any particular case that the government is involved with or is 
aware of? Who asked for this? And what implications does it 
have for our justice system? So it’s really important that we 
look at this particular bill very thoroughly. 
 
We know that there’s class action suits launched right across 
the country on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of people 
— I’m sure the judges as well, the people involved with the 
justice system — see some of them as being frivolous and some 
of them that may just be an action by a person just to create a 
whole bunch of trouble in the event that for example they may 
have lost money or lost their job or lost credibility. We see 
sometimes that there may be some frivolous actions around 
class actions. But we don’t want to continue to prop that up, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not what this is about. What we want to do is 
make sure that there is a proper process in place, that the judges 
have as many tools within their powers to be able to administer 
justice swiftly but also very fairly. 
 
So again, the retroactivity part of this particular bill, we find it 
very strange. We find it awkward. It’s very glaring in this 
particular bill and that’s why the questions we have or the 
immediate question is, who’s asked for this, and what was the 
reason for this? And these are some of the questions that we 
need to know. 
 
Now if it’s the government using The Class Actions Act to 
cover up some of their ineptness or some of their lack of 
homework, then we obviously don’t want to support that 
because if they couldn’t figure this thing out from day one, Mr. 
Speaker, they shouldn’t be changing the Act to accommodate 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5753 

their inability to figure things out. And that’s one of the 
important points that we as the opposition want to be able to try 
and understand and to try and get more answers so that we’re 
able to make a clear determination as to what this bill is 
intending to do and to present the information to the public 
because the public does have a right to know. 
 
So there is a ton of questions on this particular bill. There’s no 
question that the wording from the minister . . . There may be 
some good points of the bill that the opposition could support 
and a good administrative justice system, Mr. Speaker. We 
wouldn’t stand in the way, but we need to have a lot of 
questions answered just to ensure that we’re comfortable with 
what the bill is all about and that there isn’t a hidden agenda by 
the government to try and do something. 
 
So again I would point out that the retroactivity issue on this 
particular bill raises a lot of flags — very strange, very 
awkward for this bill — and we want to know why that clause 
is put in there. Like what’s that all about? And, Mr. Speaker, 
those are some of the immediate questions that we have on this 
particular bill. 
 
Now the minister spoke early on about a lot of the value of the 
justice system and the importance of having a neutral setting in 
which we have all arguments heard from all sides, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s the whole notion that we would want to afford this 
particular bill as well, arguments from all sides as to whether 
the merit of this bill is simply the good administrative delivery 
of justice or is it covering up for inaction or ineptness or a lack 
of homework on the part of the government. 
 
And that’s the reason why this legislative Chamber exists: so 
we can ask those questions and take the time to ask the 
questions and also to solicit advice from people out there that 
are in the know. And that’s what’s really, really important for 
us on this particular bill. We have to ensure that there isn’t a 
plan by the government to cover up an error or mistake that 
they made and then change the law to accommodate the 
correcting of that mistake and not allowing the people of 
Saskatchewan to see the total picture. 
 
So on that note, we would encourage people to come forward, 
have any advice, any information. We would certainly support 
that. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 147, the amendment to The Class Actions Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 147. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. The Residential 

Tenancies Act, 2006 governs the relationship between landlords 
and tenants of residential properties in Saskatchewan. It’s 
designated to balance the rights and obligations of landlords and 
tenants while bringing efficiency to dispute resolution through 
the use of hearing officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act was originally passed in 2006. The Office 
of Residential Tenancies has identified a number of provisions 
that would work better with some amendments. The 
amendments that I’m proposing address issues that have been 
raised by the courts, by tenants, landlords, and by the office of 
the ORT [Office of Residential Tenancies]. 
 
Some proposals benefit tenants specifically, such as the 
amendment expanding the time for claiming the return of a 
security deposit from 120 days to two years. Although I do not 
expect there will be many claims that are made beyond 120 
days, there certainly may be some. Two years is the general 
limitation period for claims in court, pursuant to The 
Limitations Act, so that will be made consistent. 
 
Another proposal for the benefit of tenants is found in the 
amendment to section 60, which allows landlords to evict 
tenants if the landlord wishes to demolish or renovate the 
premises or has other uses for property. Currently the notice 
period is one month. The proposal is to extend it to two. It’s 
reasonable that landlords plan far enough in advance when 
evicting tenants for their own purposes. In addition, in 
situations of demolition or renovation, the landlord must always 
return the entire security deposit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some proposals alleviate problems for landlords. 
In particular the bill expressly permits landlords to make and 
enforce reasonable rules in their residential premises. These 
rules may concern the tenants’ use, occupancy, or maintenance 
of the premises or the tenants’ use of services. Some examples 
may be rules concerning smoking or pets. If the rules are not 
reasonable, the tenant may challenge them with an application 
to a hearing officer. If the tenant repeatedly violates the rules, 
the tenant can be evicted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, other proposals include the ability for 
landlords to evict a tenant who has violated municipal bylaws 
or failed to pay municipal charges. In all these situations the 
tenant must be given the opportunity to correct the 
transgression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, parties have the opportunity under the Act to 
appeal the decision of a hearing officer to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench on a question of law or jurisdiction. A new provision 
helps to guard against frivolous appeals that are used to extend 
the occupancy of the premises after an eviction order has been 
made. In those cases, in order to appeal, the tenant must prove 
good faith by depositing with the court one-half of one month’s 
rent or establish that the rent has been paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing programs do not always fit nicely within 
the rules of The Residential Tenancies Act. For example, when 
a unit is part of a housing program and the tenant no longer 
qualifies for the housing program or for the particular unit, there 
are no grounds to remove the tenant from the rental unit. These 
amendments will address those issues. 
 



5754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Finally there are amendments to make hearings more efficient, 
service of documents easier, appeals more expeditious, and 
provisions easier to understand. Mr. Speaker, extensive 
consultations were conducted with landlords, tenants, and 
housing programs in developing this bill. And we are confident 
that these changes maintain an appropriate balance between the 
interests of tenants and landlords. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 
2014 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I looked at the bill itself and the 
opening comments by the minister. Really, I think is really 
important as my opening comments as the official opposition’s 
first response to this bill, that he started off with balancing the 
rights of tenant and the landlord. And, Mr. Speaker, certainly 
you look at some of the issues that he raised when landlords 
evict people for a number of . . . I think the amount that he’s 
allowed was a month and now they’re moving it to two months 
in the event that they want to evict the tenants to either fix their 
building up or to turn it into condominiums and sell the whole 
building as it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what I think is really important, the 
relationship that I see in northern Saskatchewan, and I know in 
the cities as well. A lot of apartment renters, you know, they’re 
by and large a very responsible group. And a lot of folks in the 
cities have told us about the challenges that they’ve had. And 
you can recall a couple of years ago, there was a huge battle 
between apartment users and of course the landlords in the 
sense of the damage deposit. 
 
We know some of them were increasing their rent and many of 
them could not afford to keep up with the rent so we know a lot 
of them had to leave some of the places they lived for years. 
And while that’s not the landlord’s issue, Mr. Speaker, because 
obviously the landlord owns the building, it really does beg the 
question that, how did the government respond to that particular 
crisis? Because you can’t simply sit in the sidelines and watch 
the battle ensue between a landlord that wants to get more for 
their property and a tenant who’s been a good tenant for a 
number of years and can’t afford to pay more. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Speaker, is obviously that the landlord 
wants their property back, but the government sat on their hands 
when all of these fights were going on. And a great number of 
people were pushed out of their apartment primarily because the 
apartments they were dwelling asked, the owners asked for 
more rent money and many times they could not afford it, a 30 
or 40 per cent increase and hike in their rent, Mr. Speaker. So 
we know a lot of family members basically, a lot of people in 
the cities that rented apartments, they had to move out and/or 
they had to bunk in or they had to make a number of dramatic 
changes to their lifestyle as a result of the landlord increasing 
their rent. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan the relationship 
between private developers and people in general is not as great 
as it is in the cities. In northern Saskatchewan, Sask Housing is 
what I would consider probably the largest landlord in all the 
communities. They of course administer their housing programs 
to local housing authorities, and these housing authorities 
administer the rent and maintenance and the collection of that 
rent, so on and so forth. 
 
And they’ve done a remarkable job. The local housing 
authorities have done a really good job in terms of working with 
the tenants. And while they know that their ability to set rental 
rates is limited, these housing authorities by and large certainly 
are a good sounding board for governments when it comes to 
northern housing. So I won’t go to great lengths as it relates to 
the private developers in northern Saskatchewan. My 
discussions are around the whole issue of Sask Housing as a 
landlord and many people in northern Saskatchewan as tenants, 
because that’s the relationship that they have. It’s a tenant and 
landlord situation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the most glaring issues that I’ve been 
speaking about and a glaring problem that I see as a result of 
this particular Act in balancing the rights of the tenants and the 
landlords, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it time and time again. There’s 
hundreds of examples of people from Beauval, Saskatchewan, 
people from Ile-a-la-Crosse, people from La Loche, people 
from Pinehouse, people from Green Lake, in a sense that at one 
time they had the option of actually buying these homes from 
the government, Mr. Speaker. That program was called a rental 
purchase option. So when you hear me say the RPO [rental 
purchase option], what that is is after a number of years that you 
rent a house off Sask Housing, and I think the time frame was 
eight years, that you had the option of buying this home. This 
was an agreement between the tenant and the landlord, the 
landlord being Sask Housing and the tenant being the people 
that rent houses off Sask Housing. 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that over time some of the 
families were finally getting back on their feet through training 
and through getting a job, and then the government comes along 
and they cancelled the RPO program. They cancelled the RPO 
program in northern Saskatchewan because, as the previous 
minister said, there’s too many people making too much money. 
That was her argument, Mr. Speaker. And when you look at the 
relationship of this particular Act, there was a huge disregard by 
the landlord — that being Sask Housing and that being the 
Minister Responsible for Sask Housing — when they callously 
cut the program that afforded working families in northern 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to own those homes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have told a lot of people that have gone 
through this, they cut the program in 2012 and we served 
petitions, as was indicated, and the tenant . . . Sask Housing 
Corporation refused to meet with those families that were 
prepared to buy the house off of them at fair market value, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what caused the minister at the time to change her mind 
about that program? Do these people not have, do these tenants 
not have rights? And I suggested at the time that there should be 
a class action lawsuit against Sask Housing on behalf of the 
many families who they turned around and callously cut the 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5755 

opportunities for these families from owning those homes. 
 
And what was the logic? Out of the hundreds of homes Sask 
Housing owns throughout the North and the hundreds of 
families that had the opportunity to own these homes, the 
minister came along and identified — what was it? — 13 
people working at the mine and making over 100,000. That was 
her rationale. She picked 13 people working at a northern mine 
setting then said, oh they make too much money so we’re going 
to cancel the RPO for everyone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we wanted to see happen in northern 
Saskatchewan is we wanted to see home ownership improve, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what we wanted to have happen. We 
wanted the opportunity for people that rented homes off Sask 
Housing to buy their home after a set number of years at fair 
market value so these families could work and they could earn 
as much money as they can and to have the option of home 
ownership. And many of these people wanted to do that. Many 
of these families wanted to do that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very 
simple concept. It’s a very simple concept. And certainly when 
we were in government, we saw the incredible strength that 
families had after they owned their own home. They had a lot of 
pride. They took care of their property taxes. They took care of 
their unit. They paid their mortgage on a regular basis, Mr. 
Speaker. And they became more independent people. They 
became prouder people, Mr. Speaker, and their whole family 
was strengthened. They finally had what 75 per cent of the 
people of Saskatchewan have. They had home ownership. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan, that percentage is dramatically low. 
So as a tenant of Sask Housing, as our landlord, they came 
along, the Saskatchewan Party government came along and they 
cancelled that program. And the reason they cancelled it, 
according to the minister, is they identified 13 people working 
at a northern mine making over 100,000, so everyone is now cut 
off from the option of owning their own home. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you mark my words, and we’ve said time 
and time again in this Assembly, the great Canadian dream, the 
great Saskatchewan dream for young people, young families, 
even young single people, the opportunity to own their own 
home is now suddenly not attainable. It’s out of reach for many 
young families and young people. Unless you have a really rich 
father or rich mother or rich grandparent, the option of you 
owning your own home is getting out of grasp for many, many 
young people. The prices of starter homes is through the roof. 
The prices of condominiums is also through the roof. 
 
And I can tell you today that in northern Saskatchewan, the 
prices of housing are still reasonable, and yet this government 
came along and they said, no, we’re going to put the same 
challenges that young families have in southern Saskatchewan 
of owning their own homes. We’re going to put that same 
challenge to northern families that are working in northern 
Saskatchewan, so we’re going to cancel the rental purchase 
option program for them, Mr. Speaker. And that was done. 
 
So from this bill, Bill 150, there is a relationship, a legal 
relationship that talks about a tenant and a landlord 
arrangement, a legal contract. That’s what I think it is. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when the government comes along and makes a 
determination and basically says, okay, well you guys are 

making too much money . . . There’s 13 out of, I don’t know, 
maybe 4,000 people in northern Saskatchewan that are renting 
off of Sask Housing. 
 
Well there’s 13 people out of the 4,000 that are renting that are 
working at the mine and made over 100,000. So the minister 
said, well they can afford to build their own, so we’re 
cancelling that program. Why would they do that, Mr. Speaker? 
Why would they do that as a government when they know very 
well in southern Saskatchewan the option of home ownership 
for young families is just a huge, huge problem. There is so 
many young people struggling with what our fathers and 
forefathers had the option of doing, is owning a home in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, North Battleford. And today 
now the prices of housing in Saskatoon is just through the roof, 
so young families can’t afford it. 
 
But the government didn’t do anything to address that challenge 
for young families. They didn’t do a darn thing to help those 
young families out to achieve that Canadian dream where 
Canadian kids could own their own home, Mr. Speaker. And 
not only that, Mr. Speaker, they sat on their hands when it came 
to social housing units. Not only did they cancel the RPO 
program that they allowed, this minister allowed a private 
developer to get a bunch of money from the government, for 
money earmarked for low- to moderate-income people. And, 
Mr. Speaker, she then turned around and the developer started 
complaining about it, so the minister said, well that’s okay. Go 
ahead, you can have them and sell them for whatever you want. 
And the money that was granted to you, well it’s a learning 
experience for them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people struggling for 
accommodation not only in our cities but in northern 
Saskatchewan as well. This government boasts of a growing 
population. Well they had nothing to do with it, but nonetheless, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re happy to see that Saskatchewan is growing. 
The population is growing. We’re happy to see that. We want 
that to continue, Mr. Speaker. We want that to continue. 
 
But that being said, you’ve got to understand, in a growing 
population there’s going to be pressures such as housing prices, 
Mr. Speaker. They should have anticipated that. They should 
have positioned young people a lot better. And they chose to sit 
on their hands and not do a darn thing to help the young 
families out, not do a darn thing to seeing long-term renters 
being evicted because landlords — in their right — took their 
property back to sell them or to move them into condominiums. 
 
And in northern Saskatchewan, they cancelled the one program 
that was helping, strengthening family, to make families more 
independent. And, Mr. Speaker, what they done, they turned 
around and they said no, no, no to all three fronts, Mr. Speaker. 
And that hurts not only the homeless people, but it hurts young 
families that are trying to get out of this, become more 
independent, to get out of their families’ homes, and start off on 
their own. And this government put an impediment and locks 
on every level they possibly can. 
 
And today now you see this particular bill coming along talking 
about balancing the rights of tenants and landlords. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, based on the example that Sask Housing has in 
northern Saskatchewan, they’re not balancing — and I use that 



5756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

as an example — they’re not balancing the rights of tenants at 
all. They’re balancing the rights of Sask Housing Corporation 
in northern Saskatchewan, and they’re kicking out working 
families, working people. Why are they kicking these people 
out of these homes? Because they’re making too much money. 
That’s their argument, Mr. Speaker. They can’t afford to buy 
that house at fair market value, and the government says, 
because you’re making too much money. That was the 
minister’s logic last time, the previous minister’s logic. 
 
And this minister comes along and allows a contractor to take 
advantage of low-income programs, Mr. Speaker, and then she 
lets him walk away from it saying, well he doesn’t want to do 
that anymore. He wants to sell to whomever he wants to sell. 
And this minister sat on her hands and said, okay, well go 
ahead. You can go ahead and do that. And so we look at that 
particular relationship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this particular government, Mr. Speaker, they rely on 
Habitat for Humanity to do the job that they should be doing, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re talking about 12 houses that the Habitat 
folks are working towards. And, Mr. Speaker, I give full marks, 
full marks and full credit to the Habitat for Humanity people 
because they are the ones that should be leading this charge at a 
greater level. And, Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who would 
see the government riding on their coattails. And then you see 
all these ministers waving from the Habitat coattails saying, 
look at what we’re doing for social housing. And they’re 
bragging about 12 units throughout the whole province, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re bragging about 12 units through the whole 
province. 
 
And who’s doing the lion’s share of that work, Mr. Speaker? 
Habitat for Humanity. They’re the ones doing the work. 
They’re the ones that are nailing the houses together. They’re 
finding the money. They’re putting people to work. And every 
time you have a Habitat for Humanity home open, there’s four 
or five ministers there getting their pictures taken, and yet they 
sit on this huge problem and, Mr. Speaker, a huge amount of 
money as well, not doing anything to help social housing along 
at all. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So you look at the whole issue of the balance between the rights 
of the tenants and the rights of the landlords, Mr. Speaker. The 
only landlord that we see that has callously mistreated their 
tenants in northern Saskatchewan has been Sask Housing. They 
have callously treated many working families because they 
make too much money. 
 
So we sit there in northern Saskatchewan saying, okay the 
private developer that got some low-income money, he’s 
allowed or they’re allowed to sell their units at fair market 
value, but working people in northern Saskatchewan can’t. The 
working people in northern Saskatchewan can’t. 
 
The landlords in the South that own these buildings, they have a 
right to do with their property as they wish. We understand that, 
Mr. Speaker. We understand that. But should there not be some 
concessions made for those people that have rented for years 
and years and years? And should there not be some 
consideration made on those renters whose rents were jacked up 

50, 60, 70 per cent? They say, well these guys can’t afford to 
keep those apartments. 
 
So where do they go? Where do they go, Mr. Speaker? Well the 
government points to the Habitat for Humanity folks. They’ll 
solve your problems. We’re helping them. We’re building 12 
throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, 12 throughout the 
province, that’s not even a miniscule amount needed. That just 
represents, I don’t know what small fraction of what is needed 
throughout the whole province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And secondly, the money that they do give to low- and 
moderate-income houses, a developer comes along and says, 
well I’m not going to do that anymore, three-quarters of the 
way through the project. The government says, well okay, that 
was too bad. Well we’ll see you later. Have fun. That’s the kind 
of drastic, bad leadership we have from the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we hear the minister come along and talk about 
balancing the rights of the tenants and the landlords, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of these issues come to the forefront because we 
don’t see that balance. In northern Saskatchewan, the landlord 
is Sask Housing. The tenants are Aboriginal families that are 
trying to get out of poverty. And every time they try and get out 
of poverty, the Government of Saskatchewan jacks up their 
rent. And every time they get a decent paying job, the 
Saskatchewan Party government jacks up their rent. And every 
opportunity they have to own their own home, the 
Saskatchewan Party cancelled those programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did they say? It was 13 people are 
making over 100,000 at the mines. That’s their logic, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the former minister’s logic. And I say, shame 
on her and shame on the Saskatchewan Party because you’re 
hurting a lot of working families, not just in southern 
Saskatchewan but especially in northern Saskatchewan where 
we see there are limited opportunities to build your own home, 
as there is no market value in many of these communities. 
 
So we look at The Residential Tenancies Act, Mr. Speaker, and 
we say, where is this government going? The callous treatment 
that they’ve shown to working families in northern 
Saskatchewan I think, I think should be challenged through a 
class action lawsuit. That’s what I think that should be 
happening because they broke their contract. They broke their 
word, Mr. Speaker. And there’s many families in northern 
Saskatchewan that would love to buy their homes, that 
would’ve loved to buy their homes. 
 
Now let’s take for example somebody working at the mine. 
They’ve built up their lives over time. Because obviously some 
families start off and mom and dad are starting off, and they 
have very little, like many other families. And over time, the 
mom or the dad start getting training. They start getting to 
work. Then all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, they want to become 
independent of government. And what did the Sask Party say? 
Well you’re making money now, so we would like to charge 
you more rent. We want you to pay more rent. So they jack up 
their rent.  
 
And then the people say, well okay, I’ve been a good tenant. 
I’ve been paying this amount for so long, Mr. Speaker, and can 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5757 

I have the opportunity of buying this home? Well the 
government says, no we’re not going to sell it to you now. 
We’re going break that contract. We’re not going to do that 
anymore. We decided we’re not going to do that anymore. 
That’s what the government said. Well, Mr. Speaker, that got a 
lot of people very, very angry, Mr. Speaker — very angry. 
 
And then along comes the next nail in the coffin where the 
landlord, in this case is Sask Housing, they come along and say, 
okay you’re working at the mine. So based on your income, 
you’re going to start paying $2,100 a month. That’s your rent. 
So these people, these working men and women are getting 
these letters from Sask Housing saying, now you’ve got to pay 
$2,100 a month rent on your home forever — forever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how is that fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan overall? When a working family has the 
opportunity to buy that house and get government out of their 
hair and build their family and strengthen their family and 
strengthen their community through home ownership, 75 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people have that option. In northern 
Saskatchewan, as a result of policies of Sask Housing that . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the landlord over there, they reduced the 
opportunity for home ownership for many young families to 
zero. And some of these families will be paying rent forever 
because the Sask Party government simply wants to go to war 
with the working men and women. And what’s good for a 
certain area of the province is not good for another area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I point out today that the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
Sask Party government callously kicking out working families 
from some of these homes that they’ve rented for years by 
saying, we’re going to jack up your rent because you don’t have 
the option of owning this home anymore. We’re taking that 
away. Those families should initiate a class action lawsuit 
against this government for breaking their contract and breaking 
that word without any consultation and without any due 
warning by the previous minister, the minister of Housing, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a legacy that she can carry forever, in the sense 
of seeing families not being able to buy homes. 
 
And that’s a decision they made, and I use the word “callously” 
because they didn’t think this through at all. And even after 
they’ve been told not to do it for the number of reasons why 
they shouldn’t do it, they proceeded to do it anyway, Mr. 
Speaker. They proceeded to do it anyway. And that’s where the 
word “callously” comes from because there is no regard for 
northern people that wanted to own their own home, because 
they had finally had good, decent paying jobs, not as a result of 
that government’s economic policy but because they trained 
and worked hard. And they sacrificed and they committed to 
their jobs and, Mr. Speaker, over a number of years, they finally 
got the opportunity to buy their home. And that door was 
slammed shut by the Saskatchewan Party government. And this 
fight is not over yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the relationship between the rights of the tenant and the 
landlord in northern Saskatchewan is not respected in any way, 
shape, or form. The opening statement by the minister, this is 
where I think it’s really important that people ought to know 
exactly what is happening certainly in northern Saskatchewan 
but throughout many of our cities as well. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important as well is that when we 
asked for help from the government to address the incredible 
costs for homes throughout the province, homes that I know, as 
I’ve mentioned at the outset, young people can’t afford. You 
know, they’ll be renting forever, for all their lives. They don’t 
get any help from anywhere else. 
 
But shouldn’t there be some consideration for young families 
and young people that want to own their own home? Shouldn’t 
there be some program or some opportunity for them to say, 
look, I’ve been a lifetime Saskatchewan resident. I’m going to 
live here. I can’t afford to buy a $450,000 home because I’m 
making $50,000 a year. Should we not make an effort to try and 
help those young people or those young families? And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen nothing from this government, absolutely 
nothing. 
 
And the Minister of Housing was chirping the other day: she’d 
put her housing record against ours any day of the week, Mr. 
Speaker. I would say to her, bring it. Bring it and we will see 
exactly where the proof in the pudding is when it comes to 
commitment to young people, young families, and people 
throughout all parts of the province, especially northern 
Saskatchewan. And she would be embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. 
She would be embarrassed. If I was the minister of Housing 
putting in programs and taking away programs for working 
people, I’d be downright embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would certainly tell people in northern Saskatchewan to 
get angry, to get angry at these guys because they broke a 
contract with you when it comes to housing. I believe that’s a 
legal binding contract. When you tell someone, you rent the 
office for a number of years, you honour your rent, you 
maintain your apartment, you be a good tenant, and then we’ll 
talk home ownership, and you come along a number of years 
later and say, oh no, we changed our mind on that, to me I think 
that was a legal binding contract. And they should have 
respected it. 
 
And that’s why if I was the Housing minister that I’d be 
embarrassed of that policy. I’d be embarrassed of that decision 
and that there is no respect for the tenant whatsoever. So when 
we’re talking about balancing the rights of tenants, Mr. 
Speaker, versus the landlord, evidence that the Sask Party 
government through their Sask Housing unit, Mr. Speaker, does 
not follow in any way, shape, or form the word, balance the 
rights of the landlord and the tenant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was also interesting the other day when I 
was reminiscing about the housing announcement made in a 
number of northern communities. I think La Ronge was one of 
them, La Loche, Buffalo, Ile-a-la-Crosse. A number of 
communities had housing announcements. And every single 
one of those housing announcements, we had the provincial 
Minister of Housing, her smiling face next to the MP [Member 
of Parliament] for the area, the MP Rob Clarke. He brought 
some federal money. And I was sitting there thinking, my 
goodness, now here are these guys helping prop up their federal 
cousins, you know, through housing. You know, and he come 
along and he told a number of communities, we’re going to help 
you find housing. 
 
And I’ll give you an example. In my own home community of 



5758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, the mayor is a great mayor, a young, exciting 
mayor. He’s going to do very well for the community for years 
and years. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, he knows the crisis in 
housing in his home community. So when the province comes 
along and the federal government comes along and say, look 
we’ve got some money for you; did you want to take it? And 
the mayor had no choice. The money was in front of him. And 
the problem was he had to cover 51 or 52 per cent of the costs 
from the Ile-a-la-Crosse municipal coffers to get the money 
from the federal government, as many of the other communities 
as well. 
 
So what does that do? Well it puts the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse probably about 300, 400,000, maybe even I 
think it’s a half a million dollars in debt. For what? To provide 
social housing. So the government is saying, well you guys can 
do your part too. Yes, but half a million dollars for a small 
community to be able to take on the role of housing because 
Sask Housing Corporation and CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation] and the federal and provincial 
government are walking away from this. 
 
Now what happens next year when the communities need more 
housing? Because they all need housing. Are they going to go 
another half a million dollars in debt to get five houses? And 
the year after another half a million. How about those 
communities that can’t afford to contribute dollars to the 
program? Are they out? Is Green Lake out? Is Beauval out? Is 
Patuanak, the hamlet of Patuanak, are they out? Because they 
can’t . . . Sandy Bay, Pelican Narrows, they can’t put any 
money down for these housing programs. They are also 
eliminated from the opportunity to build homes. 
 
Why? Because the Sask Party government walked away from 
their obligations to provide social housing units, Mr. Speaker, 
and because the federal government walked away from their 
obligation to provide social housing units to the underserved 
parts of Canada, Mr. Speaker. They’re walking away from that 
and they try and dress it up by travelling to these communities 
and saying, look, before we used to help you build homes; now 
we’re going to get you to build half the homes. And anybody 
that doesn’t have any money, guess what? Tough luck. You’re 
on your own. That’s their attitude — tough luck; you’re on your 
own. If you can’t contribute to housing as a municipal body, 
then you’re on your own. That’s what they’re telling them. 
 
So I was sitting there and I was wondering what kind of deal 
this is, what kind of impact this is going to have on the 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Speaker. What happens to 
the plans for the community to build an exciting economy? 
Well guess what? They’ve got to find housing for their people 
first, so half a million dollars in debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the problem that we see time and time 
again. You’re not respecting the working people by allowing 
them to buy housing. You are vacating your traditional role of 
building homes, and putting communities in debt. And 
Ile-a-la-Crosse is a population of 1,600 people. They owe half a 
million dollars today as a result of the Sask Party government’s 
policy. And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They had the 
smiling face of the Sask Housing minister and the smiling face 
of their federal cousin, the MP, and they’re saying, look, we’re 
doing so wonderful on social housing. We’re building five 

houses. But guess what? We’re only paying 45 per cent of the 
cost. And here’s a whole bunch of rules as well, going with that 
money. Now you tell me, Mr. Speaker, is that a good 
relationship between a tenant and the landlord? 
 
And I can tell you today, Mr. Speaker, that the housing program 
that they have announced, where they’re putting communities in 
debt year after year after year is absolutely the silliest program 
I’ve ever seen in my time in politics. And secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, the communities that can’t afford to be part of the 
solution to provide housing for their people, guess what? 
They’re out. So they’ll continue suffering from overcrowded 
housing, and they’ll continue suffering from the lack of 
affordable housing in a lot of these northern communities, Mr. 
Speaker. It is almost as if the government wants to make us 
dependent on people for the rest of our lives, and that’s not 
what the people of northern Saskatchewan want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many people throughout my communities, and I’ll 
give you the example, Beauval being one of them, where we’ve 
seen really strong families, really good families. A few of them 
had to move out, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because they couldn’t pay 
their rent of $2,000 a month. So they decided, okay, I’m not 
going to pay $2,000 a month rent forever. I’m going to go and 
try and buy a house in the city or I’m going to go try and rent a 
decent place in the city for half the price. So what happens is 
the mom and dad get up and they move out with their two or 
three kids. 
 
[15:45] 
 
That affects the population of the school locally. That affects 
the buying power of families in that community. That affects 
the overall wellness of the community when you have working, 
committed young people that are making a difference in their 
community, when they’re forced to move because of the 
government policy of not selling them that house at fair market 
value and increasing and jacking up their rent 200 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s the type of relationship that we see when it comes to 
housing and the lack of respect that that government has for the 
rights of their tenants under Sask Housing. It’s a total lack of 
respect, Mr. Speaker, and a total misunderstanding as to what 
their role is when it comes to trying to stimulate home 
ownership between the people that are renting off them now 
and the people that want to stay with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I go back to the earlier comments. I went on the Northern 
Pride newspaper and I condemned the housing agreement. I 
condemned the housing agreement because the Sask Party 
government wants to walk away from their obligations when it 
comes to making sure that northern Saskatchewan is treated 
fairly. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of people out there that 
fear for the future of their house because they think somewhere 
along the line there’ll be a change of mind. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you that the callousness that the minister made the 
decision to cancel the RPO program is a continuing statement 
from the Sask Party government. They really don’t care if 
working people in northern Saskatchewan own their house or 
not. All they want is the resources off the North. All they want 
is the rent cheques off the working people. And all they want is 
money being sucked out of northern Saskatchewan, and that’s 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5759 

it. They’re not going to put no more investment back, Mr. 
Speaker. And we see that time and time again. 
 
Now the former US president, the former US president spoke 
about this whole notion. And I don’t have the quote exactly 
right. And we listen to some of the famous quotes and Jimmy 
Carter, the former US president said, and I quote, and I don’t 
exactly have the quote totally correct, but it goes along the lines 
of something like this, Mr. Chair. 
 
First of all they say, he says, if you want your country based on 
Christian values, if you want your country based on Christian 
values, then don’t complain when we use your tax dollars to 
help the poor, because you don’t. That was his phrase, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what Jimmy Carter said. 
 
And we want to take it a step further with the opposition. We 
believe that people have the values of building a fair and just 
Saskatchewan. We believe that. And we believe that there will 
be somebody coming along trying to stoke the differences 
between north and south, between Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal, between those that have and those that do not 
have, for their own political gain, Mr. Speaker. And I say it’s 
the Saskatchewan Party government right across the way. 
 
Because from our perspective, we want a country, we want a 
province based on fairness. We want a province based on being 
inclusive, and we want to make sure that everybody shares the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. And in northern Saskatchewan this 
government has come down very hard on the northern 
Saskatchewan people. Very hard, Mr. Speaker, very hard. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Jimmy Carter’s statement about 
wanting your country based on Christian values, then don’t 
complain when you use tax dollars to help the poor, we take it a 
step further. We take it a step further as a party. And we say 
yes, we believe our country and our province should be based 
on good values. Absolutely. We believe that. But it’s important 
for government to try and use that goodwill of the people that 
want to build Saskatchewan on good values. We want to use 
that goodwill to make the poor people and those that are more 
disadvantaged, to strengthen them and to make them more 
independent of those tax dollars. That’s our obligation as a 
party that wishes to govern the province. 
 
We want to make those people that depend on those tax dollars 
less dependent over time. We want them to become more an 
independent and proud people. And how can you do that, Mr. 
Speaker? We can help them build social housing units. And 
then we can tell them the tap is going to be turned off for social 
housing units for your particular families, but guess what? You 
can buy this house because now you’re working. You’re 
working; you’re becoming more independent, and thereby one 
less family to look after in social housing. 
 
So it’s incumbent upon government to use that goodwill of 
Saskatchewan people and build a more independent society for 
those that need tax dollar support at this time. That is the 
smarter use of tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, than what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s doing right now by sitting on their hands 
not helping these young families achieve home ownership all 
throughout the province, by sitting on their hands not helping 
with the homelessness situation, by sitting on their hands by 

giving developers money to build homes for low-income people 
then letting that developer say, well I changed my mind; I’m 
going to sell it to whomever I want to sell these units to. And 
they let the company do that. And then they turn around and 
they start telling the working people in northern Saskatchewan, 
we’re cancelling home ownership. Guess what? You’re paying 
rent for the rest of your life, and we don’t care if you’re making 
money or not. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I want to argue here today, 
that the fact is Jimmy Carter’s statement was halfway to what 
we believe the vision for Saskatchewan would be. He believed 
that if people had a Christian value or good values to build a 
fair and just province, if people had that intent and they had that 
view, then it’s important for government to use that good intent 
to build independence for those people that need the tax dollars 
at this time so they become independent sooner and therefore 
less of a drain on the taxpayers’ dollars that we count on for 
social housing units and many other programs and services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now that is a compassionate and just and considerate and 
intelligent government that can deliver that. But the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker, has done nothing to look at the respectful 
relationship that you must have to respect the rights and balance 
between tenants and landlords. No evidence of that whatsoever. 
 
So I go back to my old argument about housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I go back to my home community. That’s 
one of the agreements I know best. And the point is, next year 
the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse will need another 10 houses. 
The population is growing. Now, Mr. Speaker, they went in 
debt half a million dollars for five houses. So it stands to reason 
that if they want to get 10 houses built next year, they’ve got to 
go another $1 million in debt. So how many more years do they 
have to go into debt to meet the housing needs and demands of 
the community? Does that not make the community at the end 
of the day less better off than the government’s coming along to 
help out? Absolutely it does, Mr. Speaker. Because the money 
they use for housing, they can’t use for recreation and cultural 
development, they can’t use for improving the economy of the 
community, they can’t use for developing the infrastructure of 
the community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re so strung out on the need for housing that all the other 
pressing issues that let the community develop and become 
more independent, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, those issues 
are now on the back burner. Because the Saskatchewan Party 
government, along with their federal cousins, are putting huge 
debts on some of these communities and not allowing the 
communities that can afford to put money up, to participate in 
the housing program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see the evidence of what the Saskatchewan 
Party is doing, and we see in northern Saskatchewan, as in the 
South, they’re abandoning their obligation to try and help 
young families achieve the one dream, the one dream that our 
fathers and mothers could or our grandparents could, and that 
was home ownership in our cities, home ownership in our 
towns, and home ownership in our villages. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we asked the question today. My colleague 
the member from Saskatoon Centre asked the question about 



5760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

social housing. And I wanted to read into the record the quote 
from last night. They had a debate in Lloydminster. And there’s 
a by-election happening there, and the Sask Party candidate was 
asked a question about housing, and here’s the quote. And she 
said: 
 

When governments get involved in owning land and being 
the gatekeepers of social housing, we all know things don’t 
work. I think that belongs to private industries for 
development and that’s where it should stay. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the whole notion of what she 
was saying, she’s basically saying, she’s basically saying what 
exactly what the Sask Party believes. They believe that social 
housing should stay with fundraising groups and that they have 
no obligation at all to help the people that are homeless, to help 
the young families that can’t afford to buy their own home, to 
help those that have been displaced as a result of their 
apartment buildings going up for sale, to help the elderly that 
have limited income, Mr. Speaker, to help those of low income. 
 
There’s a huge group of people out there whose housing needs 
are not being met, and this government sits on record revenues, 
Mr. Speaker. Let’s not forget that — record revenues. They’ve 
sat on record revenues for the last seven years, and they refuse 
to spend one single dime on social housing, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re on their way of exiting. Why don’t they just say what 
their Lloydminster candidate said last night, that they’re going 
to exit the social housing projects? And that’s exactly what they 
intend to do. Why can’t they say that, Mr. Speaker? You know 
why they can’t say that, Mr. Speaker? It’s because they don’t 
have the courage to say that. 
 
Instead they put programs in place and they cancel other 
programs to discourage home ownership. And to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a total lack of leadership and commitment. And 
yet they still stand up here day after day talking about how 
they’re helping low-income people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Low-income people know full well what they’re trying to do. 
And they see exactly how they’ve been treated by this 
government, and they will continue to vote against the 
Saskatchewan Party government for their callousness and lack 
of regard for their needs when it comes to housing. It’s 
happening all throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to read again the candidate from Lloydminster when 
she said: 
 

When governments get involved in owning land and being 
the gatekeepers of social housing, we all know things don’t 
work. I think that belongs to private industries for 
development, and that’s where it should stay. 

 
That was her comment last night, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
exactly what the Saskatchewan Party believes. So let’s do away 
with the facade. Let’s do away with the mask. And I think the 
Saskatchewan Party should just come along and say exactly 
what they’re doing. They’re trying to get out of social housing 
problems and that in the meantime they’re going to count on 
Habitat for Humanity to build 12 houses throughout the 
province. 
 

Good credit to the folks in the Habitat group but, Mr. Speaker, 
these guys shouldn’t be putting their smiling faces to the people 
that are really committed to building homes for the lower 
income people, and that’s the Habitat folks. These guys are just 
riding on their coattails, Mr. Speaker, trying to look like they 
care when they really don’t. They couldn’t care less. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that I think is really 
important here is that as you look at some of the challenges 
when it comes to the relationship and respectful . . . balancing 
the rights of tenants and landlord, as the minister alluded to, 
there has been a lack of respect for tenants all throughout 
northern Saskatchewan. And people tell this to me as well 
wherever I go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are people out there right now that would probably say, 
well why should government do these things? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the biggest problem in northern Saskatchewan, as we 
see, there’s a lot of activity with tourism. There’s a lot of 
activity with mining. There’s a lot of activity with forestry, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s all this economic activity in northern 
Saskatchewan, much like a lot of the other regions, Mr. 
Speaker. And yet all this government does, all this government 
does is take our resources, take our resources and don’t put 
anything back to try and improve the infrastructure, the roads, 
or the future of people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I tell the people of northern Saskatchewan, if the 
Saskatchewan Party government doesn’t want to help us in 
northern Saskatchewan meet some of these needs, especially in 
housing and employment and opportunity, Mr. Speaker, then 
leave our resources in northern Saskatchewan. We will work 
with the northern companies to build a better, stronger North. 
We don’t need any interference from the Sask Party 
government. 
 
They should just get out of our hair, Mr. Speaker, because the 
bottom line is they don’t care for northern Saskatchewan. 
They’ve never invested in northern Saskatchewan, and we’re 
seeing evidence of that in many, many other places including 
Lloydminster, including the teachers, including the working 
men and women in this province. And the list is starting to get 
longer and longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why it’s important to point out, when it comes to 
anything to do with housing, right away the Saskatchewan NDP 
are going to stand up for those people who can’t afford housing, 
people that are being kicked out of their homes, people whose 
programs have been cancelled with no regard, Mr. Speaker. 
And those people number many. There are many, many young 
people, many young families that are being impacted. 
 
And this government’s sitting on top of their wad of cash, not 
caring and not knowing that this anger’s out there, Mr. Speaker. 
But the anger will show up. The anger will show up. And I 
think people are going to start speaking up and speaking out, 
Mr. Speaker. So there’s no question in my mind. There’s no 
question in my mind that housing is going to be a big, big 
problem for this particular government. 
 
So in the sense of the whole relationship, I go back to the point 
that the minister made under The Residential Tenancies Act. 
You look at the proper consultation, Mr. Speaker. We’ve asked 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5761 

on all these bills, give us the proper consultation. Who did you 
talk to? Which organizations did you talk to? 
 
[16:00] 
 
New North is a good example, Mr. Speaker, New North. New 
North. And I’m sure my colleague from Cumberland shared 
with the government a letter from New North. And for those 
who don’t know what New North is, New North is a collection 
of mayors and councillors from all the municipal bodies in 
northern Saskatchewan within the northern administrative 
district, within the NAD [northern administration district]. 
That’s what they’re called. There’s about maybe 40, 45 mayors 
and councils, and they range from smaller communities to 
villages to hamlets. But there’s about 45 mayors and council 
that sit on a regular basis and basically form the New North 
organization, and their job is to monitor what the government 
does and to be a lobby group on behalf of their people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the chairman of New North is the mayor 
from La Loche. And Georgina Jolibois has on many occasions 
tried to work with the government to try and get things done, 
but time after time Ms. Jolibois was met with total disregard. 
They listened to her, but they didn’t have anything to offer her 
at all. Finally she got upset. Finally she got upset, Mr. Speaker, 
and as a result of that, New North issued a scathing press 
release giving this government extreme grief about the lack of 
respect for northern people’s safety when it comes to highways, 
Mr. Speaker. And housing is coming back up again. New North 
is going to be hidden among housing as well. 
 
So the argument that I would make to all the Sask Park MLAs 
sitting across the way, kind of chirping from their seats and 
giggling and laughing here as we’re talking about important 
issues, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have one thing to say to you. It’s either you start 
treating us fairly and as just as we should be treated or stay out 
of northern Saskatchewan. Stop sucking resources out. We will 
work for the company and build a better North as opposed to 
you guys taking out all the money and all the resources and not 
putting a single dime in. That’s the message that northern 
Saskatchewan people have for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
And do your jobs. Do your jobs. 
 
You’re sitting on top of mountains of money and you’re sitting 
on record revenues. You’re sitting on record revenues. There’s 
reference made by the Minister of Health yesterday that the 
NDP in 1990s had to make a number of cuts to health care, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can almost guarantee you, from 
the mid-1990s to now, this government has $8 billion more a 
year to work with, Mr. Speaker. They had twice the amount of 
money to work with and yet they can’t figure out . . . What we 
can’t figure out on this side of the House is why they’re 
counting on Habitat for Humanity to deliver social housing 
when they’re sitting on twice the money that the NDP had in 
the mid-’90s, Mr. Speaker. They have almost $14.2 billion, 
almost $8 billion more to work with, and they’ve got to go 
running to Habitat for Humanity to deliver social housing. And 
Habitat for Humanity’s saying, we’re going to give you 12, 12 
units. And they’re doing great work, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
doing great work. 
 
And the member yells from his seat. He probably has the 

opportunity to own his own home and many other families 
don’t. But he don’t care because as long as he’s taken care of, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s happier. He’s happier as long as his issues are 
met. He could care less about any other people throughout this 
province. 
 
And that kind of lack of compassion is going to catch up to this 
government, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that they’ve got $8 
billion more to work with, Mr. Speaker, $8 billion more, almost 
twice what the NDP had to work with, Mr. Speaker. Because 
we were so broke at the former Conservative government, our 
second biggest cost as a government was interest on the debt as 
a result of them putting this province on the brink of 
bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now they come along. They have almost $8 billion more, 
Mr. Speaker. And we sit here and this defiles belief, Mr. 
Speaker. You have that much money and you can’t figure out 
how to deliver social housing units and fix highways up, Mr. 
Speaker. They just simply can’t get the job done. They just 
don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. It goes right from 
the Premier to the Deputy Premier to the cabinet to the entire 
backbench. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can see that as clear as day from this 
side of the Assembly. Six billion dollars more to work with, and 
they can’t figure it out. And what’s amazing to us on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, they’re not spending any money on 
social housing units. They’re certainly not doing a great job at 
all on the highways. What amazes us on this side of the House 
is they have $6 billion more a year, every single year, to work 
with, and yet they’re putting universities in debt. They’re 
putting municipalities in debt. They’re putting school boards in 
debt, Mr. Speaker, and they’re putting us in debt. 
 
And how are they doing this? Through the P3 [public-private 
partnership] model. They want it so bad. They’re so addicted to 
all these flashy little press releases that they’re willing to put us 
in debt, Mr. Speaker, more in debt through the P3 model. And 
we’re saying, you guys have $6 billion a year more to work 
with, and yet you’re still putting us in debt and you still can’t 
figure it out. Like what kind of government are you? My 
goodness. 
 
You know, and they sit here today. You sit here today and, Mr. 
Speaker, after seven years that’s a tired old government. That’s 
a tired old government, Mr. Speaker. And we can’t figure out 
why they’re tired because all they’ve done is spend the money 
that was left for them. All they’ve done is enjoyed the fruits of 
hard work being done before they became government. 
Everybody in Saskatchewan knows that. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows that, and that’s why we have zero 
confidence in their ability to do the job and zero confidence 
when they talk about things like respect for tenants, especially 
when it comes to Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and 
trying to meet the needs of people that have low incomes and 
people that are homeless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what the problem is, Mr. Speaker. They haven’t been 
able to figure things out on that end, Mr. Speaker. We can see it 
on this end, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again the 
Saskatchewan Party just made a big mess of the huge 
opportunity that they got, Mr. Speaker, and that was the work of 



5762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

many people before they became government. All they’ve been 
doing is spending money, putting us in debt, and not doing 
things right, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we see on this side of 
the House. It’s very simple. You know, to the Premier, the 
Deputy Premier, and the cabinet: like figure it out, you guys. 
It’s just very simple. 
 
You have $6 billion more to work with. Why is it you’re still 
going in debt for P3s? Why is it our universities and our cities 
are going into huge debt? Because you guys are putting that 
debt onto them. You’re so addicted to press releases that make 
you look good. At the end of the day it’s going to cost us all a 
lot of money, Mr. Speaker. The net effect is, at the end of the 
day, where does Saskatchewan sit after that? Where does 
Saskatchewan sit after their mismanagement and their 
ineptness, Mr. Speaker? We’re going to be $19 billion in debt 
here within the next short few years and, Mr. Speaker, that is 
not the legacy that we want to see for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And that’s why it’s time for the NDP to tell these guys, we’ve 
had enough of this gong show, Mr. Speaker. We had enough of 
the Saskatchewan Party and their lack of ability to respond to 
the issue as it relates to housing. And, Mr. Speaker, housing is 
the number one issue I think in many of these communities, 
especially in the cities and rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to jump on the opportunity to provide home ownership 
for as many people as we can — because that’s what this is all 
about — and seek an opportunity for young people and 
respecting those that have the ability to become homeowners 
and by working with them, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to 
slamming that door shut that the Saskatchewan Party has 
certainly done that to many, many people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at all of these issues, all these bills, 
all these bills, and we say on these bills, you know, don’t 
mention the word respect when you’re talking about housing 
programs in the same sentence when it comes from that 
government. Don’t even mention the tenants that you have 
abandoned in northern Saskatchewan. Don’t even mention the 
tenants that you had booted out of their homes because of the 
increasing rents that you didn’t have no program or support for 
them. Don’t mention the tenants that were supposed to move 
into this low-income housing in the city here and that you 
walked away from that deal and let the developer take all those 
units and do what they want with them. Don’t even mention the 
fact that you sat on your hands and applauded the federal 
government exiting housing from northern Saskatchewan and 
from other places. 
 
Don’t even mention the fact that you’ve cancelled RRAP 
[residential rehabilitation assistance program]. You’ve 
cancelled the RPO. You’ve cancelled the remote housing 
program that were benefiting people and families throughout 
the province. Don’t mention the fact that you’ve been trying to 
weaken housing programs right across the board. 
 
Why? Because as your candidate says in Lloydminster, that 
they had no interest in social housing. Why doesn’t the Premier 
or the Deputy Premier or the Minister of Housing or any one of 
those cabinet members stand up and have the guts to say that 
instead of using sweet-sounding words here to try and fool us? 

People are not fooled, Mr. Speaker. They are not fooled. 
 
We see example after example of how this government have 
abandoned people when it comes to housing needs, in particular 
the low-income families that are suffering in Saskatchewan and 
many times, as I said at the outset, because families make a 
choice between rent and food. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. 
Speaker, in this day and age with record revenue — record 
revenue. 
 
We hear the Sask Party brag about record revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
We know the economy is going strong, but they have record 
revenue. And what are they doing with that money, Mr. 
Speaker? It is totally beyond us because we still see debt 
climbing, and we don’t see any progress on some of the 
challenges that the people of Saskatchewan have asked this 
government to try and address. And housing is a big, big matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would point out again, when we look at bills of this sort, 
balancing the rights of tenants and the landlords, I would say 
the balance as far as Sask Housing is concerned, the balance has 
not been fair and that there are many families that are suffering 
as a result of this lack of vision, lack of commitment, and lack 
of compassion by that government. They simply don’t get it, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s the frustrating part that many people in 
northern Saskatchewan and many young families are going to 
express. 
 
Now I say this to the young families out there, and people that 
may be listening about housing: do not give up your dream of 
home ownership. Do not give it up. We’ll continue to work with 
many people and families in northern Saskatchewan. We will. 
We will. And I would suggest that there’s probably a legal 
recourse many of those families could undertake, as this was a 
broken contract. A broken contract was done in 2012 when the 
government said, we’re cancelling that RPO program. 
 
Why? Because they felt like it. There was no compelling 
reason. And we want to find out what the compelling reason, 
why they would do that to working families in northern 
Saskatchewan. And we will find out eventually. We will find 
out eventually. And to the people of the North who know that 
this government’s not putting anything into highways, they’re 
not putting anything into housing, into health care, in 
strengthening our communities. Because we know communities 
are struggling all the time. They’re putting communities further 
in debt through housing, Mr. Speaker. We see all that evidence. 
 
And as far as roads, they’re not doing anything to help with the 
highway situation, much less housing, Mr. Speaker. So my 
argument to the people, with the people to the government, if 
you don’t want to put any resources or any projects or any 
investment in the North, then leave our resources alone. We 
will work with the companies to build a better future. We don’t 
need you sucking out all the resources and the money and 
spending the money here foolishly and not doing anything for 
the North that would really help a lot of families, especially 
families impacted by housing. 
 
So we know, Mr. Speaker, that is a total disregard from that 
government to really not deal with the issues that we’re talking 
about when it comes to housing. So many times bills of these 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5763 

sort, we look at the buzzwords. And “balancing the rights of 
tenants and landlords” was one of the lines that really got to me, 
because we see evidence in point after point of how they’ve 
been totally disregarding northern Saskatchewan people when it 
comes to housing, totally disregarding young families that are 
trying to achieve home ownership in our cities and our larger 
centres. Total disregard for the homeless people and the 
low-income people and those that are moving to Saskatchewan 
to try and find an opportunity to own a home. 
 
These are all the people impacted by a government that just 
doesn’t care, just doesn’t get it, and is busy padding the pockets 
of their big friends, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of many little 
communities and many families that want to achieve home 
ownership. I’ve said this in the Assembly 10 times and I’m 
going to say it another 10 times, and I’ll keep saying it until we 
embarrass this government into doing the right thing. And that 
is, if they can’t do anything for the North, to invest in the North, 
leave our resources alone. We’ll figure it out on our own. And 
we’ll move the agenda forward when it comes to issues such as 
housing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more issues that we want to 
raise with this government on this whole notion of this 
particular bill. We know that some of the comments that they 
make as it relates to fairness doesn’t apply 99.99 per cent of the 
time, Mr. Speaker. The only time it applies with that 
government is when they’re taken to court, and the only times it 
applies to the government is when they respond to challenges, 
direct challenges, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on. 
 
And I say this to a lot of people that may be listening to this 
residential tenancies Act. Number one is, this government’s 
getting out of social housing. Understand that. But not only are 
they trying to exit social housing, they want to keep this stock 
the same, and everybody rents off them. So working families 
are paying high rents to the government. The government’s 
taken out all the resources out of the North and making a great 
amount of money. They’re not fixing northern roads. They’re 
not addressing young people’s needs. They’re not addressing 
homelessness. All the issues that we keep bringing out, they just 
keep on, keep on doing what they’re doing. 
 
And that’s why I say to you, next election when the Sask Party 
candidate comes to knock on your door, be polite, but close the 
door fast, Mr. Speaker, because you don’t need to listen to the 
jargon. And more than likely, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to 
happen is they’ll probably try and highlight their leader and 
forget about the ineptness of the backroom there. And then ask 
them about what their track record is on meeting some of the 
social agendas of the people in their constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
It is not there. Saskatchewan people deserve better. We want a 
stronger government. We want a more visionary government 
that’s inclusive of everyone. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And now, while they’re laughing and giggling in the back, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d have them enjoy that. Go ahead, enjoy the laugh. 
Because sooner or later the last laugh comes from the voters 
who are going to tell you guys that, wherever you are, to leave 
their doorstep and don’t bother explaining things to them, 
because you have shown no evidence that you support many of 

these families when it comes to housing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there’ll be a lot more people that 
have a lot more comments on this particular bill. There’s a lot 
of issues. But I would encourage the minister not to speak about 
respect between tenants and balancing the respect between 
tenants and landlords, because the example that his government 
has as a landlord is called Sask Housing, and the lack of respect 
from many tenants in northern Saskatchewan is so very 
apparent. The lack of respect for tenants that are now homeless 
is very apparent. The lack of respect for low-income families is 
very apparent. The lack of respect of young families trying to 
buy their first home is very apparent. And, Mr. Speaker, these 
issues are hitting cities, small communities, rural Saskatchewan, 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s hitting a lot of families throughout 
the North and, Mr. Speaker, they share that same pain with 
many families throughout southern Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So a lot of my colleagues will have a lot more to say about this 
particular bill. So on that note I move that we adjourn Bill No. 
150, An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. I so 
move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 141 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 141, An Act respecting the 
Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, Public Records 
Management and making consequential amendment to other 
Acts and Regulations. And I would note that Bill 141 ties in 
together with Bill 142, which we will be dealing with after I’ve 
completed my comments on Bill No. 141. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the issue of archives and records for the 
province of Saskatchewan is maybe sometimes a rather dry 
subject that most people aren’t too concerned about or they just 
basically think people will take care of that. And I think in 
Saskatchewan we have a pretty good record of doing that. 
 
I’m quite pleased to see this legislation here. The minister gave 
quite a good description of the legislation with the rationale, 
and I would commend him for giving the detail and the ideas 



5764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

behind the changes that are made so we actually have that on 
the record. In some ways, as a newer minister, I think he could 
maybe teach some of the more senior ministers, who have 
gotten quite short in their comments about bills, to basically talk 
about how legislation should work. And so we have here, in the 
minister’s comments, quite a few answers to the questions that 
the public has to questions that we would have here in 
opposition. 
 
But practically, what is clear is that all of our legislation around 
the provincial archives, around the records of government, build 
on what has been done over many years. And I think the 
positive part of this particular bill is that it says, well, the 
standards were 30, 40, 50 years ago at this level. We now know 
that some of those things haven’t captured all of the changes in 
how we record things in the province. We need to make some 
changes to the legislation. 
 
And so I know that many people have contributed and I think 
the minister lists those people who have contributed, including 
the Legislative Assembly Office and the people we work with 
every day, the court services people and obviously the Chief 
Justice and senior judges of the courts, the Office of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner, the Ministry of Health 
as it relates to the health records, and as well as other record 
managers and legal advisors in the Department of Justice who 
have provided advice on this particular legislation. 
 
And so as we look at it as opposition, I think our goal is to 
affirm those parts that seem to capture the needs that we have in 
this decade, but also just to ask questions to make sure that the 
wording will apply for the decades to come. 
 
Now I think probably the most interesting part of this 
legislation does relate to the fact that basically our provincial 
record of activity is now all electronic or digital in some format. 
And so the question comes, how you preserve that? But also, at 
what point does the authorization come from legislation and 
from the processes set up to allow for destruction of that 
material? Because material can be destroyed very, very quickly 
in our present situation. 
 
And so when we look at the legislation, there are attempts to 
identify how this can be done. There’s some pretty clear rules 
about what the procedures are. And I think most interestingly, 
the legislation creates definitions of the various types of records 
that are here. 
 
So when you go to section II and look at the legislation, most of 
the definitions actually relate to what are records. And so we 
look at administrative record of a court. Well it’s, the 
administration side, that’s the record that we’re talking about 
there. That’s kind of a procedural side. And then you go and 
look at a court record. Well a court record is actually what 
happens in court, and that’s in a lot of ways Hansard that we 
have in the legislature. And court records have been 
traditionally the most carefully kept and recorded in our 
parliamentary democracy. 
 
And so those obviously will continue that tradition, and we do it 
and basically recognize that format will be different than it was, 
say, when I started practising law a few decades ago. And 
practically, you know, you didn’t have a way of getting easy 

access to what had been said in court. Nowadays it’s digital 
record for most proceedings, and it’s quite a dramatically 
different world. 
 
Well the same thing is true here in the legislature as it relates to 
Hansard. And we want to thank them, the people who work 
with Hansard, for the fact that we have pretty quick and easy 
access to what has been said in here and in most of the 
committees, and also that record is one that is there as we look 
back over the decades. And quite often we’re referring to that, 
whether it’s in question period or in committee, because the 
record is important. It is important that you say something 
consistent with what you said the day before. We’ve had some 
problems with that over the last week here in question period, 
but we have the official record, and anybody can go and look 
and see all the various versions of the responses to questions 
that are there. 
 
Now also in the definition, we end up looking at definitions 
around ministerial records. And that’s a bit of an interesting one 
for ministers and members, because a ministerial record is the 
record of the ministry and the office and the administration of 
the affairs of Saskatchewan, but it doesn’t include personal or 
political records or records related to constituency business of 
the minister. Now I think that’s reasonable, but it does beg a 
question of who makes that final decision around some of the 
records and whether they’re of a personal or political nature or 
if they relate to constituency business. I can see that this will be 
an area where the various institutional boards and jobs that are 
created in this legislation will have some important tasks to do 
to provide advice. And also in this legislation it talks about the 
public record, and that’s, basically goes then back and refers to 
all the different records that already have been defined. 
 
But public record is defined very clearly in the legislation in 
section 2 to be first off: 

 
(a) a record made or received by a government institution 
in carrying out that government institution’s activities; 
 
(b) a ministerial record; 
 
(c) a record made or received by the Legislative 
Assembly, the Legislative Assembly Service or an Officer 
of the Legislative Assembly. 

 
And the officers obviously include the Children’s Advocate, 
Chief Electoral Officer, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner, the Ombudsman, 
and the Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan and the Public 
Interest Disclosure Commissioner. And then it also, the public 
record includes the court record, and it includes an 
administrative record of the court — in other words, how the 
courts have been run — but it’s got an exception: “but does not 
include a prescribed record.” 
 
Now we don’t know what that means, but obviously in the part 
of the bill around regulations the cabinet is given the job of 
defining or enlarging or restricting the meaning of any word, 
and it also is given this task of designating what other kinds of 
records might be included in the public record. So it will be 
interesting to hear an explanation of how that prescribed record 
will be created, what it will be, what kinds of things are being 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5765 

contemplated as part of this prescribed record, and how is that 
term going to be used in this legislation. 
 
It’s interesting that that type of a clause is here. I assume it 
comes to deal with types of records that maybe don’t even exist 
as this legislation is being prepared. But we’ll need to ask some 
questions about that, I think, at some point as this legislation 
proceeds because it is a bit of an unknown factor as we look at 
this. 
 
Now the legislation itself really replaces the previous legislation 
that we had as it relates to the archives. And so it is possible to 
basically do a side-by-side with the old legislation and see 
where changes have been made or where it stays the same. And 
the advantage of basically continuing with the previous 
descriptions of how to do this are that you at least have some 
experience on how to apply the rules that are there. 
 
And we haven’t received that in the legislature, the side-by-side 
as it relates to this legislation, but I think it may be helpful 
when we get to committee that the ministry would provide that 
information to us or we can go through and ask questions to 
understand where the various people consulted have made 
recommendations about how to change what we’re doing at this 
time. 
 
Now there’s a couple of other areas where it is a bit interesting, 
some of the, you know, powers that are here. And I think 
there’s some version of them but it’s maybe more explicitly 
stated in this legislation, which is that the Provincial Archives 
can accept gifts and things like that and also charge fees for 
services that it renders. And I mean, these kinds of things are 
appropriate provided there’s a good mechanism that’s 
transparent to everyone as to how this has been done. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now as you look through the types of people that are to be 
employed to implement this legislation, I think my main 
concern would be is that in times where there are pressures on 
the public purse, often things like archives are underfunded or 
they’re not provided with all the money that they need, all the 
staff that they need. And this legislation, I think, does some 
expansion of how the job is done, and I think it’ll be important 
for the ministry to make sure that sufficient funding is available 
to complete all of the tasks that are set out in this legislation. 
I’m not sure it’s . . . I’m not sure what the plan is as it relates to 
the expansion or contraction of the budget for this work. But 
it’s obvious that there’s more work that needs to be done and 
that some of the tasks that are here will take a substantial 
amount of time on behalf of individuals who work in this area. 
 
Another aspect of the legislation relates to the personal health 
information, The Health Information Protection Act, and the 
ability to use health records for various purposes. I think some 
of it relates to research, and given that we have some pretty 
good records in Saskatchewan, I know that there’s often interest 
in doing longitudinal studies of people and communities in the 
province using de-identified information, health information. I 
think some of these rules here maybe assist in that work but I’m 
not totally certain how that’s supposed to work. And I think 
some of the actual mechanics of that is actually going to be in 
regulations which we will have to take a good look at as they 

move forward, but I think we’ll also want to ask some questions 
about that when we get into the committee. 
 
It’s always a tricky matter to make use of whole community 
health information, and what we want to be sure of is that 
individuals are totally protected and that no ways of injuring 
our individual citizens or groups of citizens can happen through 
legislation. I don’t think, based on who has actually been part of 
drafting this legislation, there would be any intention of doing 
that. But sometimes, inadvertently, that type of damage can be 
created if we haven’t been vigilant in observing the legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation has many aspects that are 
important for the province of Saskatchewan. And we want to be 
in a position where our citizens can have access to what is 
really the history of the province, the history of how we’ve 
dealt with each other, at a reasonable cost and in protected 
ways. So we’ll be watching the budgets for this whole area as it 
proceeds as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again thank you to the minister for 
providing the detail that he has provided in this legislation. I 
know that some of my colleagues have some questions in some 
other areas as it relates to this legislation, and I know that they 
will want to make some comments. But at this point I would 
like to adjourn debate on Bill 141, An Act respecting the 
Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, Public Records 
Management and making consequential amendment to other 
Acts and Regulations. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 142 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 142, An Act to make consequential 
amendments resulting from the enactment of The Archives and 
Public Records Management Act. This is a short piece of 
complementary legislation to the Bill 141 which we’ve just 
been discussing. 
 
Effectively it makes amendments to bilingual legislation to 
make sure that the new names of both the Provincial Archives 
of Saskatchewan and this previous legislation, The Archives and 
Public Records Management Act, are included in the bilingual 
laws where that’s appropriate. 
 



5766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

It doesn’t appear that there are any major issues here but I know 
that there may be some questions that will arise from some of 
my colleagues, so at this point I’ll adjourn debate on Bill No. 
142, An Act to make consequential amendments resulting from 
the enactment of The Archives and Public Records Management 
Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 143 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
indeed my pleasure to once again be arising in the debate on the 
bills that have been introduced by this government in this 
session. As I indicated in my comments on the Throne Speech 
when I was provided an opportunity to speak then, I find that 
the legislative agenda of this government is slightly less than 
riveting, but I don’t know if it’s because we’re in the fourth 
year of this particular legislature. I did do some research on the 
number of bills introduced by various legislatures, and this is 
certainly on the record for being the one with the least amount 
of bills introduced. So something interesting, perhaps a trend in 
governments. I’m not sure. But at any rate, it’s always an 
honour, and I take it as a serious responsibility for the official 
opposition to rise to these bills and make comment on them and 
certainly seek the consultation with the members of the public 
to ensure that the bills are appropriate and that there isn’t 
anything that’s been missed or something that’s inappropriate 
or something that’s been overlooked. 
 
So today I’m speaking to Bill No. 143 which is The Degree 
Authorization Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. And I have to 
thank the minister who gave the opening comments to this bill 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And he really did give a thorough 
explanation of the original bill itself, the purpose for the 
original bill, and a good explanation of why these new 
amendments are now required. 
 
He gave a number of explanations about The Degree 
Authorization Act. We know that was brought in, introduced . . . 
sorry, it’s been in effect since October 29th, 2012. So two years 
ago now that bill received approval, and this government is 
looking to provide degree-granting authority to a number of 
institutions that are providing post-secondary education here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I won’t get into any comment on his explanation of the 
original bill. There are very straightforward amendments being 

presented at this time. And again I guess another observation 
just in general, in terms of my short few years here in this 
Assembly, is that quite often we’re commenting on amendment 
Acts to bills that were just introduced. And I don’t know if 
that’s a trend either, but it seems like we’re often being asked to 
look at amendments to bills that just came into effect. I don’t 
know why that is. I don’t know if that’s something that happens 
in every legislature. But in this case there’s a couple of little 
changes that perhaps would have been more obvious at the time 
of introduction of the bill if a little more time had been taken or 
a little more care in terms of the intent of the bill and in this 
case the plausibility of this section that’s being amended. 
 
So it’s interesting that we see this happening on a regular basis 
with this particular government. And I don’t know if they’re 
just in a hurry to get these bills in and then realize, oh darn, we 
made a mistake, we have to fix it so we have to do an amending 
Act, or if this is something that just wasn’t obvious to the 
government at the time. 
 
So in this case we have the need to remove a particular date that 
was in the original Act, and we’re finding that in section 4(3) of 
the existing bill. And if you want to look at that clause, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the restriction on granting degrees. So it’s a 
negative clause. It tells who cannot grant a degree, and then it 
goes on in subsection (2) to say you can provide a degree if . . . 
And there’s some clauses there that explain how it happens. 
And then the third clause is the one that’s the problem. 
 
So the third subclause (3) of section 4 reads, an educational . . . 
This is not a direct quote. I’m just paraphrasing. But it’s an 
educational institution that, before December 1st, 2011 was 
providing a degree program, can continue without authorization 
to carry out that activity until November 30, 2016, so it goes on 
to say, if that educational institution and the degree program 
were exempted by the regulations. 
 
Now the explanation that’s being given in the notes that were 
provided to us tells us that the specified end date of November 
30th, 2016, which is just two years away, is the time that a 
number of these institutions need to come into compliance with 
the Act or they won’t be able to provide degrees. 
 
So what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, in the way the amendments 
are set up, is that the reference to the actual fixed date is being 
removed and now we have this flexibility within the regulations 
which is the government’s goal is to make sure there is more 
time for some of these grandfathered institutions to come into 
compliance with the Act. 
 
Now I had an opportunity to discuss this a little bit with the 
minister just before I rose today to make these comments, and 
he explained to me that there’s a number of institutions that 
need more time and perhaps that wasn’t clear at the time that 
the bill was introduced a couple of years ago. The first is 
Briercrest College, which I think is near Moose Jaw. And right 
now they’re offering a number of degrees that are not going to 
allow them to meet the requirements and the regulations. So 
they would like to be able to have all 10 of these degrees able to 
be brought into the regulations, and right now only one of them 
is eligible to do that. So they need some time. 
 
And apparently a lot of this has to do with the changing of some 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5767 

of these programs from a theological naming. There’s a 
nomenclature that’s involved with degree naming and they want 
to make it more a general, non-theological name. And I 
understand there’s a number of compelling reasons for 
Briercrest to want to be able to do that. So that makes sense. It’s 
too bad it was missed back when the bill was introduced but it’s 
never too late to amend a bill. So that’s what’s happening there. 
 
There was some other colleges or universities that were also 
examined at this time in terms of that date. He explained that 
Athabasca University, which is an online university, and I think 
home base or at least the mailing address for Athabasca 
University would be Alberta, that’s what the minister indicated, 
but anyways it’s . . . He said with regard to Athabasca 
University, when the Act was proclaimed in 2012, it wasn’t 
clear whether certain aspects of their outreach model might be 
subject to the Act. I think the determination has now been that it 
likely won’t, but there’s also an extension there to make sure. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Also interestingly, and I found this quite interesting, is that 
Cape Breton University has a partnership with Great Plains 
College to offer a Master of Business Admin degree, an M.B.A. 
degree in Saskatchewan. And I’m not sure how that would have 
come about. I find that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, how a 
small university in northern Nova Scotia, on Cape Breton 
Island, has arrangements with Great Plains College to offer the 
degrees. 
 
At any rate, Cape Breton has to apply for authorization if they 
want to continue beyond the grandfathering period. Again I’m 
not sure what date will be extended to them in the regulations. 
But we have a quality assurance board. The Saskatchewan 
Higher Education Quality Assurance Board has now developed 
the types of standards that they need to assess this graduate 
level program. 
 
And now we have this extended period for the Cape Breton 
University to apply for authorization now that the graduate 
standards are in place. So it took some time to get the standards 
in place, and then it takes time for the college to make sure they 
can respond to the standards. So obviously the need for an 
extension is the responsible thing to do. 
 
Finally there’s a comment about Lakeland College, and as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, that’s situated in the city of Lloydminster 
and also Vermilion, Alberta. Now the physical structure of 
Lakeland is in Alberta, so the folks have determined that there’s 
actually no physical presence of that college in Saskatchewan 
and so it’s actually going to be removed from the list of these 
grandfathered institutions. Of course if at any point in the future 
there is a physical institution in Saskatchewan, then that would 
be looked at again, and they may be provided the authority to 
provide degrees or grant degrees. 
 
So the changes are very particular. Section 4(3) is amended by 
striking out the date of November 30th and then we’re putting it 
in now as a prescribed date. So the minute you see the word 
prescribed in any legislation, you know that you’re being 
moved over to the regulations clause. So now the date is no 
longer to be located within the Act. It’s now being pushed back 
into the regulatory level. 

So clause 23 also had to be amended. That’s clause 23(c) and 
that is the one that it’s . . . Clause 23 is the long list of things 
that this government can do by regulation and so 23(c) used to 
just say, exempt educational institutions and degree programs 
from the application of subsection (1), but now they’re adding a 
second clause that says, “prescribing the end date for 
exemptions made pursuant to subclause (i).” So it just allows 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council, through regulatory 
proclamations, to set this date rather than have it cast in stone in 
the legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s really it. That’s really all that we can 
find in this Act. You know, again we want to make sure that 
there are no concerns within the public about these kinds of 
changes, but it’s really pretty basic changes. All it’s doing is 
taking out the actual fixed date that was in the legislation. 
Whoever decided that that was a good idea, I guess it’s not such 
a good idea any more, so now it’s being removed and the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council through regulations will have 
the authority to determine that date for the exemptions. 
 
So at that point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just continue the 
. . . adjourn debate. Thank you. I haven’t done this for a while. 
So I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 143, An Act to 
amend The Degree Authorization Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 148 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise to speak to Bill No. 148, An Act to amend The 
Vital Statistics Act, 2009. 
 
It’s kind of difficult to get into this, Mr. Speaker, when I hear a 
kind of a . . . sounds like cows mooing over on the other side. 
I’m not exactly sure what that noise is, but it’s distracting, to 
say the least. Maybe it’s too hard on the cows, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate, vital statistics is a very interesting topic for me. I 
think there’s certain nerdy type people like myself that like the 
idea of vital statistics and the role that they play in our history, 
and certainly in the genealogy that people do now. I know a lot 
of people rely on vital statistics to do their family history 
searches, and I think it’s an interesting topic just in and of itself. 
Certainly this Act here is making a number of changes to The 
Vital Statistics Act, 2009. And of course there’s a long history 



5768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2014 

of vital statistics throughout not just Saskatchewan, but our 
country. 
 
So I went and had a little look at Statistics Canada web page. 
And I was looking at vital statistics from a national perspective, 
and they have a really interesting list of the history of vital 
statistics, so some important dates in vital statistics in the 
history of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the very first time that 
there was any sort of enumeration in Canada was in 1605. And 
that’s when some priests enumerated 44 settlers in the colony of 
New France. So we’re going way back there, Mr. Speaker, over 
400 years ago that we were looking at enumeration in New 
France. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You weren’t there. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I wasn’t there. It’s a little before my time but, 
many, many, many years ago, yes. An interesting note: in 1847 
the Census and Statistics Act of 1847 was passed, and that 
provided for a decennial census. And I had to look up the word 
decennial because I wasn’t sure what it was, but it means every 
10 years. So we’ve been doing censuses in Canada, at that point 
it was Upper and Lower Canada, but in 1847 it was the first law 
that we had dealing with census and statistics. Now can you 
guess what year the first decennial census was taken? We know 
it always ends on a 1, but it was in 1851 when the first 
decennial census was taken. And in 1871 it was the first census 
of the Dominion of Canada because of course we didn’t become 
a country until 1867. So I thought that was kind of interesting. 
 
Some of the things that they really gathered in those days were 
vital statistics, and then agricultural and commercial statistics. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, these numbers are of great value to 
any kind of researchers or historians that are interested in 
looking back at what’s happened in our country. 
 
In 1956 there was a bit of a change, and I’m skipping through a 
lot of these, but the first quinquennial census. And again I had 
to look that up because I didn’t know what it meant, but 
quinquennial is every five years. So as you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we now have our major censuses on every year ending in a 1, 
but of course we also have quinquennial censuses on different 
matters that vital statistics is gathered. 
 
1969, sign of the times. There’s a new database created at the 
Dominion Bureau of Statistics, and that’s the divorce database. 
So again an interesting sort of reflection of where our society 
was at the time, and they started gathering statistics on divorces 
in 1969. 
 
1974, we see again technology advances being made — 
computerization. 1974 led to a major redesign of the 
biostatistics processing system. Now when you think about 
computers, I didn’t see a computer certainly until the early ’80s 
when I took a computer programming class in university. And 
those were . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . ’73 for Mr. Speaker. 
That’s very interesting. We know that mainline computers have 
been around for a while. But anyways as far as vital statistics 
goes, we have 1974 is when they first started computerizing. 
And this Act reflects a lot of additional technology and 
certainly electric records that we’re now using. 
 
1993, we see the incorporation of the Canadian Institute of 

Health Information or CIHI. And I know that’s something we 
look to often for health statistics and determining the record of 
particular governments and health authorities, and certainly the 
progress of health care in Canada for sure. 
 
And then something that actually we’re celebrating today is the 
10th anniversary of the advent of same-sex marriages in 
Saskatchewan, and that also comes up in vital statistics. In 2003 
when the Provincial Court rulings all started, vital statistics 
registries in Ontario and British Columbia started registering 
marriages of same-sex couples. And then in 2004 there was 
one, two, three, four, five, six . . . five provinces and two 
territories that also expanded their registries to include 
same-sex marriages. So in an ironic sort of way, you look at 
these dry statistics but they actually do tell us a story about our 
society, and some of the important changes in our society and 
our statistics reflect that. 
 
So those are just some of the interesting things about vital 
statistics. And I know as far as family histories go, it’s amazing 
what you can find out now with the Internet and how family 
histories can be tracked. And so for example, my grandmother 
was a Harrison born in Nova Scotia. And I just plugged her 
name into the computer a couple years ago and I found my 
family history all the way back to England in the 1600s, which 
was astounding, Mr. Speaker. All those numbers were there and 
the registry, the various registrations of births and deaths and 
marriages was there for me to trace my family history all the 
way back. 
 
Sometimes that’s not so easy. Obviously in days when civil 
administrations were tracking marriages and deaths, often it was 
done by churches and, you know, the records of the churches 
for births and deaths and burials. And I know with my father’s 
family name, we’re stuck back at 1772. We can’t go any further 
back because there just simply is no records. And when I did 
some research with a historian in Ireland, I discovered . . . He 
said probably most of those churches had burned down and 
those records are lost. But overall I think, Mr. Speaker, the role 
of vital statistics in our history and in the way we actually tell 
our story is a very important role. 
 
With computerization obviously and with the Internet now, I 
think the data collection is much simpler and much more 
accessible. And certainly there’s a lot more volume of 
information available now with the advent of computerization 
and the Internet which really isn’t that long ago. I mean, the 
first time I went on the Internet was in ’94. I can remember I 
was at law school, first email. That’s only 20 years ago. And 
when you think about all the changes that has happened in the 
way we gather data and the way we manage data and the way 
we rely on data, it’s a sea change for sure. 
 
And in fact in the minister’s opening comments for this Act, we 
know this government introduced The Vital Statistics Act, 2009. 
Only five years later, he’s acknowledging there’s a number of 
significant technological changes that again require amendment 
to an Act was introduced not that very long ago. So there’s a 
number of changes that are being introduced here, and the 
minister gave a brief comment on some of those things that 
we’re looking at in this particular bill. If you look at the overall 
structure of the Act itself, and think, well what are vital 
statistics? What do they actually track? There’s a number of 



November 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5769 

different areas in Saskatchewan where we capture certain 
statistics, and these are things that are within the purview of the 
province. 
 
So the first area, there’s a general section in part 3 called 
registration general. Part 4 though is the registration of live 
births. And this is something that is taken very seriously by 
administrators and that’s part of the information that’s kept in 
the vital statistics of Saskatchewan. There’s also part 5, which 
is the registration of deaths. And then part 6, interestingly all on 
its own, and it’s quite a long section. It’s the registration of 
stillbirths. And that tells a sad story, I’m sure, if you were to 
look at part 6. And that part of the registration is stillbirths and 
children that weren’t alive when they . . . Never lived I guess is 
the best way to describe it. 
 
Part 7 is, of course, the registration of marriages. And then we 
get into, the next division talks about how this information is 
stored and how it’s kept and how it’s used and who can use it, 
and then the applications to the court in the rest of the Act. 
 
So I think on the registry of live births, I’ve actually had some 
interesting debate with a number of people about the way this is 
handled by vital statistics. And there’s an incredible onus on 
hospitals these days to make sure that those certificates are 
filled out before the person leaves. And I actually had a 
constituent who came in tears after she had her child because 
she wasn’t ready to name the child before she left the hospital 
and felt that she had been coerced into naming the child before 
she was ready to do so. 
 
And I think there’s a real tension there between what the 
hospital needs to do because they have certain rules and forms 
and policies and procedures that require a name on the live birth 
certificate. But quite often parents don’t know what they want 
their child to be named. And I have some friends this year who 
had a child at home and a home birth with a midwife in 
attendance and it took them about three weeks to decide what 
the name of their new daughter was. And I think that kind of 
rigidity and adherence to, the slavish adherence to the forms is 
difficult . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The time now being after the hour of 5 
o’clock, the House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow 
morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5737 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5737 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5737 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5737 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5737 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5738 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5738 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5738 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5738 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5738 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5739 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Anniversary of Landmark Ruling 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5739 
 Memorial Cross Recipients Receive Commemorative Licence Plates 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5739 
 North Central Lakers in City Finals 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5740 
 Special Olympics Saskatchewan 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5740 
 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5740 
 Family Medicine Residents to Train in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5740 
 Saskatchewan Construction Association Gala 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5741 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5741 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5741 
 Smart Meter Program 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5743 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5743 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5744 
 Provision of Social Housing 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5745 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5745 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Swift Current to Host Women’s World Curling Championship 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5745 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5746 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5746 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5746 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5747 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5748 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5748 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5748 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5749 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5750 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5751 



 

 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5751 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5751 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5753 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5754 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5763 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5765 
 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5766 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5767 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


