




















































Hansard: October 28, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5533 

 October 28, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture, 

Sport, Provincial Capital Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

draw everybody’s attention to sitting in the west gallery. Mr. 

Speaker, this morning I was pleased to announce the launch of 

the military heritage project, Stories of Courage: 

Saskatchewan’s Second World War Veterans Remember. This 

oral history project was only possible through the generous gifts 

of memory by 17 Saskatchewan Second World War veterans 

who gave freely of their time so that future generations will be 

able to understand and appreciate that momentous period in our 

country’s history and the history of the world. 

 

Joining us today in this House are six individuals who stood up 

to be counted when our country needed them most. Mr. 

Speaker, may I introduce to you and through you to the 

members — just raise your hand when I introduce you here 

today, gentlemen — Robert (Chuck) Steen served in the Royal 

Canadian Air Force from 1943 to 1946 as a truck driver with 

the air evacuation unit. John Milani had a long career in the 

Canadian Army from 1940 to 1967. He was a command post 

officer during the invasion of Normandy. George Orton was 

also with the Royal Canadian Air Force from 1942 to 1946. He 

was a steward in the disciplinarian’s office. Alex White served 

in the Canadian Merchant Navy from 1942 to 1946 where he 

was the radio operator on SS Green Gables Park; Reg Harrison, 

a pilot with the 431 Squadron, Bomber Command, Royal 

Canadian Air Force, 1942 to 1945; Ruth Bond-Martinson from 

the Women’s Royal Canadian Naval Services, 1944 to 1945 

with the HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Cornwallis. 

Joining them in the gallery is the former Chair of the Military 

Heritage Project committee, retired Lieutenant Colonel Larry 

Wong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because of their bravery, patriotism, and 

sacrifice, and that of thousands more in both the First and 

Second World Wars that we are free today and our province and 

country are united and strong. 2014 has been a year of 

commemoration, reflection, and a growing respect for Canada’s 

military heritage. This year saw the 100th anniversary of the 

beginning of the First World War, the 75th anniversary of the 

start of the Second, and the 70th from D-Day. With the recent 

events in Ottawa and Quebec, it continues to be a year of focus 

on Canada’s military. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can draw a direct line from the valour of those 

past generations to the spirit of the Canadian military today as 

we honour the lives of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and 

Corporal Nathan Cirillo, killed last week, and we’ve seen that 

respect so clearly in the Canadian people with their outpouring 

of sympathy and patriotism here in Saskatchewan as well as 

across Canada. 

 

Our military heritage is something to be proud of and to share 

with our children and newcomers. On behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, with the greatest of respect and gratitude, 

welcome to your House. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s truly my humble 

honour to join the minister opposite in welcoming these heroes 

to their legislature, those veterans that served in the Second 

World War. Certainly they join us here at a time, of course, for 

which we have paid our respects and our remembrance to those 

two recent members of the Canadian Armed Forces who so 

tragically, so cowardly, were killed last week. And we stand 

united as a province and a nation to pay our respects to their 

service and certainly in thinking of their families. 

 

The story of those that have served in the Second World War is 

an incredibly important story. It’s important to the people of 

this province, to the people of our country, and it’s an important 

story from an international perspective. The service and 

sacrifice of so many, and certainly those that we’re joined with 

here today, is something that should never be forgotten, 

something that should always be remembered. And we certainly 

appreciate initiatives and projects that allow that story to be told 

to next generations and generations beyond that. 

 

As the grandson of a veteran that has now passed, but served in 

the Second World War, landed on the beaches, and was finally 

wounded in the battle of Moyland Wood in 1945, I know that 

story from a personal perspective. I know what it means to a 

family just the same as, I suspect, the story of service of each 

and every one of these members. I know that that story will be 

incredibly important to their families. It’s not just important to 

their families, it is important to our province. And for their 

valour, for their leadership, for their sacrifice, it’s important for 

us to be ever thankful as a province. 

 

So thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the minister for 

paying respects here today. And it’s our privilege to have them 

join us here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a delegation in your 

gallery for which I seek leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to do an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



5534 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, may I first join the minister 

and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in welcoming these 

veterans and this delegation to their Legislative Assembly 

today. This country truly is free today. We are the True North 

strong and free. There’s thousands of reasons that that’s the 

case. And we are visited by those reasons this very day, and we 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later this month the province of Saskatchewan will 

be engaged in another trade mission to the country of India. We 

will leave in mid-November and return on the 23rd of 

November. We’ll visit a number of regions in India. We’ll visit 

with a number of government officials and with companies. 

We’ll have businesses in our own delegation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, among other things we will promote 

Canadian agricultural products, significantly pulses, and we’ll 

promote Canadian energy, Saskatchewan energy, and uranium. 

Now with the new nuclear co-operation agreement with India 

and a very robust civilian nuclear program there, we hope to 

now sell uranium from Saskatchewan into that great country. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll also be talking about fertilizer. We’ll 

want to be able to promote the sale of potash in India. 

 

And we’ll be doing all of those things as well as promoting 

exchanges back and thanking India for the great trading partner 

they are, and for the fact that of all of the source countries from 

which we draw newcomers to help build the new 

Saskatchewan, India is now number two, Mr. Speaker, just 

behind the Philippines. 

 

So I want to welcome a delegation that is joining us today. We 

had a great meeting this morning. I received some very good 

advice and counsel as to the direction of the government with 

respect to the Saskatchewan-Indian relationship beyond its 

commerce relationship and more to the matter of the 

people-to-people relationship that we have. And I want to thank 

them for this meeting we had. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I hope these names are all right and 

correctly pronounced, Mr. Speaker. And may members 

welcome here the president of the India-Canada Cultural 

Association. Sunil Sohani has joined us. Maybe you could just 

give us a wave, each member as I introduce them. Kumar 

Balchandran is also here. Welcome, Mr. Speaker, to Gary 

Grewal, Rakesh Halari, Krishan Kapila, Jay Shah, Daksha 

Shah, Isha Srikumar, Murali and Rupa Krishnan, and Dr. 

Venkatesh Meda as well, Mr. Speaker. I apologize if I have 

missed any. I know some have had to leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we want to thank them for their great 

contribution to our province and to our country in just very 

many facets we found out about today, and thank them as well 

for their advice to the government with respect to the upcoming 

trade mission. Would all members please join me in welcoming 

these delegates, these citizens to their Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join with members who have already welcomed the veterans 

that are with us here today. As we enter the season of 

remembrance with Remembrance Day coming in November, 

Mr. Speaker, I guess our challenge and our duty as Canadians is 

to not have it as a season but to have it as a constant state of 

remembering and giving thanks for those who have brought us 

our freedom. So welcome and thank you to the veterans who 

are here today. 

 

And I want to add my words of welcome to those of the Premier 

in welcoming the group of Indo-Canadians who are here in the 

Assembly. The contributions that the Indian community has 

made to Saskatchewan are immense. Whether it’s in business or 

education or medicine or on our university campuses, Mr. 

Speaker, the Indo-Canadian community throughout 

Saskatchewan has made a huge contribution. We look forward 

to the outcome of the trade mission that will go on in 

strengthening that relationship and making it even stronger here 

in Saskatchewan. So I join with all members in welcoming this 

delegation to the Assembly today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 

fixed-price contracts. And we know in September this year, this 

government walked away from a new, 48-unit, low-income 

affordable housing project in Regina, allowing a private 

developer to instead take control of and rent the units at full 

market price. And when asked to explain this government’s 

decision to allow the private developer to back out of our 

fixed-price contract without any penalties, the Minister of 

Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re assuming that there’s 

these desperate homeless people,” showing how disconnected 

this government is from the realities within our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province, and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people signing this petition come from 

Humboldt and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to 

the unacceptable danger created by that government on 

Dewdney Avenue by way of the heavy-haul truck traffic that 

they failed to adequately plan for, and certainly call on this 

government to urgently take action to bring safety to Dewdney 

Avenue. And the prayer reads as follows: 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5535 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition opposed to lucrative lean contracts. The 

petitioners point out that whereas many aspects of health care 

and seniors’ care are getting worse under this government, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government is failing to fix the basics in 

health care and seniors’ care, including rejecting 8.5 million in 

urgent requests from care facilities for desperately needed staff 

and equipment and repairs, and that the government is failing to 

properly listen to front-line health care workers, patients, and 

their families. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to cancel its lucrative contracts with 

out-of-country lean consultants and instead focus its 

resources on actually listening to front-line health care 

workers and fixing the basics in health care and seniors’ 

care. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am rising to present 

a petition in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. And 

the folks who have signed this petition want to bring to the 

Assembly’s attention the following: emergency room wait times 

in Saskatchewan have doubled since 2010, the government’s 

own statistics show that patient safety is getting worse, and the 

government’s own survey showed that the majority of doctors, 

nurses, and other front-line health care workers are frustrated 

with the quality of health care; the government is spending 

untold millions of dollars on its lean project, including a $40 

million contract with an American consultant and flying in 

Japanese senseis for $3,500 per day. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that this Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the provincial government to recognize health care 

is getting worse under its watch, and to begin fixing the 

basics by listening to health care workers, patients, and 

their families, properly maintaining hospitals and care 

facilities, and focusing its resources on front-line care 

instead of spending millions on its lean project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to submit this, and the folks that have 

signed this particular petition are from my own community of 

Saskatoon Nutana in Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Military Heritage Project Launched 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 

had the opportunity, along with the Minister of Parks, Culture 

and Sport and many other colleagues, to attend the launch of the 

new military heritage project video series, Stories of Courage: 

Saskatchewan Veterans Remember. 

 

These videos present personal stories of courage from 

Saskatchewan veterans about their experiences in supporting 

the war effort during World War II. Interviews with 17 

Saskatchewan Second World War veterans from all branches of 

service are included in this project. 

 

Our government recognizes that people from Saskatchewan 

have made significant contributions to Canada’s military 

history. It’s important to preserve and share the personal stories 

of our senior veterans before these memories are lost. These 

videos have been created to commemorate their service and 

educate present and future generations. 

 

Saskatchewan residents will be able to access the project 

through the government YouTube site, the Western 

Development Museums, Heritage Saskatchewan, and Royal 

Canadian Legion offices. The military heritage projects reflects 

our government’s commitment to enriching our quality of life 

by connecting our past to our present and future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bravery and sacrifice of our military personnel 

who served in the Second World War must never be forgotten. I 

invite all members to join me in celebrating the launch of this 

new military heritage project video series. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 

recognition of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Breast cancer 

is a disease that affects many families in our province. I think 

that all members here today can think of a friend or a family 

member who has been touched by this heartbreaking disease. 

One in nine Canadian women will develop breast cancer during 

her lifetime, and although survival rates are improving, too 



5536 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

many women have lost their battles with this disease. 

 

Each year the CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] 

Run for the Cure in Saskatoon and Regina raises thousands of 

dollars for the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation, which funds 

research and advocates for the breast cancer community. 

Although this disease continues to disrupt many lives, there is 

cause for hope. Innovations and treatment have led to 

significant decreases in deaths since 1986. With better 

screening and technological improvements, we have more 

survivors today than ever before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with important initiatives like Breast Cancer 

Awareness Month, I hope that we can continue to increase 

awareness, fund the critical research, support our loved ones 

when they need us, and eventually create a future for all women 

and girls that is free from breast cancer. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Health Care Providers Week 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

recognize October 26th to November 2nd as Health Care 

Providers Week. We are very proud of our health care system in 

Saskatchewan, and we are grateful to the people who make it 

work. 

 

Health care providers are dedicated, caring people who keep the 

health system focused on the patients and the families it serves. 

We have all seen these compassionate, professional, and caring 

people in action, whether during a visit to an emergency 

department, during an annual checkup at the family doctor’s 

office, or while visiting friends and relatives in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care providers play a vital role in our 

province. We are grateful for their contributions in all areas of 

the health care sector. Mr. Speaker, we are working to ensure 

we have the right mix of health care providers to offer the best 

possible care for our province. 

 

Under our government, Saskatchewan has seen significant 

increases in the number of physicians and nurses working here. 

There are 423 more physicians working here since 2007 and 

2,600 more nurses. We are committed to ensuring we have the 

many other providers we need: therapists, care aids, dietitians, 

and laboratory technicians, just to name a few of the 

hard-working people providing the care we’ve come to rely on. 

 

I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking our health 

providers for their ongoing commitment to high-quality, 

patient-first care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

The Jam Man 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

this Chamber to talk about a remarkable accomplishment of an 

outstanding northern resident named Charlie the Jam Man 

Squires. 

 

Charlie has been selling his jams and jellies in the Prince Albert 

area for more than seven years and has donated all of the 

proceeds to various local and national charities, and 

conservative estimates pin his contributions at more than 

$10,000. Charlie’s accomplishments are impressive enough on 

their own, but the fact that he is now nearing his 90th birthday 

makes his contributions even more extraordinary. 

 

Charlie exemplifies community spirit and volunteerism, and he 

told CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Prince Albert, 

and I quote, “I’m at the stage where if I’m helping one single 

person, I am doing something.” Truly inspirational words, Mr. 

Speaker. Charlie held his final jam sale this fall but won’t be 

putting his pots and pans away for good. He’ll continue making 

his sweet treats for close friends and family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that you and all members of this Assembly 

will join me in thanking Charlie for his years of community 

service and wish him all the best as he retires from his career of 

jam-making excellence. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fleet Expands 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 10th I 

had the opportunity, along with the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers, to tour the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society’s — or 

STARS’ — new AW139 helicopter in Prince Albert. 

 

STARS landed its newest helicopter near Victoria Hospital in 

Prince Albert as part of a training and outreach exercise. This 

training is taking place in many communities across the 

province to best serve the people in this province in their time 

of greatest need. The new AW139 helicopter will serve 

Saskatchewan people from the STARS Saskatoon base 

alongside the existing fleet of BK117 helicopters. 

 

This new helicopter is larger and faster than the others in the 

fleet. It also has added features that will allow STARS to fly 

further without refuelling, to fly at night, and to fly in 

below-freezing weather conditions. Extra space is also available 

in this helicopter to provide paramedics with the room to 

provide better patient care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, PotashCorp was a major contributor to STARS’ 

fleet expansion, donating $27 million for the purchase of the 

new $16 million helicopter and the development of its 

Saskatoon base. This new addition to STARS’ fleet will allow it 

to continue to expand and better provide air ambulance services 

to Saskatchewan people. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating STARS on the 

addition of the AW139 helicopter to their fleet, and thanking 

them for the important service they provide in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5537 

Social Housing Development Opens in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

the House today to talk about a new social housing 

development that opened in Prince Albert on October 24th. 

 

We have a responsibility as citizens of Saskatchewan to keep 

our neighbours strong and to look out for those who may need a 

hand up, not a handout. That’s why our government committed 

in our plan for growth to sell up to 300 of its single family 

dwelling units in Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert to 

create more modern and energy-efficient multi-unit housing. 

Not only will this help sustain Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation’s portfolio; it will also make housing less 

expensive for the tenants, cheaper for the taxpayer, and create 

entry-level home ownership opportunities. By selling existing 

social housing to people looking for entry-level homes, we can 

reinvest the proceeds of those sales to develop new housing in 

these communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that our government invested $5.6 

million in this initiative to help keep Prince Albert and 

Saskatchewan strong. Like other communities in Saskatchewan, 

Prince Albert is growing. 

 

Our priority is to assist those in greatest housing need and to 

make housing more affordable. Mr. Speaker, this project in 

Prince Albert, and others like it, supports our government’s 

vision of making life affordable for all Saskatchewan people. 

We can help our neighbours in greatest need while keeping a 

balanced budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

New Magnetic Resonance Imaging Unit in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, earlier this year 

the Minister of Health announced that the new regional hospital 

in Moose Jaw will be home to a new magnetic resonance 

imaging unit, an MRI. The Moose Jaw Health Foundation has 

committed to raising the $3.3 million for the MRI unit, 

additional building space, and installation. The Ministry of 

Health will fund the operational costs of the new MRI unit 

which is expected to be operational in 2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will be the seventh permanent hospital-based 

MRI in Saskatchewan and will provide closer to home 

diagnostics imaging services for patients across southwest 

Saskatchewan. This new MRI will assist in providing sooner, 

safer, and smarter health care for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The number of patients receiving MRI services in 

Saskatchewan has nearly doubled since 2008, and this new unit 

will be important steps toward reducing the waiting time for 

medical diagnosis and treatment. It’s important that all 

Saskatchewan residents have timely access to diagnostics and 

health care services. And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

acknowledge the work of the Moose Jaw Health Foundation, 

the Five Hills health unit region, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan for improving health care and diagnostic service 

and reducing wait times for Saskatchewan patients. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms 

for the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we learned 

that this government ignored scathing criticism from senior 

health administrators about its lean pet project. They said that 

John Black tattles on leaders who dare question, that his 

training is so irrelevant that it’s insulting, that it’s a bunch of 

dogma that doesn’t actually encourage new analysis, that the 

flying in of senseis, Mr. Speaker, from Japan to Saskatchewan 

is a massive waste of money. They said this: “Getting out of 

this will be an improvement.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, last week, first the Minister of Health said, 

well he actually hadn’t heard these comments and wasn’t sure if 

they had been passed on to the ministry. Then he changed his 

story and said, oh he had heard these criticisms, Mr. Speaker. 

My question to the Premier: what is the truth? When did the 

government learn that senior health administrators say that it 

would actually be an improvement to get out of this contract 

with John Black? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition has been raising concerns about this project, about 

lean, for some time, as it is their duty to do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we have responded through the minister and the ministry and 

health regions. 

 

And I think I said the same on occasion here in the House, that 

we would listen carefully to what was being said by health care 

workers across the province, by those in management as well, 

and by stakeholders in the system and seek to improve lean, Mr. 

Speaker. And throughout the summer, we received some of the 

information that the Leader of the Opposition is quoting. There 

was other positive comments that we received then. In fact 

yesterday at treasury board, where the health regions were 

reporting to treasury board and presenting, we received input 

that lean must continue for all the reasons we’ve canvassed here 

in the House already. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we took the input seriously, and the 

Ministry of Health renegotiated the contract. Mr. Speaker, the 

length of the contract’s been shortened. The cost of the 

contract’s been shortened. There’s been adjustments to now use 

Saskatchewan examples on that first orientation day and to 

remove some of the things that were bothering our health care 

workers as a part of that orientation. Those changes have been 

made. The number of any out-of-province consultants to be 

used throughout the lean process will also be minimized as a 

result of the adjustments. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, savings to the system will 

continue, now approaching $60 million on a $35 million 

contract, yes, because of these recommendations. Improvements 

in terms of the appointment process for mental health, those 

improvements have already been sustained to the health care 

system. Mr. Speaker, reductions in wait times in terms of 



5538 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

pediatric care in the province — those attributable, yes, to lean 

and, yes, to this contract, Mr. Speaker — those improvements 

have been sustained in addition to the money being saved. The 

adjustments were made because we listened to health care 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue with lean in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if they had been listening to the 

advice from health care workers and from health care 

administrators, they would not have renewed the contract with 

John Black. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region] senior bureaucrats who can’t stand lean. On June 27th, 

there was a meeting of 11 senior leaders from the Ministry of 

Health, from the Health Quality Council, and from the health 

region. Here, Mr. Speaker, are some of the quotes that are 

provided by these senior leaders: “Coaching has been sporadic 

and inconsistent.” “This is not going well.” “We need to 

incorporate adult learning concepts.” “We are investing a lot of 

money for a program that appears to have no defined 

objectives.” This is the feedback given by senior bureaucrats in 

our health care system, Mr. Speaker. It sure doesn’t sound like 

it’s worth $40 million, the contract that they have signed with 

John Black. 

 

My question to the Premier: how much scathing criticism does 

he need to hear before he will end the toxic and the wasteful 

contract with John Black? Stand up and answer that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I don’t know why the Leader of the 

Opposition is so angry about saving $60 million in the health 

system or about improving the front-line care experience for 

patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about quotes in the House. Here’s 

a quote from a mother who helped design the children’s 

hospital, at the children’s hospital unveiling. Here’s what she 

said: 

 

It’s not because I stood up for something but because with 

one adjustment in attitude a culture was changed. Those 

people in that warehouse that morning [this was the 

warehouse where they planned the production preparation 

process for design that’s very much a part of our lean] 

proved that radical and rapid change is possible, that lean 

[I’m quoting] modelled in any capacity has the power to 

be successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how about Rosalee Longmoore, former president 

of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]: “A focus on patient 

and family-centred care using best practice evidence and lean 

principles will improve the patient experience.” How about the 

cancer agency: “As a health care sector, for the first time we are 

finding ways to work together and make a difference in a 

system that is transformation at its best.” 

 

I can read a number of quotes, Mr. Speaker. The bottom line is 

we listened to criticism, adjusted lean. But we’re also listening 

to those health care providers and patients and mothers who are 

saying, don’t stop, continue. This means better care and it 

means efficiencies. Why in the world would the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] be opposed to that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for this Premier, for this Health 

minister to suggest that it has actually listened to the criticism 

that they’ve heard and that they have adjusted is a complete 

joke, Mr. Speaker, because they are plowing ahead with the 

same agenda. 

 

Here’s what senior health administrators say, “The orientation 

to the kanban process within RQHR by the sensei had little 

added value.” But guess what, Mr. Speaker? This government, 

this Premier is stilling flying senseis from Japan to 

Saskatchewan and paying them $3,500 per day. And here’s an 

ad, Mr. Speaker, that ran in The StarPhoenix just over the 

weekend: 

 

Japanese interpreters wanted. LMN America is seeking 

professional interpreters to work in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, assisting Japanese Kaizen/Lean consultants 

in hospitals in Regina, Saskatoon, and other health regions 

during workshops on a weekly contract basis. 

Compensation is $600/day. 

 

My question to the Premier: why on earth is he still flying 

senseis from Japan, recruiting interpreters, Mr. Speaker, 

through an American consultant, paying $3,500 a day for the 

sensei, $600 for Japan, when the health administrators, Mr. 

Speaker, say they don’t actually add any value? Why is he 

doing that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re using the model that’s 

been prescribed by this one consultant which certainly, at the 

outset of the lean initiative, involves consultants that come from 

Japan where this was pioneered in the first place. 

 

In the new contract, we are seeking to minimize the need for 

these out-of-province consultants and in fact build capacity 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan. Why would we do 

this, Mr. Speaker? Asked and answered: we’ve already saved 

$60 million. We have patients and mothers, in the case of the 

children’s hospital, and front-line health care workers who are 

saying, you must continue this. This is a worthwhile process. 

We have the Cancer Agency, an agency we’ve increased 

funding to by I think by 98 per cent, saying you must continue 

this, Mr. Speaker. We have former front-line workers, current 

front-line workers saying, there is value in this. 

 

We listened to the concerns. Adjustments have been made. The 

contract has been less in terms of time and value, and there’s 

adjustments to that first-day orientation. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

said it in the Speech from the Throne. We will continue with 

this so long as it’s delivering results for patients, results for the 

system, and saving money, to date almost $60 million. 

 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5539 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’re not listening. Something’s 

getting lost in translation from the advice and the words that 

front-line health care providers and health administrators are 

giving and what this government is actually doing, because 

they’re plowing ahead with the same agenda, the same heavy 

kaizen, lean Japanese agenda that they’ve had since day one 

through John Black. 

 

So the Premier and the Health minister can say that they’re 

listening, but what front-line and senior administrators say, that 

it is irrelevant and insulting, the training. Advice from senior 

leaders say it’s sporadic and inconsistent, that it’s a bunch of 

dogma that doesn’t encourage new analysis, that the senseis 

who are flown in from Japan to Saskatchewan are a waste of 

money and don’t add any value. Yet this government, this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, plows ahead with the agenda. They’re 

still bringing in the senseis and bringing in the interpreters so 

the senseis could be in Saskatchewan hospitals. It makes 

absolutely no sense. And they’re paying, Mr. Speaker, $3,500 a 

day for each sensei and $600 a day for the Japanese interpreters. 

 

My question to the Premier: why on earth, if he claims he’s 

listening, is he plowing ahead with the heavy Japanese 

program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the spring I did instruct the Deputy Minister of 

Health to look at the remaining time that we would have under 

contract with John Black and Associates and look to make 

changes to the contract to reflect concerns that had been raised. 

We specifically went out to the health regions to tell us what 

was working well and what needed to be changed as we moved 

into changing that contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of what was said by health regions, I’m 

happy to say that we have made adjustments to the contract. 

The Leader of the Opposition has pointed out some of the 

information that had been provided by health regions. What he 

left out from, for example the Marlene Smadu briefing note, 

and I’ll quote this, it’s on the second . . . on page 3: 

 

It is a hugely important initiative, that if we stick with it 

will indeed have a transformative impact on our health 

care system and allow us to achieve patient safety and 

quality targets that we would have otherwise thought 

impossible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen in Saskatchewan is 

transformative work through the incorporation of lean as one 

tool, but only one tool that we need to ensure that we fully 

deploy across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government claims it’s 

listening. It claims it’s hearing the criticism and changing, but 

it’s not. It’s running an ad, Mr. Speaker, this weekend, for 

interpreters for the Japanese senseis. That makes no sense. 

 

Now here’s a quote from the senior health administrators, “. . . 

this offers an important opportunity to keep whatever benefits 

there may be from lean and be free of the rigidity of JBA.” But 

for some reason this government didn’t take that opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker. It did not cancel the contract with John Black. It 

renewed the toxic and wasteful contract here in Saskatchewan 

Health. 

 

Here’s a quote. Here’s what the Health minister said on 

Thursday: “Once we transition away from JBA, it will allow us 

to tailor lean more specifically to Saskatchewan’s health care 

system.” Well, Mr. Speaker, why on earth are we paying $40 

million when front-line health care workers say that it’s not 

working, when senior health administrators, Mr. Speaker, say 

that they can’t stand it, when the Health minister himself, Mr. 

Speaker, says the $40 million American consultant can’t even 

tailor what he is doing for Saskatchewan’s context? Why would 

the Premier insist on flying in more senseis, recruiting more 

interpreters, all at a time when the evidence says he should be 

doing the opposite. 

 

My question to the Premier: When will he clue in? When will 

he listen to what’s being said on the front lines and cancel the 

John Black contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we specifically asked 

regional health authorities what was working and what could be 

changed as we moved forward with the final year of the John 

Black and Associates contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the observation memo that the Leader of 

the Opposition is referring to, and I think it’s important that 

everybody know that there are four columns. It’s got the area 

that they’re talking about. The next column is what is working 

well. The next column is what needs to be changed, and then a 

summary after that. He speaks about, in his question, the 

preamble of his question, about tailoring the lean project for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Here’s from the what’s working well, from Saskatoon Health 

Region. Under lean depth study: good experience and many 

learnings from our first effort, customized tools for 

Saskatchewan and Canadian context, Mr. Speaker. It shows that 

we have already begun work to tailor the lean deployment for 

Saskatchewan’s context. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that one other important change 

that I think the people of Saskatchewan would be interested in 

is the fact that who has signed onto our lean fellowship program 

to learn what we’re doing here in Saskatchewan? The Mayo 

Clinic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the most common irritant, the 

biggest frustration that we hear from health care workers, we 

hear from administrators around lean, Mr. Speaker, is the 

adherence, the religious adherence to the Japanese terminology, 

the senseis being flown in, and all of the lean kaizen basic stuff. 

You would think, Mr. Speaker, that would be an area where this 

government would change, try to salvage a little bit of the good 



5540 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

maybe and get rid of the bad. Why is this government 

continuing with the Japanese senseis and recruiting the 

language interpreters? Why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we certainly 

agree that as we transition away from JBA and as we look to 

improve stuff, that we need to do it within a Saskatchewan and 

a Canadian context. In fact Marlene Smadu in her memo put, 

and I agree with this: “It’s time for us to put our own stamp on 

the Saskatchewan lean management system.” That to me 

doesn’t say that we’re going to move away from the 

Saskatchewan lean management system. It means that we are 

going to transition away from JBA but ensure that lean 

continues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that this has allowed 

us, Mr. Speaker, to reduce wait times. It’s allowed us to 

improve patient flow. It’s allowed us to ensure that people are 

receiving more timely access to care in this province. We know 

that we have more work to do. We know that the examples of 

other health care systems show that this is not just a one- or a 

two- or a three-year project. This is a continual cultural 

transformation. 

 

We are dedicated to that in this province. I believe our senior 

administrators are. I believe our front-line staff who have been 

engaged in this are as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this 

will serve the patients well long into the future in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Search for Chief Executive Officer for Saskatoon 

Health Region 

 

Ms. Chartier: — We learned yesterday that there will not be a 

proper search process for a new CEO [chief executive officer] 

for the Saskatoon Health Region. Instead the government has 

people in mind and will just recruit from within. 

 

This position oversees the largest health region in the province, 

a budget of $1.14 billion, 13,755 employees, and over 1,000 

physicians. The wage for this position is $400,000. To not have 

a proper search process for such an important position is 

completely unacceptable and irresponsible. To the minister: 

how can this government justify not having a proper search 

process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

board Chair, the board of Saskatoon Health Region through the 

Chair, have indicated that they first want to look at internal 

candidates within the Saskatchewan health care system or 

individuals that have experience in the health care system. If 

that does not prove to be successful in finding a new CEO, then 

they would look to do a national search. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that, in this case, it’s a proper course of action that they 

have decided to take. We’ll see if it does lead to a national 

search, but at this point the board Chair has indicated that 

they’re going to look to see whether or not there is a competent 

candidate from within the system or within the province that 

can serve in that role. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — In the Saskatoon Health Region, just 22 per 

cent of employees and 18 per cent of physicians say they see 

strong evidence of effective leadership from health region 

leaders. In other health regions it is not much better. Just 25 per 

cent of employees and 28 per cent of physicians across the 

province say they see strong evidence of effective leadership 

from health region leaders. 

 

When over three-quarters of employees say the current 

leadership is not effective, would it not make sense to cast a 

wider net and not just recruit from within? It’s more than 

strange that newspaper ads have been running for almost a 

week, searching for Japanese interpreters to work with senseis, 

yet this government does not see fit to run a proper competition 

for the CEO of the province’s largest health region. 

 

To the minister: how can he justify such a narrow, weak search? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, regional health authorities will decide to take different 

approaches when doing executive searches. Certainly I know 

the board Chair has indicated that whether that be within 

Saskatoon Health Region itself or within the greater health 

system here in Saskatchewan, or individuals that do have 

experience in the health care system that may no longer be in 

the province, they are going to turn their attention towards a list 

of candidates that they’ve been compiling, go through that 

process. And if at that time it’s determined that a national 

search needs to be undertaken, which is not an inexpensive 

process and can be a timely process if that would be the case, 

but first they’re going to look to see whether or not they can fill 

that based on interviewing some prospective candidates. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Just 27 per cent of health workers across the 

province say senior leaders are open and honest in 

communication. Just 25 per cent say senior leaders make good 

business decisions. Just 24 per cent say senior leaders make 

them feel positive about the future of their health region. Just 18 

per cent say senior leaders act on employee feedback. Again, 

this is scathing, Mr. Speaker. When this is the perception of the 

current leadership, this government should not be recruiting 

from within and it should not just be looking for someone with 

depth and passion in lean. 

 

To the minister: wouldn’t it make sense to do a proper national 

search for someone with a proven track record in, say, 

employee engagement and patient safety? Shouldn’t those be 

the priorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5541 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly we want to ensure that we have the best candidate 

possible to take over for CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region, 

our largest health region, one with a budget of over $1 billion a 

year, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the board and the board Chair 

haven’t ruled out doing a national search, but their first point is 

that they want to look at whether or not there are candidates 

within the health system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the engagement scores, certainly 

we know that we need to do a better job of engaging our 

employees. We also need to do a better job of ensuring that our 

employees are filling out the survey because even our turnout 

numbers in terms of those that do complete the survey are low 

and give us only a piece of the picture. 

 

But certainly, Mr. Speaker, the board Chair hasn’t ruled out 

doing a national search, but first they want to look to see 

whether or not there would be internal candidates. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Internet Fees for First Nation Schools 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Over a month ago, Grand Chief Ron Michel 

wrote a letter to the Crowns minister and the Education minister 

to raise concerns about a new 10 per cent admin fee for Internet 

services for SaskTel that SaskTel is charging for First Nation 

schools. Prince Albert Grand Council has not received a 

response from this government. To the minister: why is this 

government charging a new 10 per cent SaskTel administration 

fee to First Nation schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question 

from the hon. member, and I can inform him and inform the 

House that SaskTel is not charging that fee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — There’s a quote from the letter: “We are 

concerned that SaskTel as a corporate entity is setting a 

precedence that . . . [difficult] rules/rates apply for various 

stakeholders.” We know that First Nation schools already 

receive much less funding than other schools, and the Prince 

Albert Grand Council is worried about the impact of this new 

SaskTel admin fee. 

 

Grand Chief Ron Michel says, “Our schools cannot afford to 

cancel or reduce school programs . . .” To the minister: how can 

this government justify charging extra to schools that are 

already struggling? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, as I just outlined in my 

previous answer, I am familiar with the issue, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

with respect to the CNET [CommunityNet] system for 

on-reserve schools and those involved with the Prince Albert 

Grand Council. The schools that the hon. member is referring to 

are not involved in that particular situation, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s no additional fees for those schools involved in that 

situation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Agreement With Smart Meter Supplier 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 

trying to claim that it’s gotten its money back from its smart 

meter debacle, but nothing could be further from the truth. The 

$8-million store credit with the company that provided faulty, 

dangerous meters is nothing more than a joke. 

 

The minister claimed yesterday that the store credit was his 

only option, other than going to court and fighting for that 

money. To the Premier: how can this be acceptable to him and 

his government? Why won’t he commit today to fighting to get 

those dollars back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the deal that 

was made with Sensus to recover the taxpayers’ dollars, there 

was a considerable amount of money that was refunded for it, 

$27 million that was refunded for the smart meters themselves. 

 

In addition to that there is a program that will be put in place to 

test meters here in Saskatchewan, approximately $5 million for 

that, to make sure that they . . . If we ever go down that path 

again of installing smart meters here in Saskatchewan, they’ll 

be tested under vigorous testing conditions here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to that, we have a credit with Sensus for $18 

million. We both use it for . . . SaskEnergy uses some of their 

technology, as well as SaskPower uses some of their 

technology. We also, it is known that Sensus’s communications 

technology that they use as a part of Sensus meters are very, 

very high quality and are known around the world to be one of 

the best in terms of distributed power networks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note, very important to 

note, that should we at the end of the testing procedures not 

agree with the installation of smart meters for whatever reasons, 

if they don’t meet Saskatchewan’s testing requirements, all of 

that money would be recovered. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yes, the question was to get the $18 

million back from the private American company that provided 

faulty, dangerous meters that impacted and put people’s lives at 

risk. That’s the record of that company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yet as the minister sort of referenced in cute language, that 

government not only accepted $18 million of store credit with 

the same company, but that government actually gave a 

$5-million bonus to that company. A giveaway, Mr. Speaker, a 

gift of $5 million of hard-earned ratepayers’ money, dollars to 

apparently help them to do the company’s own research and 

development, I guess, about rain in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

This is wrong, and it’s a waste of money of Saskatchewan 



5542 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

people. 

 

To the Premier: how can this government possibly defend a 

$5-million gift to the company that gave us faulty, dangerous 

smart meters? Will he commit today to working to fight to get 

those $5 million back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

$5-million program will be to ensure the safety for 

Saskatchewan families. It will be to test under the most 

vigorous testing here in Saskatchewan, the most vigorous 

testing that possibly can be done. And what the member refers 

to in terms of a store credit, the least . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this 

program, we recovered all of the money that taxpayers have put 

into this program, which is in great contrast to the members 

opposite. Did you get any kind of a store credit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member for Regina Rosemont 

understand what it means to come to order, please? I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, did the members opposite, 

when they were in government, did they get any kind of a store 

credit for Channel Lake? Or did they get any store credits when 

they spent money in Guyana? When they lost money at NST in 

Chicago, $16 million, did you get one cent back then? Did you 

get any money back from Retx, $27.4 million under that fiasco, 

under you folks opposite? Did you get anything back then? Not 

a dime you got back. You lost $300 million of taxpayers’ 

money, and they will never forget it. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 141, 

The Archives and Public Records Management Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 141, The Archives and Public Records Management Act be 

now read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records 

Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée  

The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 142, 

The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — First reading has been moved by the minister 

that Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 143, The 

Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved Bill No. 143, The 

Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read for 

the first time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member on his feet? 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5543 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To move 

a motion by leave regarding the absence of a member. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion regarding the absence of a member. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave 

of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for Monday, November 3rd 

and Tuesday, November 4th, 2014 to attend the 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians special outreach 

in Ottawa, Ontario on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for Monday, November the 3rd 

and Tuesday, November the 4th, 2014 to attend the 

Commonwealth Women’s Parliamentarians special 

outreach in Ottawa, Ontario on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have to say it’s my honour to have the privilege to rise for the 

fourth time already to reply to a Throne Speech from this 

government. It’s a bit of a déjà vu feeling, Mr. Speaker, and I 

kind of was wondering why, but as I read through the Throne 

Speech I realized that much of it is just, as our leader would 

say, rinse and repeat. There’s a lot of repetition and a lot of 

reannouncements in this particular Throne Speech that I feel 

actually leaves a lot to be desired. 

 

You know, I always sort of go to the Internet to see what 

exactly are these procedures that we’re going through here. And 

what we know from Wikipedia and Google, which is kind of 

the go-to source for me, the idea of a Throne Speech is to 

introduce the government’s agenda for the coming session. 

Sadly I don’t think there’s much in this Throne Speech that tells 

us exactly what new ideas and fresh thoughts that this particular 

government has. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Throne Speech is supposed to outline the legislative 

program of this government. If you look in this Throne Speech, 

you will find reference to new legislation only on two pages. 

And I think . . . How many pages is this Throne Speech? I think 

we got up to 20 pages. So there’s only reference to legislation 

— excuse me for my cold, Mr. Speaker — on two pages out of 

20. So there’s not much of a legislative program that we can 

look forward to coming from this government either. 

 

The other thing that’s suggested in much of the literature on the 

role of the Throne Speech in Westminster legislative assemblies 

is that it should identify initiatives that the government intends 

to use to accomplish their goals. Well first of all, try and find 

the goals of this government in this Throne Speech. I’ve 

identified a few, and as I go through it, I will point those out. 

But there weren’t a lot of goals in this Throne Speech, and I 

would suggest there’s a paucity of initiatives as well. 

 

So overall I’d have to say that, as I went through the speech, I 

found it to be very uninspired and quite flat. To be frank, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a lot of recycling. There’s a lot of 

reannouncing. There are a few new things in there, and that’s 

what I’m going to focus my comments on today. But overall I 

would have to say I felt déjà vu, and I think there’s a lot of 

reason for that, as I’ll point out in my comments. 

 

On page 3 the government talks about one of its goals, and 

again this is almost a platitude. It says it’s going to work hard to 

keep Saskatchewan strong. That’s a very trite statement, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think what underscores that is what strength 

really means. And I think when you look at the definition of 

strength, strength is always determined by the weakest links. 

 

This Throne Speech doesn’t talk very much about the weakest 

links that we’ve certainly identified and what we were looking 

for in the Throne Speech, and I’ll get into that as well. For 

example little to no mention of our northern communities and 

the struggles that they’re facing right now with lack of 

infrastructure and lack of economic support. Certainly very 

little discussion about affordability and the problems that a lot 

of the people in my riding are facing. 

 

When you look at the number of seniors that are on fixed 

incomes, who are facing such a big hit with the cost of living in 

the last few years, I’m really worried about a lot of the people 

in my riding. In fact right across from my office, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s an apartment building called Nutana Towers, and that 

was a building that was owned by some local people for 30 

years, and there were seniors in there on fixed incomes and on 

social assistance who were living in the community and doing 



5544 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

their part. Now that building has been sold. It’s been gutted. 

And every single one of those folks that were on fixed incomes 

had to leave the riding. They can no longer afford to live in 

their home of the last 30 years, and I just find that that’s really 

troubling. 

 

When you look at the consumer price index in Saskatchewan, 

since 2009 alone, the cost of living has gone up over 12 per 

cent. The cost of food has gone up over 15 per cent. The cost of 

shelter has gone up over 15 per cent. And that’s since 2009, Mr. 

Speaker. If we went back even more, it would be much higher. 

But the concern I have is that the income that these seniors are 

living off of has not gone up at all, or negligibly. It hasn’t gone 

up by 15 per cent. And they are now using a lot of their income 

to pay for their accommodation. I think that’s really, really 

disturbing. 

 

When we were in Lloydminster awhile back, we met with the 

Métis housing authority in Lloydminster. They’re very, very 

concerned about their housing units and the affordability of 

those housing units, particularly because the federal funding, 

we know the federal funding is disappearing. It’s being 

grandfathered. And pretty soon these housing authorities are 

going to be in desperate straits, and they’re going to have to 

double, if not even higher, raise the rent for their tenants, which 

means many of their occupants will no longer be able to afford 

to live in those units. They’re very proud of the units that they 

have, and it would be devastating to see them have to evict 

some of their tenants who are working very hard to get their 

lives together and put together a life together for their children. 

So these are the things that we don’t hear about in this Throne 

Speech, and I think it’s very concerning. 

 

I do want to speak though with great appreciation and thanks to 

this government for its announcement that it will introduce a 

poverty reduction strategy. That’s a critical piece. It’s one that 

we’ve been calling for for some time. I applaud their efforts to 

work with groups like Upstream and Dr. Cory Neudorf from 

Saskatoon who are strong, strong advocates for this kind of 

strategy. 

 

I also want to quote a little bit just to give some more detail 

about the work that Upstream and Dr. Ryan Meili does. It’s 

really important work, and we’re very proud of the work that 

they do. And in fact, one of the pieces was written — it’s the 

comprehensive poverty reduction fact sheet — it was written by 

Charles Plante from Upstream who’s one of my constituents 

and a supporter. And there’s a number of targets that we want to 

see. And I’m just putting this on the record, Mr. Speaker, so 

that when our minister comes out with this reduction strategy, 

we’re going to see the right elements in it, because that’s what 

we’re going to be watching for now. 

 

We want to see first of all targets and timelines. That’s critically 

important to any successful strategy. Secondly, it must be 

comprehensive. Thirdly, it must involve the community. 

Fourthly, it needs to be unique. Fifthly, it needs to be 

non-partisan. And sixth, it requires a commitment. And so those 

are just some of the basic facts. 

 

There’s a lot of really good information out there on a poverty 

reduction strategy, but obviously number one is affordable 

housing. And that’s something that I think we have seen this 

government fail in miserably, and there’s really not a lot in this 

Throne Speech to give me any confidence that we’re going to 

get anywhere there. 

 

Another goal that they’ve introduced that I found was very, 

very, very interesting — actually it’s an old goal that’s 

reintroduced — that’s on page 4 of the speech, it says, “To help 

[me] meet my government’s goal of doubling exports by 2020 

. . .” That’s an old goal, but there’s a new incentive. And 

interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, it’s a new-growth tax 

incentive tied to the creation of new jobs. If it had stopped 

there, it would make a lot of sense. But no, it goes on to limit 

this tax incentive only to manufacturers and processors who are 

expanding their sales outside Saskatchewan. 

 

And what this is in stark contrast to, Mr. Speaker, and directly 

opposite to actions of this government in another area, and 

that’s the film employment tax credit, where we had 

manufacturers of film and processors of good cultural products 

who were creating jobs in Saskatchewan and expanding their 

sales outside Saskatchewan, and this government yanked the 

carpet right out from under an entire industry. 

 

We are hearing stories of people that have now had to move 

away. There’s a lot of people in Saskatchewan who are trying to 

find work elsewhere, but they’re overqualified. And this is a 

weird thing for this government to do is to focus on groups, 

specific groups like manufacturers and processors, when they 

did the complete opposite to an entire industry in the film 

industry. So I think this is something that’s really, really 

concerning. 

 

They go on to say on page 4, just a couple of comments here, 

the government’s going to undertake trade missions. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, governments have been doing that for decades, so I’m 

not sure what’s new about that. They talk about the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. Well that was 

introduced in 1996, Mr. Speaker, so that’s not new either. 

 

They say they’re going to encourage railways to make railway 

capacity a priority. That hasn’t worked too good for them so far, 

Mr. Speaker, but let’s hope that perhaps the cheerleading will 

get a little more enthusiastic and we see some changes in the 

ability of this government to change the mind of the railways. 

Something I’m looking forward to is the strengthening in the 

shortline network. We’re certainly looking forward to that and 

hope that that is successful. Also something I’m supportive of, 

and I think we want to work with the government on this, is to 

enhance rail linkages to Canada’s coastlines and of course to 

the United States, and that is definitely something we need to 

do. 

 

On page 5 the government is talking about continuing working 

to reduce international trade barriers such as the country of 

origin labelling. We’ve seen some progress in that area 

although that’s at the good work of the folks, the farmers, and 

the producer communities. So again we want to see that happen, 

but this is not anything new, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Throne Speech talks about opening up trade between 

provinces, but I know that one of the things we called for prior 

to the Throne Speech being released was more of a focus on 

proper procurement policies and not necessarily the lazy 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5545 

procurement policies that this government has where they just 

give the contract to the lowest bidder. There are a number of 

different ways that we can improve our procurement, and this 

Throne Speech doesn’t even address some of those concerns. 

 

We have a new body. It was introduced in September actually, 

prior to this Throne Speech, called Priority Saskatchewan. This 

government really likes to create agencies with the 

Saskatchewan tag at the end. So we all remember Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. We now see Tourism Saskatchewan which took 

over from a very successful tourism agency. And now we have 

Priority Saskatchewan which is going to lead a 

cross-government review of tendering practices. So again looks 

good on paper. We’ll have to take a look at it and see whether 

or not that is going to be as successful as Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, for example. 

 

Page 6, in terms of the skilled workforce, we do support the 

initiatives in the adult basic education services, and we want to 

totally support increasing the number of seats of ABE, adult 

basic education. And we are looking forward to seeing more 

Saskatchewan people getting the training they need to be 

responsive to the needs of the workforce and the job 

deficiencies that there are. 

 

There’s a lot of talk about P3s [public-private partnership] on 

page 6 and 7. We’ve been on the record often saying we need 

more accountability in this process. We also know that this is a 

way to defer debt. And with a government that is spending 

record revenues, we wonder why it’s necessary to defer debt in 

the way that they’re doing with our schools, our highways, and 

our long-term care facilities. So that’s really, really concerning, 

Mr. Speaker, that tendency of this government to defer debt in 

the P3 process. 

 

Another recycle that we find on page 7 is the reintroduction and 

expansion of the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative. 

This is again something that we support and are pleased to see it 

being expanded to some First Nations who are positioned to 

take advantage of that. So that’s something that is positive, 

although it is again a recycle. 

 

On page 8 they talk about private liquor stores. And it’s been 

interesting to hear some of the members opposite wail and 

gnash their teeth about, you know, the scary fact that we 

actually might put some money into a liquor store. And what’s 

scary about that, Mr. Speaker, is that their thinking stops there, 

and what they fail to do the math about is that every dollar 

that’s invested in a liquor store actually brings extra money into 

the coffers. 

 

So the thinking is extremely flawed on the part of some of the 

speakers previous to me, and we know that the liquor stores 

have been very profitable and have brought lots of revenue to 

the province to deal with things like hospitals, infrastructure, 

and also addictions treatments. So the thing that’s scary about 

all this, Mr. Speaker, with Halloween coming, as the member 

opposite mentioned yesterday, is that the math is simply not 

being done by some of these members. We are saying SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] is appropriate 

but it needs renewal and it needs renovation. It needs 

modernization. But to throw the baby out with the bathwater, to 

throw away good revenue is something that doesn’t make any 

sense at all. 

 

In highways we don’t see any new initiatives except the fact 

they’re evaluating a proposal from SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities]. So we’ll wait and see how 

that goes. 

 

In efficient government there’s no new initiatives. 

 

In health care there are no new initiatives. 

 

And one thing I do want to speak about a little bit, Mr. Speaker, 

is the comment about, we need to do more to help people 

dealing with mental health and addiction problems. And what I 

really want to share is a story. Out door knocking the other day, 

I came to a home of a woman that I actually have met through 

music, and I said, do you have anything you want to talk to me 

about? And she said, actually I do. And she is a mother of a 

young man who has schizophrenia. And we talked for about 

half an hour about her situation, and her advocacy groups are 

suggesting, talk to your MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] whenever you get a chance. So she told me her 

story, and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that illness has destroyed 

that family’s ability to enjoy life in any way, shape, or form. As 

parents of an adult son with schizophrenia, they do not have any 

respite whatsoever. They are constantly on alert for their son’s 

health. And one of the phrases she left me with, and this haunts 

me today and will continue to, is the fact that she says, we have 

to endure in silence. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a strong Saskatchewan. That’s not 

a Saskatchewan that we want to leave people suffering these 

kinds of daily lives. And I look to this government and plead 

that this government will take account of those sort of situations 

that people with mental illness and mental health problems in 

their families are dealing with. We know that the 10-year 

mental health and addictions action plan is coming forth soon. 

We’re looking forward to that, and we’re looking forward to a 

swift and efficient implementation of the recommendations in 

that plan. 

 

We do see some of the new legislation coming forward. On 

page 10 there’s things to strengthen patient privacy, modernize 

the organ donation and transplantation processes. We support 

those initiatives, Mr. Speaker. We do wait to see the legislation 

itself to see if it meets the goals that are going to be dealt with. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But on the health care front, we’re not seeing really anything 

that we called for in the Throne Speech. We don’t see this 

government getting rid of John Black and Associates, despite 

the scathing criticisms that senior leadership in the health 

industries are raising. We asked to close the kaizen promotion 

offices. No sign of that happening. In fact they’re still hiring 

translators, Japanese translators to help with that specific, 

language-specific aspect of lean. 

 

We are looking for a way to deal with waits, the extra long 

waits in emergency rooms, the short-staffing, and overall I 

think, Mr. Speaker, we were really looking forward to 

initiatives and goals and objectives dealing with the plight of 

long-term care in Saskatchewan. And it barely rates a mention 



5546 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

in this Throne Speech, so very disappointing. 

 

Education, there are no new initiatives there. We had called for 

more educational assistants, and inequities, addressing the 

inequities for First Nations children in schools. And that’s 

really disappointing that we don’t see more in the educational 

front. 

 

In innovation there’s a mention of the carbon capture and 

sequestration project down at Boundary dam 3. We know that 

this has been an incredibly expensive project, and it is going to 

deal with less than 2 per cent of the emissions that this province 

is currently creating in carbon. So we’ll be asking more 

questions about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But really, we’re not sure. First of all, it’s not clear to us who 

owns the technology. Apparently this technology is now owned 

by Shell or one of its subsidiaries. We’re not clear what kind of 

deal this government got in terms of the sale of the liquefied 

carbon to Cenovus, but all indications point that it’s actually . . . 

we are selling it for a song and we’re losing out a lot of money 

on the sale of the liquefied carbon. And then finally, well we 

don’t own the technology itself, so we’ve put $1.5 billion into a 

project that we don’t own and that we’re underselling for profit 

in the long term over the 20-year period. So we’re just starting 

to gather some of that information, but we’re really not sure 

what’s going on there, and we’re going to be asking a lot of 

questions. 

 

We also are concerned about the deal with Northland Power. As 

we see prices drop, we see oil now under $80 a barrel. You 

don’t hear much about that from the government. We know that 

natural gas is bottom-of-the-barrel prices right now. So how’s 

Northland Power doing and what are we paying actually for the 

power that they’re producing? We have a number of questions 

in that area that we’ll be looking for answers to. 

 

And agriculture, again there’s a page, on page 14, that sets out 

some of the accomplishments of our producers and that’s 

certainly . . . as my brothers are farming, and they had a good 

year. We’re very proud of our producers here in Saskatchewan 

and we want to wish them the best and the hope that they are 

able to continue their exports and increasing the exports to the 

rest of the world, and we will continue to feed the world. 

 

What’s really interesting though is that Saskatchewan’s going 

to host a transportation market access summit in the next few 

weeks. But, Mr. Speaker, no one from this government even 

showed up at the summit that was held last year. So I just don’t 

get the actions of this government sometimes. It just doesn’t 

make sense. 

 

There’s a number of initiatives and legislation identified under 

the heading of safe communities. Again, we support the Hub 

model of crime prevention and are pleased to see it being 

expanded to Meadow Lake and Melfort. Those are certainly . . . 

That’s good news in this Speech and I think an initiative that’s 

worth supporting. 

 

And in social services, we see some goals here. The one goal 

that I think is a goal that any government will want was to 

ensure all children in the province can live with their families in 

safety. And we see an initiative here, that there will be a review 

of child welfare legislation. And we see that there will be 

legislation introduced to strengthen The Child and Family 

Services Act and The Adoption Act. And that’s certainly, 

certainly goals that we think are a laudable goal, a laudable 

initiative, and certainly laudable legislation. Again the devil’s in 

the details as always, Mr. Speaker, so we will need to make sure 

that the legislation actually meets the goals and the initiatives 

that are stated here in the Throne Speech. 

 

Again, I talked about this earlier but it’s worth mentioning 

again, the poverty reduction strategy and the work that’s being 

done by Upstream led by Dr. Ryan Meili from Saskatoon and 

Dr. Cory Neudorf from Saskatoon. These folks are doing some 

really exciting work, and I’m pleased to follow the work of 

Upstream. And I think that’s the leadership that we need to see 

in this province in terms of health strategy and poverty 

reduction strategy. 

 

Where the rubber hits the road, Mr. Speaker, is once the 

strategy’s complete I don’t think the minister is going to need a 

lot of time, because the research has already been done by 

groups like Upstream and a number of other groups. The issue 

is putting meaning into the strategy, and that is going to cost. 

And we need to see a commitment from this government to 

make sure that affordability of housing, for example, is not such 

a nightmare for people who are struggling. 

 

And I really need to mention one of my constituents, Mr. 

Speaker, who is going through a terrible time right now. He was 

a victim of a hit-and-run accident with a drunk driver and 

actually has a head injury and is unable to work. He suffers 

from a number of trauma-related mental illnesses right now and 

has a really hard time sorting through the paperwork and the 

bureaucracies and the administrative work that has to happen in 

order to access the programming that he’s eligible for. 

 

But what I found out . . . I actually went with him to apply for 

SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability], the SAID 

program, because he was so anxious and scared of being in a 

crowded place. So I actually went through the SAID application 

with him. And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, as a fairly literate 

person who is in fairly good health and can basically understand 

forms, I was overwhelmed by the requirements that the SAID 

program placed upon this individual. I was overwhelmed by the 

fact that his social worker barely had time to help him fill out 

the form and that she was clearly under the gun to deal with a 

number of other clients. So he was not getting the help he 

needed. 

 

And I was aghast to find out that the maximum benefit available 

to him under the SAID program was $1,200 a month. His rent is 

$1,000 a month, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the reality that a lot of 

people under SAID are living with. And I think, as everybody 

knows, social assistance figures are even lower. 

 

So if you look at any of the poverty reduction strategies that are 

out there, number one is a decent wage or a decent living cost, 

and I think that’s something that this government needs to take 

a serious look at if they truly want Saskatchewan to be strong. 

We see billboards, and yesterday my colleague from Saskatoon 

Centre referenced a cartoon with our Premier featured in the 

cartoon, and there was an individual called the poster boy. And 

we’ve starting seeing a lot of poster boy posters up now with 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5547 

these large billboards all over Saskatchewan. In Saskatoon we 

don’t see pictures of our Saskatoon MLAs, like the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast, but we see big posters of poster boy 

who is featured strongly and prominently throughout our city. 

So I don’t know what the message is from the Sask Party to the 

voters of Saskatoon, but maybe it’s that you don’t vote for the 

MLA, you vote for poster boy. I guess that’s the idea, that they 

might be ashamed of their MLAs maybe, and maybe they just 

want them to focus on their leader. I’m not sure. 

In terms of the environment, which we find on page 18, there’s 

again a mention of the Boundary dam project which again, as I 

said, is dealing with less than 2 per cent of the emissions from 

this province, so 1.5 billion for less than 2 per cent. We know 

that Alberta has rejected carbon capture sequestration because 

it’s too expensive. We know there are other ways that are 

available to reduce our carbon emissions but . . . carbon dioxide 

emissions, CO2 emissions, but there is absolutely nothing in this 

Speech from the Throne that deals with any of that at all. 

And what was really strange — my sense of déjà vu really came 

out on page 18, Mr. Speaker — and there’s a quote at the 

bottom of page 18 that seemed really familiar to me. And I’ll 

share this quote with you. It says: 

In the coming months, we will adopt a new results-based 

regulatory model that will improve protection of the 

environment and promote innovate management tools, 

including the Saskatchewan Environmental Code. 

Now why did that sound familiar to me, Mr. Speaker? Well we 

did a little search, and we found this language in a news release 

from this government from April of 2009. That’s five years ago. 

And it says: 

Saskatchewan is adopting a new, results-based model for 

environmental regulation that will improve protection of 

the environment, while promoting innovative new tools in 

environmental management. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s three ministers ago. That’s five years ago, 

and we still don’t see anything. In the 2009 Speech from the 

Throne, “In the coming months, my government will move 

forward with plans for a new environmental regulatory 

framework.” Well, Mr. Speaker, thank God I’m not holding my 

breath because I would have exploded by now. 

This is shameful, Mr. Speaker. And with the chirping from 

across the way, you’d think they’re proud of this fact, that they 

cannot get their act together and they cannot possibly introduce 

something that they’ve promised for five years. You’ve got to 

wonder what’s going on over there, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 

think there’s a lot of competency in the environmental area. It’s 

just disappointing and I think it’s disrespectful to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

We see again on page 19 a mention of a priority issue for the 

Saskatchewan water agency in terms of drainage. They’re 

thinking of a new initiative introducing regulations to govern 

drainage. Mr. Speaker, this has been an issue for five years as 
well. And we have a fairly robust water Act already that has a 

number of provisions in it, but Sask water agency I’m told is 

not even staffed sufficiently to be able to deal with a backlog of 

complaints they currently have, so the frustration in the farming 

community . . . I was out and about in Yorkton area and down 

south this summer, and there are a lot of tensions and 

frustrations. 

And this government has been dropping the ball, including the 

former minister of Agriculture. I was in his riding this summer, 

and his constituents tell me that he is not to be seen and not to 

be heard on this issue, which is very, very disappointing. He’s 

letting down his constituents. And I think this is something that 

this government needs to start paying a lot more attention to and 

actually have a plan and actually deliver the plan and actually 

act on it instead of all these platitudes like we see on this 

Environmental Code that was promised five years ago and we 

still don’t see it. It’s really shocking. 

Mr. Speaker, I feel, you know, the privilege and the honour of 

being able to rise in this House and comment on the Throne 

Speech. I think that’s part of the value of our democratic 

system. We’ve seen some challenges to democracy in the last 

week or so and some threats to our democracy, but I think 

through debate and through open discussion I think we really 

need to . . . We will expand these ideas and bring home to the 

people of Saskatchewan a better society and a better world. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the people of Saskatoon Nutana, my 

constituents, deserve more. 

I want to thank all my constituents. I would also like to thank 

my families, my supportive sons, and my supportive exes who 

help me on the home front. I want to thank my network of 

friends who are also there for me when I need them, and the 

world, the cultural world that gives me so much joy and 

pleasure in terms of music and performance. So I think, you 

know, on a balance, I’m able to present . . . keep myself healthy 

and also do the job that we’re asked to do here in the 

legislature. 

I want to thank my outgoing constituency assistant, Deb Aitken, 

who just took leave on Friday to have a baby in a couple of 

weeks. So we’re very excited about this new baby coming 

forward. And I also want to thank my current constituency 

assistant, Mr. Cody Gieni. And some of you will remember him 

as a legislative intern here in the legislature. So Cody’s already 

hard at work for me doing research and bringing forth some of 

the issues of Saskatoon Nutana. 

We know that people in my riding, the seniors and the students, 

deserve an affordable place to live. Parents deserve accessible 

and affordable child care, and my low-income constituents 

deserve to find housing that doesn’t swallow up more than half 

of their income. They deserve wages that allow them to put 

their kids in music lessons, to buy the medications they need, 

and to put healthy food on the table. 

Mr. Speaker, we can’t talk about how strong Saskatchewan is 

until we know that no child or senior is living in poverty, that 

hard-working people are earning decent wages in a safe work 

environment and they can afford to buy their own home, that 

schools are not overcrowded, and that seniors will live out their 

golden years in respect and comfort. That’s the strong 

Saskatchewan we want, and we will continue to challenge this 

government to focus on the things that matter to Saskatchewan 



5548 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

people. 

 

This Throne Speech is a disappointing, backward-looking 

failure. My Saskatoon Nutana constituents deserve better, and 

the people of Saskatchewan deserve better. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

an honour for me to join into a Throne Speech today, the 

Throne Speech debate. 

 

I want to say thank you very much to the Leader of the 

Opposition for allowing the member from Nutana to speak 

finally. She hasn’t been on her feet for a long time, and it’s nice 

to hear a different voice over there besides the member from 

Massey Place. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as always when we start these Throne Speech 

replies, there’s a few people in my life that I need to thank that 

allow me to do this wonderful job and be able to represent the 

people of Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

First, as all of us have great constituency assistants, Heather 

Howell-Shiplack has been with me since the election of 2011, 

making sure I am where I need to be and I’m prepared for our 

meetings, our stakeholder meetings, our events throughout 

Regina. She does a wonderful job ensuring that the constituents 

that call into our office get great help right away. We’ve had 

many phone calls back about Heather’s professionalism and 

how well she handles casework and how she gets back, gets the 

people in touch with the ministry people or with the information 

they need to make sure that their problems move along. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first and foremost in my life, I have to thank my 

wife, Larissa Steinley. She is by far my greatest supporter and 

my greatest critic. She keeps me honest, Mr. Speaker, and 

whenever I need a grounding she’ll give it to me to make sure 

that I keep my head from not from getting too big, which is a 

task sometimes for her, Mr. Speaker. And she is also the person 

that is my greatest support, Mr. Speaker, and she has done so 

much for me. 

 

She looks after our son. She’s an amazing mother, something 

that I guess I can’t thank her enough for. Our little son, 

Nickson, is 17 months old now, and she has done such a great 

job with him. I know all of us spend a lot of long nights here, 

and for me session time is a bit more difficult. I’m out of the 

house before Nickson gets up and I’m back home only a couple 

days before he goes to bed. And I miss him a lot, but she is 

doing a wonderful job. And FaceTime is a wonderful thing. 

Technology is great. So every now and then we get to 

FaceTime and he gets to say good night to daddy, and it means 

a lot to me just to be able to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since Nickson came along, our lives have changed 

a bit and our perspective has changed a bit on our priorities, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think priorities are what the Throne Speech is 

all about. It set out the priorities of our government for this 

session, and I’m not surprised that our priorities differ from the 

members across the way, Mr. Speaker. I think that obviously 

we’re going to set a different agenda than they will, and I 

understand how they are supposed to oppose some of our 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to go into a few of the 

things that I find very, very important in our Throne Speech, 

and one obviously is the theme throughout that is tied 

throughout all of our priorities — keeping Saskatchewan strong. 

 

And I think through everything else, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition probably can’t disagree with keeping Saskatchewan 

strong. We’re an ascending province. We’re growing, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re growing in population. We’re growing in 

people working. That’s why the amendment brought forward by 

the member from Rosemont was a bit confusing when his 

amendment was: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for 

primarily working to benefit a select few while dismissing 

the most important things Saskatchewan families want and 

need, especially in the areas of health care, education, and 

the rising cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a very confusing statement because we 

know that in June our employment hit a record high of 577,000 

people working in our province. So if there’s 577,000 people 

working in the province of Saskatchewan, how would you be 

able to say that this government is just working for a select 

few? That doesn’t make too much sense to me, Mr. Speaker. I 

also wonder how the opposition say we’re working for a select 

few when our wages are the highest there have ever been in the 

province. 

 

So there’s more people working in the province than ever 

before. There’s more people making more money in the 

province than ever before, and we’ve had the lowest 

unemployment in the country for 23 consecutive months . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . That’s probably a record. Thank 

you, my member from Wakamow. 

 

So putting forward an amendment just for the sake of putting 

forward an amendment is a practice that the opposition has used 

for many, many years. And I don’t really understand the 

amendment, but I do understand how they oppose some of our 

priorities because our priorities will be a lot different in the next 

18 months I believe. 

 

For example we have a growth plan. We have a 2020 growth 

plan of where we want to go into the future. That would be 

different because, as the member from Rosemont said in his 

speech, “Of course there’s an important place in our 

parliamentary democracy for the role of advocacy on the floor 

of this Assembly as well and . . . [there’s a role for the] 

opposition to oppose and yes to propose.” This really struck me 

funny. 

 

So oppose and propose, which I totally agree opposing and 

proposing is a very important role within opposition. And they 

have the opposing down pat. Very good. The proposing leaves a 

little to be desired. Like if I was going to propose policy, I 

would put it on our website. If you google — the member from 

Nutana was a fan of googling things in her speech — if you 

google the NDP Saskatchewan website, there is no policy. 

There is no plan. So for the member from Rosemont to say it is 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5549 

very important for the loyal official opposition to propose 

policy and then really have nothing to offer the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Let’s not forget we’re 18, possibly 12 months out from an 

election. So how do you go to the people of Saskatchewan, 

which I’m sure all the opposition did for the whole summer? 

I’m sure they were all out there door knocking to ensure that 

they maintain their seats, the nine seats they have hopefully. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No they weren’t. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — No. Oh well the member from Sutherland said 

no, they weren’t out there at all. But if I was going out to go 

door knocking, which we did on this side of the House, I would 

want to put forward ideas to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Like for example I would have targets. I would have targets for 

population like 1.2 million by 2020. That’s a target. That’s a 

policy with a target base. I know the member from Massey 

Place was a former policy analyst, so he should know to 

formulate policy. And maybe it’s just taking him a little longer 

than expected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another comment from the member from Rosemont which . . . 

The member from Rosemont is an interesting guy, and he 

always has a few interesting statements that he makes in his 

speeches. And he talks about people doing better, not the 

province doing better, which we’ll get back to later. It doesn’t 

make a whole bunch of sense. If your province is doing poorly, 

the people in the province will probably be doing poorly as 

well, as we saw with them for 16 years. The province wasn’t 

doing really well, so the people weren’t doing well so they left. 

 

But the member from Rosemont, and I’ll quote his speech from 

Thursday: 

 

And these are the companies, Mr. Speaker, who have skin 

in the game, who have stuck through more challenging 

times within this province, who deserve, who deserve to 

be part of the projects right now, with workers . . . 

 

Interesting statement, Mr. Speaker. So the member was on a 

rant about a Sask-first policy, which we’re working on with our 

Sask priorities for different . . . for reviewing our tendering 

policies. So he is very concerned that the companies within 

Saskatchewan deserve to be doing better right now. 

 

Well my question would be, what would have been the more 

challenging times that the member from Rosemont referred to? 

When would there have been more challenging times? Because 

as the natural governing party, as they like to call themselves, I 

would assume that more challenging times would be further 

than seven years ago. So that would probably be within the 16 

years that they were in government would have been these more 

challenging times for the businesses that he was speaking of. 

 

And I remember this, and probably one of the better speeches 

that I’ve heard in this Assembly was when the member from 

Cut Knife-Turtleford stood up and said, I’m a survivor. I 

survived the lean, lean years as a businessman under the NDP. 

Very poignant words from my colleague from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, which we’re looking forward to hearing from 

him again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, talking about these challenging times from the 

member from Rosemont, obviously he’s talking about the times 

when his party, the NDP, were in power. So I guess he would 

feel that the socialism that they would have evoked probably 

was not working very well for the business people of 

Saskatchewan, and possibly you remember there was a 

job-killing monster legislation that they brought forward too, 

which I think the businesses didn’t really like that either. I’m 

not sure if that was ever really proclaimed because I think they 

pulled that back — rightly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They didn’t get it through. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — They didn’t get it through? Yes. So I’m 

guessing those lean times were, they’re talking about when the 

NDP would have been in power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to talk about, and the member from Athabasca 

who’s been here for a long, long time on both sides of the 

House and for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to do an extended 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has requested 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to stand today and to recognize in the east gallery two 

great friends: Greg Fofonoff, who’s with SNEDCO [SaskNative 

Economic Development Corporation] or SMEDCO [SaskMétis 

Economic Development Corporation]; and also Louis Gardiner, 

who is the member of the executive of the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And to point out, Mr. Speaker, the two individuals that are here 

today, Louis was one of our premier hockey players when he 

was a younger lad. He played with the Flin Flon Bombers when 

they were in the WHL [Western Hockey League] and really 

inspired a lot of young, young children and young adults during 

his time to play hockey, and he’s really the premier hockey 

player in his time for our area. And as well, Greg Fofonoff who 

I believe is the CEO with SNEDCO, the Saskatchewan Native 

Economic Development Corporation, or the Métis economic 

development corporation, and Greg’s been a champion for 

many Métis business people throughout his time. And I would 

dare say today that Mr. Fofonoff and his team at SMEDCO are 

the premier Métis lending institution that does a lot of work 

through northwestern and northern Saskatchewan as a whole, 

and of course the province as a whole because their mandate 

certainly involves the entire province. 

 

So SMEDCO, SNEDCO, they have a number of different areas 



5550 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

that they have a responsibility for. I would say today that they 

are the best Métis business lending agency out there, Mr. 

Speaker, and I wish Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Fofonoff continued 

success in building a strong Métis economy for the people, the 

Métis people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I join 

with the member in welcoming. It’s always good to have people 

from the public come in and take in the proceedings, and have a 

tour of their Legislative Building. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was going to talk about the member from 

Athabasca for a minute or two because there’s a lot of myths 

that I’ve heard from NDP members, NDP MLA, the few NDP 

supporters that are in Walsh Acres when I get to knock on the 

doors. Because it’s always good to talk to everyone in Walsh 

Acres — NDP supporter, Green Party supporter, Sask Party 

supporter. It’s good to learn from each and every one of them, 

Mr. Speaker. But I always hear this, and it’s quite amazing to 

me to hear some of the not-so-factual information that may be 

derived. 

 

So I took a look in . . . I am a political nerd, Mr. Speaker, so I 

read the speeches from the members from Regina Rosemont 

and Regina Athabasca the other night just to try and learn a 

little bit and see what point of view they’re coming from. It 

didn’t work. I don’t know where they’re coming from. But Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Athabasca goes: 

 

. . . it’s a huge disappointment for many people throughout 

Saskatchewan. Despite given a huge surplus, a booming 

economy, and a growing population, Mr. Speaker, they 

can’t figure out where they’re at, and what they’re going 

to present to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve heard this a lot from the member 

from Athabasca, the member from Rosemont, the member from 

Riversdale, about the huge, huge economy that we inherited 

from them in 2007. And I’ve heard time and time again that 

Saskatchewan became a have province in 2003, time and time 

again, especially from the member from Athabasca and 

Saskatoon Riversdale. And we’ve had conversations about this, 

and she just doesn’t really . . . I don’t know. I sent her the link. 

 

So I went up on to the Government of Canada’s Finance 

department because I guess if you’re getting equalization 

payments, you’re probably not a have province. You can 

probably make those two points and figure that out. So I have 

here, right here, federal support to Saskatchewan from the 

Government of Canada: 2005-2006, equalization payments, $89 

million; 2006-2007, $13 million; 2007-2008 . . . Wait a minute. 

2007-2008, $226 million. So, Mr. Speaker, if you’re receiving 

equalization payments and you’re getting them from the 

Government of Canada, that would be, the basic assumption 

there would be that you’re not a have province. 

 

So let’s go on and see the next couple of years. I wonder how 

much money Saskatchewan received in equalization from 2008 

to 2014. Blank. Blank. Not one. So obviously the mystery can 

be put to rest. I can officially make the member from Athabasca 

aware that we were not a have province in 2003. That’s a 

guaranteed fact of life. He’s going to have to come to terms 

with that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The next thing that he always spouts, he’s like, oh yes there was 

a lineup of cars on November 11th, 2007 just waiting to come 

in as soon as you guys won, because he always figures . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well there probably was, Mr. 

Speaker, but I don’t think that’s the point the member’s trying 

to make from Athabasca. He goes, our population was growing 

and growing and there was people coming to our province in 

spades back in 2003, ’04, ’05, and ’06. So like the member 

from Nutana told us, I googled. I googled the Saskatchewan 

population from 1999 to 2008, so which is interesting because, 

according to the mythical speeches of the NDP, Saskatchewan 

is doing awesome. And the member from Lakeview will know 

this for a fact, but things were just fantastic in the early 2000s, 

population growing and obviously a have province, which is not 

true. 

 

So like the population on January 1st, 1999 was 1,016,883 — 

over the million point. That’s a pretty good target. That’s kind 

of the magical number for Saskatchewan. January 1st, 2000, 

1,011,141. That’s a bit lower, so I guess we’re not increasing 

yet. Well wait: 2001, 1,003,469. A bit lower again. 2002, 

998,728. Under that magical million mark. So 2003, when the 

member from Athabasca and Riversdale and everyone says 

everything’s going better now, 2003 is the time when it’s our 

time to shine, 996,289. That would be lower again. 

 

So my colleague from Estevan makes a great point because in 

2003, 2004 . . . This is after the election and one of their senior 

ministers, and this, this is when I was paying a bit more 

attention to politics when I was a younger guy, and I remember 

this quote specifically from the NDP. I think it was Mr. 

Lautermilch, I believe, the Economy minister. “Well . . .” And 

it was during a scrum. “Well if more people leave, that just 

means there’s more for the rest of us.” How could you ever run 

a province with people like that and that ideology making 

decisions for you? There’s more for the rest of us. That is just 

probably counterintuitive to any common sense you could ever 

have. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Socialism at its best. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — I think the member from Wood River said it 

perfectly. 

 

So hold on. We’re going back to the population because 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5551 

eventually they say things are going to turn around under them. 

January 1st, 2004, 996,596 — that would be lower again; ’05, 

995,000 — that’s their lowest point yet. But just wait. They can 

beat that. January 1st, 2006, when the economy’s booming, the 

population’s growing, according to the member from Athabasca 

and the other nine over there . . . Eight, sorry. January 1st, 2006, 

992,242 people, and that is their lowest benchmark. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after years and years — well four years — 

listening to their speeches over there talking about we inherited 

a booming economy, the population was growing, with two 

Google searches you put all their myths to rest. Their 

population in 2006 was 992,242. Absolutely incredible. It’s not 

like in the fall of 2007 people just suddenly realized, hey, 

there’s oil here; hey, there’s potash here. It’s always been here. 

But they had this idea that the more that people left, the more 

people left, the more that would be left over for the rest of them, 

not realizing that the more people left, the more they’re going to 

raise taxes, the more they’re going to drive people out. If they 

would have still been in, had been in power, Mr. Speaker, we’d 

probably be at about 500,000 people living in Saskatchewan 

right now. Alberta would have had about another 500,000 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what I came to realize is that maybe sometimes, sometimes 

— and I don’t want to be too critical of our colleagues across 

the way — but it really, really surprises me that they can stand 

there in their seats and rail and rail about how great things were 

in 2000 and 2003. And then they’d talk to us and say, well what 

have you done for eight years? Well it was a good farming year 

for a few people, the member from Arm River-Watrous says. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think at some point in time you have to take 

a step back and take stock and say, you know, our fairy tales 

aren’t working anymore. People probably aren’t believing that 

things were really, really good in 2003, ’04, and ’05, or else 

we’d probably still be in government. Maybe it’s time to look at 

some of our policies. Odd, we don’t have any. Well that’s 

probably been a problem with people. I think if you don’t have 

any policies and you’re not going to maybe take a step back and 

look at some of the things you’ve been doing, you’d probably 

have a whole bigger issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all this summer was a great summer for us. The 

weather finally got better about June and July and we got on the 

doorsteps. I think each and every member in here was on the 

doorsteps talking to constituents. And I was on the doorsteps in 

Walsh Acres too. It was a pretty good experience, obviously. 

And obviously everyone’s not going to be happy with 

everything we’re doing, but that’s why you go out there. You 

go out and listen to constituents and listen to what they think 

you’re doing well and listen to what they think you can improve 

on. That’s a part of our government’s philosophy. 

 

There’s always going to be more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re not going to stand up there and talk about the glory years 

of when things were just magical and everything was perfect. 

We’re going to work hard to continue to make things better for 

this province, continue to seek growth, Mr. Speaker, and not 

just for the sake of growth, but for the sake of making each and 

every person in Saskatchewan’s quality of life better. That’s 

why this side seeks growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while I was door knocking in Walsh Acres . . . It was 

fantastic. I got to meet constituents. But then I have a 

neighbouring constituency which . . . It’s going to be an 

interesting race come fall of 2015 or spring of 2016. So I 

usually go out with a couple of friends, and we were door 

knocking in Regina Rosemont. And the member from Regina 

Rosemont, he stands up here; he has petitions about this traffic 

on Dewdney. So we want to go and door knock right by 

Dewdney and see how things are going and talk to the people 

that are right there. 

 

It’s interesting because he’s an affable young man. He says he’s 

out and about a lot. But a lot of people really didn’t even know 

who their MLA was, so that was a bit interesting. But when we 

were talking about the traffic on Dewdney, we also brought up 

the fact that our government’s working on a west bypass and a 

couple of solutions to the problem, which is weird because they 

said they never really got any of that information from their 

MLA, whoever that was, in their newsletter. Which is 

interesting because if you’re going to stand in your spot and 

present petitions day after day after day, you should probably 

also realize that there might be some solutions coming down the 

pike, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also when we were door knocking in Rosemont which . . . It 

was after the boundaries were redrawn. Part of the area of 

Regina Walsh Acres went into Rosemont, so I was able to door 

knock that area as well, and you wouldn’t believe the reception 

we got on the doors in that area. People were happy to see us. 

They were happy with how things were going. The government, 

you always go and you say, well we’re here. I want to know 

how you feel that we’re doing, what we can be doing better, and 

what direction you’d like to see the government go in. And after 

a couple of short discussions, people would say, we enjoy what 

you’re doing. People are making more money in the province. 

There’s a few . . . We appreciate the priorities you’ve set out. 

You’re making some commitments in health care. You’re 

making some commitments in post-secondary education and 

education. What we don’t want to see is you guys not in 

government. 

 

We don’t want to go back to what the NDP were doing eight 

years ago. We don’t want to go back to people leaving the 

province. We don’t want to go back to us having to pack up the 

van and visit our kids in Red Deer or Calgary or Edmonton 

because we did that for 16 years and we’re happy they’re 

moving home. 

 

The proof in that is when I was graduating high school in Swift 

Current in 2000 . . . I get a look from a couple of members. Yes, 

2000 was my high school graduation. It was fantastic to be done 

high school. You’re excited, and then you get home . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Dewdney said I 

was 22 years old. That’s actually incorrect. I was not 22 years 

old. I was a tall kid, but I was not 22. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you’re happy; you’re excited; you go to your 

graduation. And most of us walked through the door, and our 

parents knew that we’d be leaving so there’s a set of luggage 

there waiting because they were like, you don’t got any 

opportunities here. You might as well pack up. So that was the 

experience we had in the high school, Mr. Speaker. We had the 

experience of having to leave this province to search for the 



5552 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

quality of life that we do have here now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that’s one of the biggest things that people on the 

doorstep have said to me and I think to many of our colleagues 

across Regina, across Saskatoon, that they’re happy that they’re 

. . . One of the things that they’re the happiest about in our 

government’s priorities is having the opportunity for their 

children to raise their families here. Not having to leave to visit 

grandkids. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s how you build a 

province. It’s also through immigration and it’s through 

welcoming new Canadians here, Mr. Speaker, but I think at that 

cornerstone is ensuring that there is the opportunity for young 

people. And that’s some of our priorities, and you saw that in 

one of our first budgets. We brought in the graduate retention 

program. 

 

And the members across can say, well all you’re doing is 

repeating yourselves. You’re repeating yourselves. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, sometimes if you’re doing some things well, you 

repeat them because they’re working. And then you listen to 

people and listen to the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan 

and then adjust to make sure that you’re doing those things 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when it comes to the graduate retention program, I think it 

was one of the best priorities our government set forward to 

ensure the young people, our talent, our best resource, our 

people have the opportunity to stay in Saskatchewan to live, to 

work, and to raise a family. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that sets 

out some of the priorities that are important to us — growing 

our province, growing our economy — which is what we set 

out in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is that when you grow 

your economy, one of the most important things you have to do 

is grow your skilled workforce. 

 

And we realize some of the things we need to do better. We 

face a skilled labour shortage, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

has invested heavily in adult basic education services, and 

we’re working to eliminate that wait-list of the ABE. In the 

upcoming fiscal year, we’ll increase the number of ABE 

training seats to 775, eliminating the 2012 wait-list and bringing 

the total number of seats to 9,355, an increase of nearly 60 per 

cent since 2007. 

 

We do have some very strong priorities on education, Mr. 

Speaker. A few months ago, we were pleased to sign on to a 

Canada Job Grant agreement with the federal government. And 

I know this is really going to scare the opposition when you 

agree with the federal government. Because basically their 

economic platform was to go and sue the Canadian government 

for $800,000 million and stay on the have-not list and try and 

collect welfare for 30 years and try and grow the economy that 

way, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t work. You have to make these 

agreements. You have to get along with your funding partners, 

be it federal, municipal, Mr. Speaker, and that’s some of the 

things that we’re focusing on. And our government is investing 

$15.7 million in the program which will link training directly to 

the needs of employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to have a growing economy, 

you’re going to have to have the infrastructure to support that 

growing economy. And this year alone, nearly $3 billion has 

been committed to renew and expand the province’s 

infrastructure. And one of the things that we fought for, Mr. 

Speaker, and that we were big proponents of in the city of 

Regina was the Regina bypass project, which will be the largest 

transportation project in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a project where the municipal government came to 

play, The Building Canada Fund came into play, Mr. Speaker. 

And heaven forbid, it’s going to be a P3. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to ensure that we get the most bang for 

our buck, so to speak, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to need to 

leverage the dollars that we can to ensure our growing economy 

the infrastructure’s going to keep up with it. And if you’re 

going to go with a blind ideology where you can’t use P3s, and 

you’re going to leave money on the table, you’re obviously not 

going to take advantage of the opportunities that was given to 

you. And that’s why you can’t be opposed to P3s just based 

strictly on an ideological rant. 

 

Although the member from Athabasca is, to his credit, probably 

not . . . He probably didn’t get very much credit when he went 

back into his caucus office, but he said, you can’t leave money 

on the table. And, Mr. Speaker, I totally agree with him on that 

point. I don’t know if his other colleagues did. But I think that’s 

very important that at least he realized that, is that when you 

have the opportunity to leverage money, be it municipal, federal 

dollars, you have to take those opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also leveraging P3s for a 225-bed Swift Current 

long-term care centre. It’s under construction now, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s going to be a P3 also. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And although it’s a program that was very successful in our first 

term, there is a program we’re reintroducing which is the 

Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I remember when I worked in this building when SIGI 

[Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative] first came into 

play. It was a fantastic project, Mr. Speaker. The municipalities 

from all over took advantage of that. And then we’ve actually 

expanded that, Mr. Speaker. And in the first iteration of SIGI 

nearly $200 million in borrowing was approved, and 82 

communities benefited from interest rate subsidies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan First Nations would also benefit 

from SIGI. So that program will be open to those First Nations 

in a position to participate. Mr. Speaker, I think this is another 

initiative that maybe the member from Nutana said it was 

regurgitated, but when it went so well the first time that we 

rolled out SIGI, why wouldn’t you roll it all out again, Mr. 

Speaker? And SARM does like it, Mr. Speaker, and I think that 

there’s a lot of First Nations that’ll take advantage of this, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that it’s a very prominent part of the 

Throne Speech this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that highways are very important to 

Saskatchewan, and they’re an important part of our 

infrastructure. We realize that there’s more that needs to be 

done on highways. We all travel the same highways, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’re working hard to fulfill a gap that was in the 

highways for 16 years where no money was put into them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5553 

Mr. Speaker, health care is one of the most important things and 

important priorities that our government has in place. It’s a 

huge budget item, Mr. Speaker. And we realize that the health 

care of our seniors is vitally important. They’re the people who 

built this province, and we’re working hard to shorten the gap 

that is there in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that it’s very ideological. I don’t want to throw that word 

out too much, but I think to believe that anyone wants to see 

poor senior care in this province is ridiculous. For them to say 

we’re letting seniors go by the wayside, it’s not true. They’re an 

important priority to this government and we’re going to work, 

we’re going to work hard to ensure that the senior care keeps on 

improving under a Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

We’re going to work hard to ensure that there’s more beds 

available. I know that there’s an analysis being done in RQHR 

with long-term care to see exactly what the needs will be in the 

future. Because I remember that member from Lakeview saying 

that . . . just follow the plan they set out and you’ll be okay. 

Well you can’t follow those plans, Mr. Speaker, because their 

population numbers were not even close to what they are today. 

So their plan really is null and void at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to take a few minutes to talk about education, Mr. 

Speaker. I had the opportunity, and I know members across the 

way aren’t going to believe this, but I have some friends that are 

teachers, so every now and then we get together and have lunch 

and talk about how they would like to see the education sector 

move forward as a whole, Mr. Speaker. And talking with them, 

there’s a few things that they would like to see. The 

investments, we have more capital investments in the education 

sector than the former NDP government did in 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker. Over the last seven years, our government has spent 

more than $700 million on education infrastructure. That’s a 

260 per cent increase from what was done before. 

 

And I remember when I, as a young guy, when I was going to 

school in Waldeck. I went to school there from K to 9 

[kindergarten to grade 9], and I remember walking around the 

buckets when the rain was coming down, going to change the 

buckets because there was so much water being dripped in them 

that you had to . . . really couldn’t get a whole class done before 

you had to go and pour the buckets out. And these are things 

that we’re working on, trying to improve quality infrastructure 

for our young people. Because I think the cornerstone of 

education is our wonderful teachers, but also the infrastructure 

in which they have to go to school each and every day to learn 

in. They have to have a great learning environment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As a young person, as a young family yet, my son at four, three 

years now — that kind of flew by — he’s going to be starting 

education. So I do have some very, very interesting . . . I do 

have interest in the education sector. And like I said when I was 

speaking with a couple teacher friends of mine and they were 

talking about the direction that education is going in 

Saskatchewan, and for the most part, Mr. Speaker, they said the 

direction is right. They’re happy with the way it’s going. All 

they need to do is have a bit more communication. And I credit 

the current, the Minister for Education, the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast because his communication with the 

education sector, he’s communicating clearly with them and 

they’re happy with how that communication’s been going. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, moving on to post-secondary education. I’m a 

U of R [University of Regina] alumni. My colleague from 

Saskatoon Northeast is the current minister for post-secondary 

education and I think he’s doing a fantastic job. I believe the 

University of Regina is at an all-time high for enrolment. I go 

and attend as many events as I can at the University of Regina. 

 

University of Saskatoon, how’s their enrolment? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s up. Up again. Good MLA. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Up again? The University of Saskatchewan, 

sorry. I should be corrected there. The House Leader said it was 

University of Saskatchewan, right? It is a friendly rivalry here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I talked about the graduate retention program 

already. And over $130 million in rebates have been provided 

to more that 50,000 students, and those 50,000 students all 

chose to stay right here in Saskatchewan to start their careers. 

 

Talking about the University of Regina and University of 

Saskatchewan, they are two of our wonderful jewels in the 

post-secondary education. But also there’s the regional colleges, 

SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute, and all post-secondary institutions 

that help to ensure that First Nations and Métis students have 

the supports they require to do their studies as well. Mr. 

Speaker, in post-secondary education, Aboriginal enrolment is 

ever increasing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I think is very 

important to close that education gap which . . . we’ve talked 

about it many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Advanced Education will work with SaskTel to 

upgrade Internet access and speed at regional colleges, which 

again is talking about infrastructure to ensuring that students 

have the best opportunity to be successful in their studies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more things I would like to get on 

the record and one will be our support for communities. As a 

result of the province’s predictable and sustainable 

revenue-sharing program, municipalities already know they’ll 

receive record revenue sharing for $265 million in next year’s 

budget, which is more than double the amount from when we 

took over. See, there’s a few more differences that we’ll have 

between us and the opposition, looking back and looking 

forward. Looking forward, Mr. Speaker, they’re able to rely on 

a reliable revenue-sharing formula. So they know how much 

money they’re going to get, which allows them to be able to 

budget more clearly. On the other side, I think when they were 

in power, they clawed back money. I think they clawed back 

about $600 million from municipalities over their tenure in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So far, Mr. Speaker, I’ve covered many of the areas that we find 

as a priority in the Speech from the Throne. There’s a couple 

more things I’d like to talk about and one is the difference 

between leadership. They talk about, they call it premier poster 

boy, which is interesting. I think what they should realize is that 

when you’re proud of the job your leader’s doing, when your 



5554 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

leader shows vision, when your leader has policies that he’s 

able to talk about, you want to make sure that people know and 

see him. I think when you have a leader with no vision, no 

policies, no platform, no hope, I think that’s probably why you 

don’t see billboards up of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

There’s a thing that the Leader of the Opposition says a lot 

which it’s . . . doesn’t make a lot . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

One of them, but that’s not what I’m talking about. One thing 

that the Leader of the Opposition says and says a lot is, it’s not 

about the province doing well, it’s about people doing well. So I 

really don’t understand that statement whatsoever. 

 

So I think it’s different because what I did is, I took a look back 

at the last session and who did most of the talking for the 

opposition. And it’s very interesting how it broke down. The 

Leader of the Opposition, out of the total time allowed for 

question period, talked 44.2 per cent of the time. The members 

from the North — from Athabasca and from Cumberland — the 

member from Athabasca spoke 3.2 per cent of the time and the 

member from Cumberland spoke point nine per cent of the 

time. It seems like they don’t have a high priority on the North. 

But I think and . . . I think I’m going to help the Leader of the 

Opposition out here. I don’t think the slogan he’s using right 

now is very correct. I think it should be, it’s not about the NDP 

doing well; it’s about the member from Massey Place doing 

well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think they may have some issues in that side 

especially when it comes to the North. Because when I also 

looked at their Throne Speech magical wish list, I didn’t see 

very much in their wish list for the North either, not even from 

Prince Albert. Not even from Prince Albert. Not for the North. 

And I think that might be a problem for the member from 

Cumberland because I know of a young man who’s just 

recently been nominated in Cumberland for the Saskatchewan 

Party named Thomas Sierzycki. And he’s the mayor up there, 

and I think he’s a pretty well-liked mayor. 

 

So if I was the member from Cumberland, I’d probably go and 

talk to my leader right now, saying I might need a little more 

face time or there might not be a seat for the member from 

Cumberland on that side of the House because it’s probably 

going to be on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m probably going to wind up here pretty soon, Mr. 

Speaker, but . . . Well if you want me to keep going, I can keep 

going for a while. But I was looking at the NDP’s Throne 

Speech list of demands, which I don’t know how you have a list 

of demands when you’re in opposition because it should be . . . 

I guess that . . . [inaudible] . . . the combative words they like to 

use. But their demands are: stop ignoring urgent needs in care 

facilities for front-line staff, equipment, and repairs. So I would 

say that last session our government provided $10 million to 

health regions for specific initiatives and an additional 3.7 

million for ongoing programs. This funding will be used to 

purchase 700 pieces of equipment, hire additional staff, and 

support staff training. 

 

Stop ignoring the $2.2 billion in need of repairs for hospitals 

and facilities. Well since 2008, ministries, Crown corporations 

have spent close to $16 billion on a range of capital projects. 

This year alone, 3 billion have been committed to renew and 

expand the province’s infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on with their list of demands. And 

the interesting thing is . . . Oh I’ll get one more in because I 

really liked it when the member from Massey Place talked 

about eggs in a basket. So I’ll talk about the economy for a little 

bit. Mr. Speaker, he always says, we need to diversify, we need 

to diversify. Well 577,000 people are working in the province 

today. That’s pretty good. Unemployment’s been at a record 

low in Canada for 23 consecutive years. And to diversify the 

economy . . . Months, sorry. Getting ahead of myself. Mr. 

Speaker, to diversify the economy, I think one of the biggest 

points that you could see and look at, one of the biggest pieces 

of data you can see is, where are the jobs being created? Where 

are the 577,000 more people working? So maybe we should 

break that down. 

 

So over the past seven years, there have been 70,400 new jobs 

created in Saskatchewan. And fewer than 10 per cent of those 

jobs, 66,000 were created in the resource sector. Well where 

have they been? Because they seem to think we’re relying on 

the resource sector. Construction, 18,000; health care, 10,700; 

resources, 6,600; science and technology, 6,200; education, 

5,800; agriculture, 5,300; all other sectors, 17,800, for a grand 

total of 70,400 new people working in the province. I’m not too 

sure but that sounds pretty diversified to me. That doesn’t seem 

like one sector’s taking up all the jobs, all the new jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 

well as the member from Yorkton says, that sounds like all 

kinds of eggs and all kinds of baskets. And I think that, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what happens when you have policies in place. I 

know that I keep going back to policies because . . . One more 

story about the member from Rosemont, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that he went and talked to a University of Regina class a 

couple of weeks ago and the member from Coronation Park was 

there speaking with him, and he was going, the member from 

Rosemont was going on and on about what the NDP will do 

when they come back in government and what they’d like to do 

and what they’d like to see. So the member from Coronation 

Park goes, well we’re all here and I bet you we all have smart 

phones. Why don’t we jump on the Google, as the member 

from Nutana would say, and see what their platform will be and 

the party’s policies are? Then you’ll see exactly what they’re 

talking about. That went over like a lead balloon with the 

member from Regina Rosemont because when all the students 

went to look at the NDP’s website, nada, nada, nothing. It was 

very interesting and it was probably difficult for him to talk his 

way out of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think at some point in time . . . And I’m very much looking 

forward to it because within the next 18 months, the people of 

this province are going to have a decision to make. They’re 

going to have to decide on a party, a government that has 

policies, has vision, has leadership, has a team in place that 

wants to put Saskatchewan first, and they want to be able to go 

out on the doorsteps . . . And we’ll be on the doorsteps probably 

from now, for 18 months total, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 

when we go to the doorsteps, people are very much happy to 

see a party with ideas. And I don’t know but I’m very, very 

much happy and encouraged when I go to the doorstep and I 

hear, well the NDP were here and they don’t have much to 

offer. And I think that that’s probably what’s going to happen. 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5555 

[15:45] 

 

And I feel pretty sorry for the member from Cumberland when 

he’s going to go door knocking. In last session they reported in 

his paper that he asked four questions in the whole session. 

Maybe eight, sorry. It might have been eight questions. I 

apologize to the member from Cumberland. I think he got on 

his feet eight times, not four — my bad. But how he’s going to 

go there and go door knocking in La Ronge and say, hey I 

asked probably 12 questions for you guys in the last year. I’m 

not sure if that’s the type of representation they’re looking for. 

And I think that that’s going to be replayed a lot for members of 

the NDP across the province. And I’m very much looking 

forward to the next 18 months. 

 

And I’m probably not going to support the amendment, which 

confused me to begin with because . . . Well I won’t be 

supporting the amendment. Not probably. I won’t be supporting 

the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I will be supporting 

our government’s Speech from the Throne. I will be supporting 

the direction our government’s going. And I think that we’re 

trying to do the best we can for Saskatchewan, making the 

priorities that we hear on the doorstep when we’re talking to 

Saskatchewan people, and I think they see those priorities 

mirrored in what this Throne Speech brings. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and thank you to my colleague from Walsh Acres for 

his very, very good response in the Speech from the Throne and 

covered many, many subjects on there. But I think he 

particularly enjoyed talking about the member from Rosemont 

and some of the mistakes he’s made inside and outside this 

legislative. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start off as everybody does. I 

need to thank my family. I need to thank my wife, Leane, for 

everything that she has done for me in allowing me to come 

down here. I have to thank both my children, Courtney and 

Carter, and in the same breath I need to apologize to them 

because I’m not going to be there for some of these events, 

some of the hockey games and some of the special Olympic 

events that my daughter attends. But they understand why I’m 

down here. They know I’m down here to make Saskatchewan a 

better place for them to live in the future and to choose this as 

home as I did, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also need to thank my stepdaughters, Kassidy and Keely, who 

are very supportive, make sure that they, that they’re always 

around helping out in the house, that they understand why I’m 

gone. And it’s very critical to have that support at home as 

everybody from both sides of the House know, that they have to 

have that support at home otherwise this job, it’d be very 

difficult. 

 

In saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank my 

parents. I was encouraged to get into politics from my father, 

Ted Merriman who was a MLA 2003 to 2007, and of course my 

mother, Marie. Thank you very much for everything that you 

did for me. Both of you guys, you raised, I would have to say, a 

great child. I have to do that. I have to say that. Two children. 

I’m sorry to my sister. But they instilled the values that I have 

which allows me to come down here and speak on behalf of the 

people of Saskatoon Sutherland. So again to my parents, I thank 

you very much for everything that you’ve done for me. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one other special person that I 

need to thank. Her birthday is tomorrow. Her name is Sophie 

Foster. She is my most active constituent, and I know I’ve 

talked about Sophie in here before. Sophie is turning 100 years 

young tomorrow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m looking forward 

to celebrating her birthday. She has family coming from across 

Western Canada to be able to celebrate with her on Saturday. 

But 100 years, and I’m not sure if this is going to stir the pot 

within our ranks, but I believe that she is the oldest active 

member of the Saskatchewan Party. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

again to Sophie I want to say thank you and happy birthday 

tomorrow, Sophie. I look forward to seeing you on the 

weekend. So thank you very much for that. 

 

And again I need to thank my constituency assistant, Kendra 

Johnson, who just came to me this year and has done an 

absolute fabulous job of keeping me on track. It’s a very hectic 

work and family-life balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

Kendra’s very good at encouraging me to make sure I make all 

of the meetings and do all of the greetings that I need to do on 

behalf of my colleagues, but also balancing that out with telling 

me to get out of the office and go home to spend time with my 

family to make sure I understand why I’m down here again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And in lieu of the events — and I know we’ve talked about this; 

several people have talked about this — we had some of the 

veterans in, and I was privileged to hear the gentleman speak 

downstairs on his life in World War II from 1941 to 1945, some 

of the stories that he had. He got up there, was remarkable at 91 

years old. He was saying everything like it happened yesterday. 

He was there. He remembered his friends. He remembered. He 

had survived, believe it or not, four plane crashes in a bomber, 

so he considers himself very lucky. And one of the things he 

said down there was that there are an average of 100 to 200 

veterans dying that are from World War II that are dying every 

day. 

 

We’re losing our veterans, and I think everybody in this House 

and . . . We need to thank our veterans. When we see them on 

the street, when we see them in the Legion halls, we need to 

thank them. We have no understanding. And my colleague from 

Walsh Acres said, when we both walked away from that event 

this morning said, absolutely the greatest generation of 

Canadians that we have ever seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

want to very much thank them for exactly what they have done 

so we can enjoy the privilege of democracy here in 

Saskatchewan and across our great country. 

 

I also want to touch base and thank Pat Shaw. He has been 

instrumental in keeping the security of this building, and his 

team and all of the first responders across Canada and 

especially here in Saskatchewan. With the events that happened 

in Ottawa, we need to be vigilant. We need to make sure that 

we are aiding and assisting in any way we can to make sure that 

this type of terror attack does not happen in our country again, 

the radicalism and the people that are choosing to do this. This 



5556 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

is something that they’re choosing to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in a country that bore them, that absolutely they grew up in. We 

went to school. And these people are getting radicalized, and 

it’s very scary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I want to make sure that all Canadians out there know that 

their governments at all levels are working to make sure that 

their safety is number one above everything else, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Again I would touch base on the first responders. 

 

And now I’ll get into a little bit of the Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can’t express it enough on what it means 

to be living in a strong Saskatchewan. It was the equivalent . . . 

When I moved out to Saskatchewan from Toronto in 1988, 

Saskatchewan had some potential. Then we turned into the dark 

years, and it was like this whole province had a flu, had a virus, 

and everybody was trying to get away from it. The kids were 

going. My friends were leaving. It was a very sad time. 

 

And the government at that time, the member from Lakeview 

who’s sitting here was in that government at that time, they 

were happy at best with the status quo. They did not want to 

grow the province. They did not want to build anything. They 

wanted to keep everybody’s expectations low, and they wanted 

to be able to keep what their goals were even lower. They never 

tried to grow the province. All they would do is complain to the 

federal government, run out there to Ottawa with their hand out 

saying, please, sir, can I have some more? That’s the sad state 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And my colleague from Walsh Acres talked about it a bit, about 

the member from Athabasca thinking that everybody was lined 

up in 2007. And absolutely they were. They absolutely were 

because they had . . . people were seeing a breath of fresh air 

come into this province. We were starting to work with 

businesses, not trying to own the businesses and the 

government control everything. 

 

That’s what amazes me about their whole philosophy over 

there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is their philosophy is government 

knows best in all areas of the province, of business, any kind of 

business. And I’m going to get into the list of some of the 

businesses that they invested in, and it’s just, you absolutely 

shake your head at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But their philosophy 

is that they should be controlling everything. The government 

knows best. 

 

And I can tell you, sitting on the government, there are 

absolutely some things that we do that are very good for 

encouraging things, but we don’t get down to telling people 

what they should do, getting investing into different businesses. 

We shouldn’t be doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because our 

role is to support the businesses, support the economy, and 

make sure that we allow it to grow. Not to try to stifle it, not to 

try to kill it. I mean it feels like that we were in a slow bleed for 

16 years and finally somebody put a Band-Aid on us, and now 

we’re actually healing and we’re growing. 

 

And the interesting part is now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I 

travel, either with work or with businesses, you talk to people. 

They’ve heard about Saskatchewan. They know about it. They 

know about our potash. They know about our uranium. They 

certainly know about our agriculture, and they know about our 

oil and gas. Why is that that they didn’t know about this the 

whole time? Why was Saskatchewan left off the world radar 

map forever? It’s because they didn’t want to explore this. They 

didn’t want to grow the province, and that’s very disappointing. 

And they still believe that. They haven’t changed any of their 

policies from the last election. 

 

We had the member from Lakeview actually stand up and say, 

well it was because of the snowfall or it was the weather; well it 

was something else. They have excuses. They haven’t adapted 

or evolved into the new Saskatchewan. They haven’t come up 

with any new ideas on how to solve some of the growth 

challenges that we’re facing right now because they never had a 

plan for growth. They never wanted to grow. They absolutely 

wanted to keep this province as low as they possibly can. 

 

And they didn’t want our population to grow because they had a 

core base of supporters. And the more people that come into 

this province are the more people that have never seen the NDP 

govern this province. We have over 100,000 people that have 

come into this province that we need, as people who have been 

here through those dark days, remind them. Remind them of 

what it is to be under the NDP when nothing was going right, 

when it was an absolute socialism type of government that just 

controlled everything. 

 

And I’m going to get into some of the losses that they talked 

about, or that they had over their term. But the Leader of the 

Opposition over there, he seems to keep dismissing this as, oh 

that was before my time. No, it wasn’t. The Leader of the 

Opposition for the NDP needs to answer for everything that the 

NDP has done since the inception of the NDP. That’s his party. 

These are the people. We have some core supporters over here 

of the NDP who love Tommy Douglas and are Tommy 

Douglas’s people. And Cam . . . Sorry, sorry. The member from 

Massey Place, the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 

Opposition seems to dismiss that. He seems to dismiss that 

quite a bit. And he seems to be the new vision of the New 

Democratic Party. But I don’t understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

as to how he has his own divisiveness in his party, but yet he 

seems to forget about everything that the member from 

Lakeview did while he was in cabinet, the member from 

Saskatoon city centre, and even the member from Athabasca. 

We’re not actually quite sure what he did in cabinet, but he was 

there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know he was there because he 

had the honourable title for a little bit of time anyways. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to talk about is some of 

the things that I’ve been working on within the legislative 

community. I’ve been privileged to be able to be appointed by 

Premier to be the Vice-Chair for Public Accounts. Now a lot of 

people, when I tell them it’s Public Accounts I’m sitting as a 

Deputy Chair, the Vice-Chair for Public Accounts, they’re not 

sure quite what that is. So what it is is we look after . . . We 

look at all the auditor’s recommendations that the government 

should be doing or some of the things that the auditor is 

suggesting that we should do — a whole wide variety of things. 

 

And it’s very eye opening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When we have 

a recommendation from the auditor, we seem to act on it. We 

seem to work with the auditor and the opposition to be able to 

say yes, that’s a good idea. We never thought of that one. 

Absolutely we need to implement that. And one of the best ones 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5557 

that we’ve seen that working from the government and the 

auditor’s office is moving from the GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] to summary financials. That was something that the 

auditor called for and that we worked with the auditor’s office 

and to be able to make that happen so the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that we are working with the 

auditor’s office. So Public Accounts is very interesting, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But some of the things I want to touch base on other than that is 

immigration. Again I’ve been I guess reappointed or extended 

my appointment for Legislative Secretary for Immigration, and 

I’ve had the honour of going out and meeting people in the 

immigrant community. Now these are just people coming from 

the Philippines, from Ireland. These are people coming from all 

over the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the reason that 

they’re coming here is they’re coming here for hope. This is 

what our Premier said right after we won the 2000 election: 

hope beats fear every time. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people 

are coming here because they have hope; they’re not fearful. 

 

The opposition would like to keep everybody in fear. But 

within, when you talk to the people coming in from all around 

the world, they’re absolutely awestruck by the people of 

Saskatchewan, by the opportunities in Saskatchewan, and by all 

the excitement that’s going on in Saskatchewan. They’re talking 

about it all around the world. 

 

And I’ve had a couple of opportunities. Just last week I was at 

the Skilled Trades Canada conference where they’re planning 

on having 43 different trades. They’re having a competition. 

This is a national competition that goes on every year, and 

they’re coming to Saskatoon to be able to do this. Now this isn’t 

what you would typically think of as the trades of construction, 

electrician. This goes everything into information technology, 

different nursing strategies, a whole wide variety, 43 different 

areas that are going to be . . . There’s going to be a skills 

competition. They are very excited about planning this. There is 

thousands and thousands of volunteer hours that are going into 

this. And why are they picking Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Because this is the place to be. 

 

The Premier has said it many times. It used to be the place to be 

from and I guess the only thing that I can say about the NDP 

and what they did was they were able to spread the Rider nation 

across Canada. I guess that’s one good thing, so we can always 

go to a game and feel like it’s a home game because everybody 

left this province for 16 years. But now people are coming back 

to this province. We have expatriates coming back to this 

province; we have immigration coming into this province; and 

people are staying in this province. The graduate retention 

program is one of our great programs that we have, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in able to keep our young people here. 

 

Again when I graduated high school a little bit earlier than my 

colleague from Walsh Acres in 1990 — 1990 and yes, I can do 

the math, thank you — everybody was gone. People were gone 

to Alberta. Some went to the United States. Some went to 

Manitoba, Ontario. It was a sad state of affairs to be able to say, 

it was our graduating class and 60 per cent of the people, 70 per 

cent of the people are going to be gone in the next year. And it’s 

difficult when you have friends, especially me just completing 

my last two years of high school here, when you have all of 

these friends and they’re all gone and you lose connection with 

them. And it’s too bad that at that time everybody was just 

bolting out of this province as quick as they possibly could. 

 

But I want to talk a little bit about the citizenship ceremonies 

that I’ve been able to attend, and I know my colleagues have 

attended these as well. This is one of the great things that I’ve 

been able to do as an MLA and as the Legislative Secretary for 

Immigration, is when you have somebody coming to you and 

they are taking that oath and they get that certificate of 

citizenship and they choosing Saskatchewan, of all places to 

live. It is one of the most rewarding experiences that I had. 

 

The first time I went, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I got up to speak and 

I had trouble speaking. I was choking on my words because of 

the pure joy. You hear the stories and the horror stories, and 

again we’re so blessed here in Saskatchewan, but you hear the 

horror stories of what people went through to be able to get here 

to live, raise their family, and establish their roots and become 

part of the Saskatchewan mosaic culture. It is absolutely 

horrifying to hear what they had to say. But the reward was, this 

was the last that they were going to have to do. They did this for 

their kids, for their families, for their parents. Their parents’ 

reward is that their child of whatever age got out of that 

situation, got out of that country, and can start a new life right 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it was absolutely fascinating, and I want to thank my 

colleagues who have been there who have absolutely shaken the 

hands of the new citizens. It’s very critical for them to see 

because a lot of these people have never seen a politician in real 

life. They haven’t. And for them to be able to stand up and you 

can say, welcome to Saskatchewan; welcome to Canada. Even 

if they have been living here for multiple years and waiting for 

their citizenship, now they’re officially part of the Canadian 

citizenship family which is made up of immigrants from all 

over the world. With the exception of our First Nations people, 

we’re all immigrants into Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

think that’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 

understand, especially in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re a very young province. We’ve only been around for just 

over 100 years and at best, again outside of the Aboriginal 

community, we’re maybe fifth generation in Saskatchewan. So 

this is a new influx. This is like what was happening back when 

Saskatchewan was first forming. We were supposed to be the 

biggest, most populated province in Western Canada and well 

socialism happened, as somebody was asking. That happened 

and it absolutely stopped our province. It stopped it dead in its 

tracks. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very important for us to be able to 

get out and talk to people, talk to the people that are coming in 

and see why they appreciate it. It gives us a new appreciation of 

how lucky we are here. And I’ve had the opportunity to take my 

children to the citizenship ceremonies and I remind them we 

are, you know, in Canada we are the 1 per cent. We are very 

lucky here in Canada. We have the freedom of speech, freedom 

of religion. We have lots of freedoms that people can’t even 

dream of around the world. 

 



5558 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

So I want again to thank my colleagues for that and thank the 

minister for allowing me to go and attend this. And I know he 

has been at some citizenship ceremonies and working with lots 

of the immigrant communities trying to find out how we can do 

things better, how we can help work with the communities to 

get people in Saskatchewan, to get them to settle in. We just 

don’t want people to come in and fill jobs. We have a job issue. 

There is 95,000 expected jobs by 2017 that we need here in the 

province. We don’t want them to come in and just work a job. 

We want them to come in, have a career, set down their roots, 

and become part of the Saskatchewan family. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s important that all people 

realize that we need to welcome all of the immigrants coming 

around because they’re here for the right reasons. They’re here 

for the work. They’re here to settle, and we want those people 

to come in here long term, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So in saying 

that, there’s a couple of other things that I want to talk about. 

 

Certainly I’ll get to the Speech from the Throne. I’m just doing 

my 15-minute preamble, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I want to talk 

about door knocking, just going out in the province and talking 

to people. And I’ve had the opportunity to be in Saskatoon, and 

all the areas of Saskatoon. And it’s interesting what we’re 

hearing in question period down here and what the media seems 

to latch onto sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether it’s lean 

or SaskPower meters or whatever it is that’s the question of the 

day. When you get out and talk to people on the streets, what 

are they talking about? 

 

They’re talking about schools, new schools being built in 

Saskatoon, Regina, and Martensville. They’re talking about the 

children’s hospital. They’re talking about their roads and their 

highways, the investment that we need to have to be able to 

keep Saskatchewan growing. They’re talking about the 

infrastructure. They’re talking about the new bridge in 

Saskatoon. They’re talking about the south bridge in Saskatoon, 

which our government was able to allocate $98.5 million for 

that. These are what they’re talking about. 

 

Yes, there’s going to be people out there that are not happy with 

everything. And I don’t think as a government our goal is to 

make everybody happy on everything. We need to make the 

majority of the people understand that we’re investing in their 

backyard. We’re helping them out. We’re keeping the property 

. . . We’re keeping the taxes low. We’re able to make sure that 

we have . . . which is our cornerstone, and it should be the 

cornerstone of every government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 

balanced budget. That’s the most important thing. Because if 

we start going into deficit financing, all we’re doing is passing 

on that debt to my kids and I don’t think that that’s fair, and I 

don’t think anybody wants to pass the debt on to their kids. But 

with the NDP, in their last campaign they wanted to shift at 

least 5 to $6 billion more, was the costing of their election 

campaign. They wanted to shift that on to the next generation 

and to our grandkids. 

 

I’m not a grandfather yet. Please don’t let me be a grandfather 

for a little while. I’m not ready for that. 

 

But I want to make sure that we reduce the debt. That’s our job, 

is to reduce the debt, is to make sure that this is the best place. 

Not just that we have fancy bridges and that we have hospitals 

and all that, but we have a way to pay for it now. We have a 

way to be able to finance that with multiple sources of income. 

We have uranium, potash, agriculture. We have oil and gas. 

 

And the other thing that is interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

now we have a broader tax base. We’ve taken people off the 

tax. People with low income, we’ve taken them off the 

provincial tax. But now, we have 100,000, over 100,000 more 

people paying provincial tax. That’s another source of revenue. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s great to be able to see that we have 

all of these different sources of revenue to be able to fund the 

projects that we determine that is important. And let me tell 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that decision does not sit on this side 

of the House. That decision of what we do and where we go and 

how we spend our money sits outside this House. It sits in our 

constituencies. It sits when we talk to the people on the street, 

when we talk to the business community, when we talk to the 

community-based organizations, we talk to the health regions, 

the educators. We talk to them and we get advice from them. 

 

Everybody thinks . . . I think most people think that there’s 

some inner circle of people that make all of these decisions. 

Where they get the information from is outside this building, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s no disrespect to the 

government. That’s no disrespect to the legislative process. We 

need to get our information from the people that are actually 

going through the programs, that are actually driving down the 

roads, that are actually out there in the school system. When I 

go to pick up my child from school, whether it’s my daughter 

from high school or my stepdaughter from high school or my 

son from elementary school, the teachers are there. They’re 

talking to us. 

 

When I have to go in and pick up my mother when she had 

surgery on her knee, talking to the health care people, I don’t 

solicit. I don’t say, hey I am from the government. I’m here to 

help. Tell me what to do. I just simply ask the question, how are 

things going? And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nine 

times out of ten they say, yep, things are going extremely well. 

We’re very happy with the way things are going in 

Saskatchewan. Is there any opportunity to look at this? Yes, 

absolutely. So we take that back. We funnel that through 

caucus, through cabinet, and if there’s an expense item, then it 

goes through treasury board. It goes through its process. 

 

But what the people of Saskatchewan need to understand is, 

there is a process. It doesn’t start in this building. It ends in this 

building. That’s where all of the different ideas from all of our 

constituencies that we represent and also the constituencies that 

we don’t represent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they did have 

the opportunity to go knock doors in the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Interesting, two things that happened. Nobody mentioned lean. 

They did mention the schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But what 

they also did mention, which I found very interesting, was like 

the member from Walsh Acres said about the member from 

Rosemont is, they hadn’t seen him. They hadn’t seen the Leader 

of the Opposition knocking in his own area. They hadn’t seen 

him out since the last election. 

 

And that’s a little disconcerting because we don’t answer to the 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5559 

people every four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We answer to the 

people every day. And if we’re not answering to the people 

every day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then we’re not doing our jobs 

effectively. I think that, and that is probably why the opposition 

has lost touch, they really have. They haven’t evolved, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they haven’t evolved with what is the needs of 

the people of Saskatchewan. They still think that they know 

best: oh don’t worry, we’ll take care of you; we’re the 

government. 

 

See, what we do is we take everybody’s ideas and formulate 

that into a plan. And I know this is something that the 

opposition doesn’t particularly like to hear about because they 

don’t have a plan. They don’t have anything on their website. 

I’ve been told recently that they took, or actually it wasn’t 

recently, it was probably about six to eight months ago where 

they finally took the Regina Manifesto off of their website. I’m 

not quite sure why they did that. I’m not sure if that’s going 

back, if they’re trying to lose their history. I don’t understand 

that. 

 

We’re very proud of our history within the Saskatchewan Party. 

We’re very thankful for our founding eight members who saw a 

bigger vision. And it wasn’t about party lines. It wasn’t about 

history of one party over the other. It was, we need to get 

together to be able to make this province better, and we can’t do 

that if we’re fighting each other all of the time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 
 

[16:15] 
 

A couple of other things I want to touch base on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I don’t get too many opportunities to get up and 

speak other than the odd member’s statement. So I did want to 

thank some of the colleagues, thank some of the . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I’ll get to you there in a minute, mister 

Batoche. But I wanted to thank some of my colleagues that 

have decided to retire, have decided that they’ve put in their 

time. And they’ve done an absolute fabulous job at representing 

their constituents, representing the people of Saskatchewan, 

whether they’re here in Saskatchewan or they’re travelling 

around the world. I just want to put a quick thank you out to 

them.  

 

And again, I’ve touched base on the founding members. I want 

to put a personal thanks out to the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. Certainly from what I’ve been told, and 

again I don’t have a whole lot of background in agriculture, but 

what I’ve been told — and no disrespect to the current — but 

the best agricultural minister that we’ve ever had in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again, I want to put out a thank you to a colleague and a 

mentor, the member from Wood River, who is a veteran. And 

again I want to thank you very much for your service. I want to 

say, you know, as one of the original members, not the 

founding members, but one of the first members of the party, 

it’s absolutely great to be able to see that we have the longevity 

and the history to be able to bring members like the member 

from Wood River. And the nomination meeting — and again, 

we don’t talk about this a lot within the House because of some 

strict rules — but it was absolutely fabulous to see so many 

people out at so many different of our nomination meetings 

across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We’ve had anywhere from 1,000 up to 12, 1,300 people come 

out for one single nomination, five or six candidates coming out 

to be able to be part of this. They want to be part of this 

experience. They want to be able to say, I did my little part to 

be able to move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Again, one of our founding members, the member from 

Moosomin, thank you very much for everything you’ve done as 

to be able to bring this party and represent your constituency. 

And I believe he’s the longest-sitting member in the legislative. 

Thank you to him. 

 

To our current Finance minister and Deputy Premier, the 

member from Canora-Pelly, our Deputy Premier, I want to 

thank him for his guidance, for his wisdom. And I’ve never 

experienced another Finance minister, so I have to say he’s the 

best that we’ve ever had, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again, former Social Services minister from 

Kelvington-Wadena, what can I say? Just an absolute fabulous 

lady, very classy lady. Her speech yesterday was moving. She 

was extremely eloquent in being able to articulate what all of us 

were feeling about our members in our armed service. Great 

Social Services minister, great lady. But I think what’s most 

important to her is, a great mother and a grandmother. And I 

want to say thank you to her. 

 

And my member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, my friend, 

well, well, well. I’m very glad to see that he’s going back into 

his policing career. I hope I don’t have to see him again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, while I’m going up to the lake. I’d like to see 

him in a very social setting, but not in a very official setting. So 

again thank you to the member for P.A. Carlton. 

 

The member from Greystone, who just happens to be my MLA, 

as I sit just outside of the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

As my MLA, I can go in and give him a hard time about what’s 

going on with the government. And I wish him the best of luck 

in his future endeavours. 

 

And also I wanted to put out a quick thanks to — and I think I 

can officially say his name — Tim McMillan, who has moved 

on to another career. And I wish him and his family the absolute 

best. Tim was one of the great guys that mentored me in a 

whole bunch of different aspects. And after the 2011 election, 

Tim was very excited because now there was some other — 

myself, the member from Regina Dewdney, the member from 

Walsh Acres — there was some other people here that were 

over six feet. So he was pretty excited to be able to have some 

other taller people in politics. So again to him and his family, I 

wish them the absolute best . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, 

I’m not talking about P.A. Carlton anymore. 

 

I would like to talk just a little bit about some of the 

opportunities I’ve had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as many people on 

this side of the House are aware that I sit on the board for 

Special Olympics for the province of Saskatchewan, which I’m 

very privileged to do that. The Minister for Advanced 

Education, past president of Special Olympics, we have a very 

good tie with the Special Olympics to be able to help them 

work with the athletes. And we need to recognize the athletes; 

we’ve had them in here before. 

 



5560 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

We have the best athletes in the world here in Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s Special Olympians, hockey, dance, art, culture. 

Those people are just the absolute best, that work to represent. 

They wear the Saskatchewan flag with pride. And the Special 

Olympians are . . . It’s an absolute treat to watch them. And 

don’t kid yourself for a second, they’re very competitive. This 

is highly competitive. 

 

My daughter is a Special Olympian. She went bowling the other 

day, and she was just learning how to bowl. And the gentlemen 

that was two lanes down threw one ball short of a perfect game. 

As a special Olympian, he also happens to be on the national 

team. But that tells you the calibre that they have within the 

Special Olympics, that these people, the people that are working 

within the Special Olympics . . . And most importantly they 

wouldn’t be able to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless they 

had volunteers to be able to help them out. 

 

So it’s absolutely critical with all of that, with any type of 

program, the volunteers are there. And everybody knows that 

Saskatchewan is a volunteer capital of the world. Everything 

from Telemiracle down to the local bingo, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we volunteer. We get out. We help our community, and we 

make sure that the community thrives. 

 

I touch base on a couple of other things. On the Ronald 

McDonald House, I had a tour of that. And I think this is 

something that affects everybody. Within Saskatoon we have an 

addition to the Ronald McDonald House. I just went on a tour 

of it, and what an impressive building. And this facility isn’t 

being used by people in Saskatoon. Very rarely. It’s being used 

by people in the North, South, East, and West. All over the 

province, people come in to Ronald McDonald House to be able 

to relax. They have everything from people staying there for 

over a year and a half to people that’ll come in just for a day 

pass, that their child is in the hospital and they just need to get 

out, breathe, have a nap, rest while their child is being taken 

care of.  

 

And the work that Tammy Forrester and the group at Ronald 

McDonald House are doing are absolutely fabulous. I got a tour 

of the rooms. I got a tour of the facilities. They have everything 

there from a games room for teens with an Xbox and a 

PlayStation, and whatever else that those kind of types of games 

are, to a playroom for the kids. They have an indoor and 

outdoor play area. They have a craft room. It’s just absolute 

fabulous. 

 

They have a room with literally a tree in it. They had this tree 

that they had to cut down for part of the expansion, and it’s got 

to be at least four feet around. They took it, cut it into pieces, 

brought it down, and put it into a special area. That’s when the 

kids get to leave, when it’s their last day, they get to go into the 

special room, and they have fake grass on there. They get to 

climb up the tree and then they get the real surprises. They open 

up the next door and it’s the toy room of all the toys that have 

been donated to Ronald McDonald House. And they can pick 

whatever toy they want. 

 

And the joy that they say happens when that kid gets to pick a 

toy, whether it’s their brother or sister in the hospital or it’s 

them themselves that have just got out, and they come over and 

get to pick a toy, that’s their way of saying that yes, this is 

behind me. And I hope that they understand all of the volunteer 

hours that went into that. The parents do, and I think the 

children do as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would be remiss, as the Leader of the Opposition seemed to be 

hammering on us a little bit today about spending, which we 

can’t understand or I can’t understand personally, is we’re 

spending $35 million on a contract to save over 60. I don’t 

know why they don’t understand that math, but sometimes as 

people . . . And maybe they don’t know this because maybe not 

too many of them have actually run a business or been involved 

in anything, but as a business owner and people that understand 

on this side of the House, when we talk, sometimes you have to 

spend money to save money. And that’s just the way it is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. On the other side of the House, they didn’t get 

that. They really didn’t. 

 

And the Minister of the Economy started touching on this a 

little bit in question period, and he of course has been around 

that he knows these facts. I have to read them off the sheet. But 

just for the record, I mean they’re talking about a return on 

investment for $35 million in taxpayers’ . . . I have no problem 

in justifying that we saved $60 million to date and that number 

is going to accumulate. It’s only going to get more and more. 

 

We’ve heard some positive feedbacks, and when I talk to nurses 

and when I talk to people in the hospital, they say it’s great. Not 

everybody likes it and that’s understandable. But when they say 

that things are more efficient, people are getting their surgeries 

done quicker, people are getting in to see the specialists 

quicker, that’s what they care about. They really don’t care 

about what happens behind the scenes. They just want to be 

able to get their treatment, get on the healing process, and move 

forward and get out of the hospital or get out of the treatment 

care centre. They don’t want to be there. They just want the best 

service, the most efficient service that they can possibly get, 

and then move on with their lives. That’s all that they’re 

looking for. 

 

Unfortunately the opposition is stuck on that we can’t do it this 

way. And again I’d be remiss if I didn’t hear the word sensei 15 

times a day. I can’t understand why they can’t get past this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We are looking for outside . . . We’ve been 

doing the same old. We’ve been doing, you know, with 16 

years, put more money in. Throw more money in. Throw more 

money in, higher budget, higher budget. At some point you 

have to stop and say, is this working? Can we do it a better way, 

or shall we just be doing the same old thing that we’ve been 

doing forever? 

 

Increase the budget. That’s what they would do. Just increase 

the budget. Increase taxes. Increase royalties on potash or oil 

and gas so again all of these companies would leave. That’s 

what they would do. They can’t come up with an innovative 

idea. If they came up with one since I’ve been here . . . Three 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been here. I haven’t seen one 

idea come out of the opposition. 

 

I don’t understand why they can’t do some policy. We’re a year 

out from a potential election, and the province is growing. It’s a 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5561 

strong province. But what do they want to do? They want to 

take it back. They want to continue to take it backwards. They 

want to go back to the old days when there was just under 1 

million people here, where businesses didn’t want to invest, and 

it was a sad state for everything. 

 

So let me . . . I just want to run through, and I know this has 

been read into the record probably 100 times and we’ll read it 

100 times more. Here’s a quick list: $15 million lost in Channel 

Lake, not one nickel returned; $2 million in Guyana; $16 

million lost, NST Chicago; $9.4 million lost . . . We had $90.8 

million lost in a BC [British Columbia] telecom company — 

$90 million. We had $10 million lost in Craig Wireless, a 

Manitoba Internet company; $17.2 million lost in Coachman 

Insurance; $35 million lost in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company].  

 

And these are some other ones, and I can’t wrap my head 

around why government would be involved in this. We had two 

— and again it’s not an insignificant amount — $2.42 million 

lost in a pawn shop. How does a government even get involved 

in that? Why are we not looking at what’s . . . highways, 

investing in our schools, investing in taking care of the farmers, 

taking care of all of the people? Why are they investing in . . . 

 

And they talk about investing in an American company with 

John Black. Well I can see right here, they’ve invested in 

Atlanta dot-com, Nashville dot-com. They’ve invested in a 

Guyana . . . I mean Australian stock market gamble, Austar 

Communications. The bingo — again bingo — what the heck 

are we doing in bingo? Why would anybody in any government 

think that we should get involved and start doing bingos? 

Everybody loves bingo, but it’s not something the government 

should be doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So it’s just absolutely sad that we got into all of this as a 

government because I mean the quick total just at the end here 

is a total of $303 million plus. It was the NDP who wasted that 

money. Could you imagine? With that loss they could have 

built the children’s hospital in 2002, one of the things that they 

promised. They promised a health science building. They 

promised all of these things but never did it. But they could 

have done it if they weren’t going on these little investment 

schemes — $300 million. 

 

And you wonder why everybody was bailing out of this 

province like rats off a sinking ship. It was absolutely ludicrous. 

Nobody had any confidence in that government. Nobody had 

any confidence in them, even themselves. They didn’t. It was 

absolutely sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about what . . . I had the honour of 

going down and representing our province at the 

federal-provincial-territorial meetings and talking about some 

things. We talked about Red Seal trades and how we’re going to 

work on making sure that our Red Seal trades across Canada are 

recognized by each other, which is a very important thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But what we also talked about was breaking down some of the 

barriers within Canada that we have from province to province. 

And I know the Premier has talked about this several times. 

How can we make sure that we are doing the best as a country 

and not looking out jurisdictionally in the province? We want to 

make sure because we understand here in Saskatchewan that in 

order for us to grow and develop, we need the provinces around 

us to do that as well. We can’t just do it alone. 

 

I mean first of all we’re landlocked. We are rich in resources, 

but we have to be able to get that product to market. We have to 

work with our counterparts east and west and with our 

counterparts to the south, the Americans. We need to make sure 

that everybody is looking at the same picture, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that we’re trying to maximize the potential within 

Saskatchewan. And that is freer trade. That is making sure that 

we can get our products to market and other provinces can get 

their products to market in the best, cheap, most feasible, and 

safest way to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And one of the other things that we talked about was a skilled 

workforce. And again I’ve been able to meet with the people at 

the trades and training centre, the apprentices, to be able to say, 

how can we move Saskatchewan forward? How can we make 

sure that our trades internally are recognized throughout the 

world? 

 

And we’re working on recognizing immigrants that are coming 

into Saskatchewan; that their accreditation is recognized here; 

that there’s not a huge delay in process, in timing; that we can 

get them in and get them working as fast as possible, doing the 

trade that they do best now, whatever that trade is. And again 

it’s not just all welding and construction. It’s everything from 

nurse, from home care, to whatever it is that they’re skilled in. 

We need to be able to recognize that. So we’re working with 

our counterparts across the country to make that easier for 

people to be able to come into our country and maximize their 

trades. 

 

One of the big things that we’ve done within our government is 

invest in infrastructure. We talked about, my colleague talked 

about the Regina bypass, and we were very excited up in 

Saskatoon to get funding from the provincial government — 

and thank you very much to the Minister of Finance and the 

Minister of Highways — to be able to work on our north bridge. 

We have a south bridge in Saskatoon now we’re working on 

with the federal government on a P3 project. 

 

And I know the NDP . . . Well let me rephrase that. The local 

NDP don’t understand P3s. The NDP in Manitoba do. Their 

federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, does. They all understand the 

benefits of P3s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the provincial NDP 

here don’t. Why? Again because they can’t evolve. They can’t 

move forward. They’re stuck in the past. 

 

We’ve done over $16 billion in a range of capital projects — 

highways, hospital, education, infrastructure — that this 

province was neglected for 16 years. I’ve talked to the teachers. 

I’ve talked to the people in the hospitals. All they got was the 

bare minimum to keep them going. They only got just enough 

to be able to keep them to the next budget cycle. 

 

There was no planning. There was no forethought as to what are 

we going to do two years out? It was like sticking a little pat on 

a leaky roof. Well we’ll just stick a little Band-Aid there, and 



5562 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

we’ll stick a bigger Band-Aid there, and eventually we get this 

infrastructure deficit. Now the whole roof is shot. It was 

probably maybe a $10 fix then, and it’s now $1,000, and in 

proportion to whatever the project is. The cost of everything 

goes up incrementally because they neglected all of this 

infrastructure within our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I want to touch base again on health care. This is near and 

dear to everybody within Saskatchewan. And I want to thank 

the Minister of Health and the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health and the former minister of Rural and Remote Health for 

their keen insight and to be able to look out what’s best for 

Saskatchewan patients. Now that includes a wide variety of 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a whole bunch of things 

that they have to look at. 

 

They have to look at everything from the average person who 

is . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member that I interrupted, I thank him for the opportunity to do 

this. In the gallery we’ve just been joined by Mrs. Edith 

Klassen, and friends and family of hers. She has come from 

Lanigan today and has received the Council of the Federation 

Premier’s Literacy Award, an award that is given for people 

that have promoted literacy. 

 

She has worked tirelessly in Lanigan over the last number of 

years, helping new Canadians not just with literacy and reading 

skills and language skills but also with adapting to living in a 

country where they might not have a driver’s licence and may 

not be able to adapt readily. And these are people that have 

come over under the, some of them, under the immigrant 

nominee program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, firstly I would like to ask members to 

welcome Mrs. Klassen and her family and friends to the 

legislature but also ask all members to congratulate her on 

having won the award. I expect the member opposite may want 

to speak as well. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Again I want to . . . I’m going to wrap things up 

because we’re getting close and I know some of my colleagues 

want to speak on this as well, but I want to be able to thank, 

first of all again, my family at home, but I also want to thank 

my family here, my colleagues here. I want to be able to thank 

them for everything that they have given me and the advice and 

the trust, the friendship, the relationships that I have built over 

the last three years. This is a great group of people to work with 

and to work for, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everything from the 

minister’s office to the staff to the people in caucus. I want to 

be able to thank them for all the help and support that they’ve 

given me. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to close by 

saying that I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne and 

I will not be supporting the amendment. So thank you very 

much for my time today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise in the House to speak in favour of the motion 

regarding the Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, earlier this 

week a number of my colleagues in this legislature and in 

legislatures across Canada have risen and spoken regarding the 

killings of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal 

Nathan Cirillo whose funeral was earlier today. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s commendable that Canadians have risen and 

expressed their horror, their revulsion with this. The outpouring 

of emotion is what makes us Canadians. 

 

Unfortunately terrorism is now something that has come to 

Canada. I note that we’re now in a position where we’re 

looking at revised security in our legislature, and I’m sure that’s 

something that’s being taken place all across Canada. It is 

indeed tragic that that type of process has to take place and that 

we’re now in a position where we have to adapt and consider 

carefully where we want to be as a nation with regard to access 

to what we used to think were buildings that should be open to 

the public as much as is possible. In any event, I have a great 

deal of confidence in the security staff in this building and 

would welcome the process as it goes forward. 

 

We also have, Mr. Speaker, we recognized veterans earlier 

today and we have Veterans Day, Remembrance Day coming 

up on November 11th. People spoke a lot about their own 

families. My father had health issues and was not able to serve 

as an active member of the military. What he did instead — and 

I think a lot of Canadians that did not serve in active service 

chose to do other things — my father went to Thunder Bay and 

worked in an aircraft factory, assembling airplanes that were 

used overseas. And it was something that he took a great deal of 

pride in and at one point took me to a military museum in south 

Texas where he showed me the type of aircraft that he worked 

on the assembly line for and spoke, not just as somebody that 

worked on that, but as somebody that was doing something on 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5563 

behalf of the war effort in both Canada and planes that were 

used by the United States as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a time as well when people thank and make 

comments on their situations in their own constituency. I 

usually do this. I mention my mother who is now 93 years old, 

living in a LutherCare facility in Saskatoon, doing remarkably 

well, in good health. Tells me that she occasionally watches me 

on TV but often presses mute. Also says that she plans to live 

long enough to spend my entire inheritance, and I wish her 

every success in doing that. 

 

My mother-in-law, Mildred Simpson, lives in Rosetown. She 

recently turned 90 years old, and any hope that I had for 

inheriting money from that side of the family appears to be not 

going well as well because she has recently purchased, not that 

long ago, an automobile so that she can drive down to the co-op 

store and continue spending my what should be inheritance 

there. And I wish her great success in that endeavour as well. 

 

I should, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank my constituency assistant, 

Gordon Rutten, who is part of my in-house recycling . . . 

[inaudible] . . . I’m joking about this. But he is past the age of 

70, so he’s passed where he’s contributing to the pension plan 

and should be taking it out but continues to work and provides 

great service to the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast. And so I 

want to thank him and wish him as many years in that office as 

I continue to stay in the legislature because he’s working out 

incredibly well. 

 

I should, Mr. Deputy Speaker, recognize and thank my wife, 

Sandy, who works tirelessly at going to events, making sure 

that I’m doing what I’m supposed to do, and critiquing, very 

aggressively sometimes, my performance or lack of 

performance in the legislature when we go to events. So it’s a 

time where we should all think about our families at home and 

the support and guidance and direction that they give us. And as 

much as we may make jokes, make comments and that, we 

would not be able to do what we do without the support of our 

families. 

 

I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that this is Halloween week coming 

up this weekend and that we have a growing number of people 

planning Halloween parties, Halloween functions. I want to 

commend the staff at the Legislative Assembly for doing their 

best to do Halloween costumes. How do you decorate a dome? 

Well I guess you decorate it as an inland wheat terminal. So 

they’ve done a remarkably good job of doing that. I see that 

they will have likely railcars here coming. Anyway, pardon my 

poor humour at that. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, talk a little bit about our province, 

which in my view is the best province. We have seen some 

great things happen. Over the last number of years we’ve seen 

record high population, record low unemployment, record 

investments. In my home community of Saskatoon, we see a 

number of projects under way thanks to those record 

investments. 

 

We have a state-of-the-art children’s hospital supported by our 

government’s investment of $235 million. Over $155 million to 

date for a number of school projects, including announcing 

brand new P3 joint-use elementary schools in Rosewood, 

Evergreen, Stonebridge, and also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Leader of the Opposition’s constituency, Hampton Village, 

which sadly and oddly was not supported by the Leader of the 

Opposition who indicated that he did not want a P3 elementary 

joint-use school in his constituency. And I think that’s 

something that probably the constituents in his constituency 

should probably be made aware of, that their MLA did not 

support this joint-use P3 school for them. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And it’s something that’s very much needed. There’s rapid 

growth in that area of the city. And, Mr. Speaker, regardless of 

what the member opposite wants or doesn’t want, we are going 

to build that P3 joint-use school in his vicinity because we 

know what his constituents want. He may not know but we 

certainly do, and we’re going to go ahead and do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have in Saskatoon a north commuter 

bridge announced. It will have an estimated $250 million cost, 

and we’re going ahead with that process as well because the 

rapid growth in Saskatoon is making for some real traffic issues 

and we want to be able to support our city. Those are just a 

handful of examples. 

 

In order to continue making investments in infrastructure in our 

province, our government needs to make sure that we have 

skilled workers. That’s why we have committed to harmonizing 

labour standards between our New West partners. It’s why we 

have committed to increasing the number of adult basic 

education training seats, and why we are boosting the number 

of apprenticeship seats. We need to do what we can to recruit 

and retain skilled workers. This Speech from the Throne 

provides for that. 

 

Our government has taken a number of steps to support 

workplaces across this province. Earlier this year The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act was proclaimed and despite 

fearmongering from the members opposite, that piece of 

legislation spelled good news for Saskatchewan workers. The 

Act provides for something that was called for . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I hear the member, I hear the member from 

Saskatoon sort of chirping from his seat. 

 

The member opposite has said, he’s wanted minimum wage and 

he’s talked about The Minimum Wage Act, something that 

hasn’t existed in our province since 1969. But now, Mr. 

Speaker, we have The Saskatchewan Employment Act, which 

calls for indexing of the minimum wage, something that has 

never been done in our province. 

 

The member opposite went on at great length about wanting to 

have a minimum wage Act. I don’t know where he was in the 

summer of ’69, whether he was watching the moon landing or 

watching Woodstock on TV, but that was the year that the NDP 

did away with The Minimum Wage Act. We now have it 

embodied in The Saskatchewan Employment Act where it can 

be . . . [inaudible] . . . and the member opposite knows it’s a 

good thing. And I want to encourage him to get out and tell his 

constituents what a great thing The Saskatchewan Employment 

Act and indexing of the minimum wage are. And I know that he 

will because I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he believes in it and 

he is very supportive of that. 



5564 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, we also have allowed for modified work 

arrangements to allow for more flexibility for workers, banking 

of overtime hours, increased accountability for unionized 

workers, improving the essential services process to ensure 

essential public services are being provided and collective 

agreements can be reached. It provides for additional leave 

provisions such as leave for citizenships or parental leave. It 

also creates safer workplaces, increasing fines under 

occupational health and safety, requiring a prime contractor to 

be designated on job sites, allowing summary offence tickets to 

be done. 

 

I would be remiss if I did not thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 

employers and employers who are working tirelessly to 

improve our safety records. We are making great progress but, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still have an unacceptably high injury 

rate in our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go to sessions regularly with the member 

opposite who I regard as a friend and a colleague because we 

both believe in better worker safety. And we all go out and we 

listen to the same things, and we know that it’s something as a 

province we have to do. And I thank him for his continuing 

support in that, and I wish he would support the Speech from 

the Throne as well because there’s great things in this Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also provides for a stronger education 

system. This Speech from the Throne is all about students. It’s 

all about the things that we need for our students. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the one thing we need to do is focus on putting 

the student first. We talk about schools. We talk about a lot of 

other things. We talk about testing. But the most important 

thing we have to do is to focus on the students. 

 

Over the past year, Patricia Prowse and Russ Mirasty embarked 

on a province-wide student-first consultation. They conducted 

over 120 engagement sessions that involved nearly 1,000 

students, parents, caregivers, and teachers from across the 

province. The feedback that they received was insightful and 

honest and it helped shape our system. We will do everything 

we can to continue to put the student first. That’s why this fall 

our government will be introducing legislation to ensure the 

safety of all students in the province by creating a new 

regulatory body for teachers in our province. 

 

As I mentioned, this is about the safety of our students, but it’s 

also about the integrity of our teaching profession in the 

province. Teachers are professional. This legislation will 

provide Saskatchewan teachers with the same authority and 

responsibility as other self-regulated professions in the 

province. We thank them. We recognize and appreciate the 

challenge and commitment they make to our children and to our 

students. 

 

We know that our teachers are hard-working, dedicated 

professionals who work to put the student first every day. As a 

government, our job is to ensure that the education system is 

well supported. That means having the foundations in place so 

students can learn, and having the necessary resources available 

so the teachers and staff can support student learning. 

 

We have made record investments in our classrooms. We’ve 

increased capital spending by — and I hope the members 

opposite are listening — by 268 per cent. Forty new schools 

have been built or are in the planning stages. In contrast, the 

members opposite closed, during their tenure, 176 schools, on 

average about one school a month. If you lived in one of their 

areas, you would not want it. You would be living in fear for 

what was going to happen if you were the one that had to go 

down that month. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see first-hand 

some of the new facilities. This fall we’ve opened new schools 

in Swift Current, Regina, and White City. In the next several 

months more new schools will be opened in Lloydminster and 

Saskatoon. Major renovations will see like-new schools reopen 

in La Ronge and Lumsden. 

 

We were left with a $1.2 billion deficit in school capital when 

we formed government. This is as compared to a dismal legacy 

that was left by the members opposite of a $1.2 billion deficit. 

We have come a long way, but we know we have more work to 

do and we want to continue to rise to the challenge. 

 

Beyond the bricks and mortar, operating funding for education 

has increased. For school divisions we’ve provided an increase 

of over 26 per cent since November of 2007. The number of 

students enrolling in our schools continues to increase. This 

presents challenges, but they are good challenges to have. 

 

In the coming weeks we will have this year’s school enrolment 

for the province confirmed. We are already hearing preliminary 

numbers from many school divisions who indicate that their 

enrolments are up and are continuing to grow up. We have over 

$19 million budgeted to support these enrolments. 

 

In just seven years we have accomplished a great deal to 

improve our education system, as opposed to closing 176 

schools, neglecting the schools that they didn’t close. There was 

a horrible capital deficit that’s there. They drove over 35,000 

students out of our province. These are people that are now 

living in Alberta and elsewhere. Thankfully a lot of them are 

choosing to come back. They’ve underfunded . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . They’d need a lot of school buses. He talks 

about school buses. They’d need a school train to take out all 

the students they drove out of the province. Mr. Speaker, I am 

so glad that those students are now starting to come back as 

opposed to leaving. It was a sad day when they were in 

government and the only thing you saw was tail lights leaving. 

Because when they were going to build schools, they needed to 

build them in Calgary or Edmonton because that’s where our 

students were going to. We’ve got great students and they’re 

coming back to Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have come a long ways. Under our 

government, the total budget line for education has grown by 

over 88 per cent. We’ve increased operating funding by 26.5 

per cent, increased capital spending — and get this number — 

by 268 per cent. Increased child care spaces, 53 per cent. 

Increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per cent. 

Increased early child intervention funding by 40 per cent. 

Increased operating grants to libraries by over 45 per cent. 

 

We’ve undertaken a historic consultative process called 

student-first where teachers’, parents’, and students’ voices 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5565 

were heard. We’ve accepted the first ever education sector 

strategic plan created by and for this sector by all the school 

divisions working together, coming together, supporting it in 

conjunction with STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], in 

conjunction with all of the major sector partners. Mr. Speaker, 

this is going to be . . . was a great Speech from the Throne. It 

provides and will continue to provide supports for education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by thanking all of the members in 

the legislature on both sides of the House who continue to 

support and do good work for their constituents and for the 

people of our province. If not for the people in this legislature, 

the citizens would not have a direct voice and, Mr. Speaker, my 

colleagues in the legislature on both sides work hard and are 

committed to doing the best they can for the citizens of our 

province and I want to recognize what all of the MLAs do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Speech from the Throne, this 

particular Speech from the Throne is something that I feel very 

proud of. I’ve looked at the things that are in there and I want to 

encourage the members opposite to sit down and take a long, 

careful look at the Speech from the Throne and decide whether 

this is something they should vote for. There’s only nine of 

them. They know they’re not going to be able to defeat it, so 

why don’t they look at it and say, maybe there’s some things in 

here we like? Why don’t we do something different? We’ll vote 

for this. 

 

In particular, I would say that to the Leader of the Opposition, 

because the Leader of the Opposition would then be able to go 

back to his constituents and say, oh I was wrong before when I 

didn’t support the P3 school that was coming into the 

constituency. He’d be able to stand up and say, I’ve changed 

my mind. I saw the light and I want this school for you. I want 

this school for the constituents. Rather than what he’s doing 

now is blindly saying and stubbornly refusing to accept that his 

constituents want and need a school. They deserve a school. 

They’re continuing to move there. We want those people to be 

well educated. We’re going to do it for them, with or without 

them. But I’d sure like to give them the opportunity to come 

along with us on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the Speech from the Throne. I 

will not be voting for the amendment and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to encourage the members opposite to withdraw the 

amendment. It’s something that is rather pointless. I think they 

should just say, no, we’re not going to do it; we want to support 

it. It’s the right thing to do. It’s the right thing for 

Saskatchewan. It’s the right thing for our citizens. Mr. Speaker, 

I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 

Remote Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

an honour to enter into this, the debate, the Speech from the 

Throne for 2014-15. And as has been customary on I think both 

sides of the House when entering in this debate, specifically on 

this year, in this time, I really believe that it’s my duty as well 

to thank those in the protective services — our RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] and police services, fire services, but 

specifically those in our armed forces. And in light of the 

happenings of last week in Montreal and in Ottawa, it really is a 

touching time of year, specifically because of Remembrance 

Day. But this year, I think many around the country will be also 

remembering those that gave their lives recently on home soil. 

 

As was referred to by a few of my colleagues on this side of the 

House as well, an exciting announcement today. The military 

heritage legacy project that the Hon. Minister of Parks, Culture 

and Sport saw to this morning, this afternoon, stories of courage 

referred to earlier by some of the members. 

 

Reg Harrison, a World War II bomber pilot, now 91, 92 years 

old, survived four crashes during his bomber command. I had a 

bit of a kinship with him. I saw a little excerpt of his story. 

Seeing that he trained in Yorkton where I’m from, the 

constituency I represent, and connection to that same airport, 

aerodrome back in the World War II days, is still active today 

as our municipal airport and I happen to fly out of quite 

regularly today. And some of the pictures that were shown in 

his video are reminiscent of what we see today. They’re still 

probably one of the only hangars from the World War II era in 

that kind of condition, still usable, and utilized fully in Yorkton. 

And it is quite touching to hear his story and see his connection 

to my hometown of Yorkton. 

 

But also again bittersweet in the wake of remembering Warrant 

Officer Patrice Vincent and also the funeral of Corporal Nathan 

Cirillo today from Ottawa. So again sort of a bittersweet day in 

that regard. Thank yous to them. 

 

And also, as has many around our side of the House have 

thanked family members, I’m very indebted to my family — 

my wife Leone, my daughters, Katelin who is finishing up her 

fourth year of a RN [registered nurse] program here in the city, 

soon to be practicing nursing in our province, and also my 

daughter Rayanne, newly married just over a year ago, a great 

son-in-law, Austin Krahenbil, and happy to announce publicly 

now that I’m going to be a granddad in April. And so she can 

let me . . . she’s letting me say that publicly now. So I’m a bit 

goofy because it is my first grandchild. Grandma’s really 

excited about it as well. 

 

So looking forward to them helping to grow our province, 

especially in light of the fact that they moved back here from 

Ottawa. They had gone to Ottawa, Austin specifically for his 

training as a geologist on a hockey scholarship, and Rayanne 

working as a hair stylist out in Ottawa, managing a salon out 

there. But happy to report that they’re both back here and living 

in the province and helping to grow our province one at a time. 

So that’s great news. 

 

Also thank you to my colleagues on this side of the House as 

well. We can’t do this job without the support of our colleagues, 

along with the staff back in Yorkton, Lauretta, Ingrid, and 

Rachelle, who have been with me for a number of months and 

years. Also the staff here in Regina, Michael, Selena, Chaelah, 

Brittany, and Ashley as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5533 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5533 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5549 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5562 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Military Heritage Project Launched 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5535 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

 Health Care Providers Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

 The Jam Man 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fleet Expands 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

 Social Housing Development Opens in Prince Albert 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

 New Magnetic Resonance Imaging Unit in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5537 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms for the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5539 

 Search for Chief Executive Officer for Saskatoon Health Region 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5540 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5540 

 Internet Fees for First Nation Schools 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5541 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5541 

 Agreement With Smart Meter Supplier 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5541 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5541 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5542 

 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5542 

 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5542 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5543 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5543 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5548 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5555 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5562 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5565 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


