
























































Hansard: October 27, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5519 
 October 27, 2014 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The hour now being 7 
o’clock, debate will resume on special orders. I recognize the 
member from Regina Dewdney. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Now this evening after, after the supper 
break, I believe when I concluded my comments before that, I 
was talking about the TASCAP [Trades & Skills Construction 
Apprenticeship Program] program at Campus Regina Public, 
how it allows students to have a chance to try the trades. And it 
fits in well with adult basic education, the more seats that are 
coming as indicated in the Throne Speech. 
 
And certainly we see the apprentice seats going up by 300. And 
that number is now at 7,000, an 86 per cent increase, right from 
the Throne Speech from 2007, Mr. Speaker. So we see, because 
of the labour shortage in our province, industry and the 
education sector working together to meet, meet jobs with 
people that are looking to increase their skills and earn higher 
wages and contribute to our province with economic growth. 
 
And certainly again the TASCAP program helps students learn. 
It also provides houses for people to live in. Certainly it’s one 
of the biggest success stories I think of our government. I 
remember a few years ago the vacancy rate here in Regina was 
under 1 per cent and that’s certainly a tough situation for people 
trying to find accommodations, people coming to Saskatchewan 
to work. And right now I believe it’s in that two and a half per 
cent range. Three is considered the optimal vacancy rate. 
Province-wide it’s 3.3 per cent, and that’s higher than the 
national average. So we’ve seen accommodation improve a lot 
here in our province, and that’s a good thing. 
 
And one thing that was quite surprising to me, listening and 
looking over the Throne Speech, since ’06 the number of rental 
housing units started isn’t — I think two times would be pretty 
good, four times, maybe even 10 times, that would be a large 
amount — it’s actually 34 times higher than 2006. So that’s 
some good work. The Ministry of Social Services, Sask 
Housing Corp, Habitat for Humanity, etc. — all those agencies 
and groups are working hard in our province. And certainly it 
was acute here in Regina. We’re seeing progress made, so that’s 
very good. 
 
Like in the Throne Speech there was some reference to free 
trade, the CETA [comprehensive economic and trade 
agreement], the trade agreement nationally by the feds with 
South Korea. And certainly that’s going to be, when our 

province is an exporting province, we have what the world 
needs, and those will open up that flow of goods and services 
and money coming into our province. And certainly that’s good 
for consumers as well, for goods that they produce coming the 
other way. So certainly it’s a win-win situation, and that’s good 
for consumers and our exporters. And certainly to be able to do 
that all across Canada, certainly I think that was part of the 
vision of the Fathers of Confederation. Certainly more work to 
do in that way, but I think Saskatchewan’s taken a leadership in 
that area. So that’s as well good to see. 
 
I notice also in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker — and it’s been 
in the last few things I’ve talked about, it’s certainly very 
important in my constituency — is the Regina bypass, again a 
very large infrastructure project for our province. And certainly 
that’s ongoing. I believe there are three bidders that have been 
announced publicly that are competing for the project, and 
that’s certainly a good thing. 
 
Now it’s interesting that the last several petitions presented by 
the member from Rosemont, I notice that he is, you know, he’s 
worrying about truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue West. And 
certainly that’s certainly an issue and it’s an issue in my 
constituency — more and more truck traffic coming into the 
Global Transportation Hub — but it’s interesting that he gives 
this government credit for that. And certainly there are 
challenges with growth, and we’re working hard to meet those 
challenges, but I think having extra truck traffic is a good thing 
for our city. You know, it certainly, like it is, it causes traffic 
congestion, but certainly it’s many more jobs. 
 
There’s more products coming into our province. The Global 
Transportation Hub is obviously a key to that. And we’re 
working very hard on the P3 [public-private partnership]. I 
know the members opposite don’t like to hear that word, 
certainly. But it’s interesting, he brings . . . He gives this 
government credit for doing that. Usually on this side of the 
House we give credit to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan who helped create all the jobs and the industry 
that happened in our province, but if he wants to give credit to 
this side of the House, then that’s just fine. 
 
Certainly, and I believe in his Throne Speech the member from 
Rosemont also said this is one of those easy solutions that 
government should find for it. Well, I respectfully disagree with 
that. It’s a big project. It’s over $1 billion. You have to acquire 
land. You have to do all sorts of planning. 
 
And certainly, you know, that makes me wonder, with the 
leadership over there, if they call the Regina bypass project just 
a simple solution, an easy thing to do, I challenge that member 
when he’s talking to — and he should advocate for his 
constituents just like we all would do — but I want him to make 
sure that he tells his constituents that he’s against a P3 project 
for the bypass. The reason for that is it’s taking at least a dozen 
years off the time it takes to put that project through, Mr. 
Speaker. If it was just a regular government procurement, each 
overpass, each section would be done individually. When you 
do it with a P3, it can happen much more quickly. I believe I 
have heard it is in the area of four years instead of 15-plus 
years. 
 



5520 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

So he can tell his constituents that he wants the truck traffic off, 
but under his plan it would be at least a dozen years into the 
future. So that is something that . . . You know, we hear that 
rhetoric from the members opposite that you can’t try things 
here in Saskatchewan. You see that all the time. You can’t do 
that here, I think is their attitude on a lot of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I think of liquor stores, you know, it has been done 
without the government being involved in the retailing in other 
places — all over Canada, all over the world, all right. But to 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] you just can’t do that here, all 
right. You know, Willow Park here in Regina, there’s a couple 
open in Saskatoon. And I haven’t been to Saskatoon lately, but I 
know here in Regina the apocalypse hasn’t come. It’s not that 
big of a deal, certainly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, the other thing they dismiss out of hand, private 
clinics to do surgeries, Mr. Speaker. The P3s, right off the table 
even though the waste water treatment plant in Regina here is 
getting done. I believe it is saving $43.5 million dollars. 
Forty-three and one-half million dollars savings just doing it 
through the P3 model, Mr. Speaker. There was very good, 
strong competition, and so because of that there was a lot of 
cost savings. And certainly we’ve talked before about free 
trade, the pipeline, carbon capture. The idea, I think, from the 
members opposite? You just can’t do those things. They’re 
stuck in the late ’70s. That’s not available here. 
 
I remember when I was a kid, Mr. Speaker, when I watched 
cartoons in the morning, or I was reading a comic book, and 
there was always, always a disclaimer at the bottom: not 
available in Canada. Not available in Canada. And that was 
kind of frustrating. And now I think from the members opposite 
you get that idea. Just not available here. We can’t do it. We’re 
not . . . It’s not available. We shouldn’t do that. I think that’s 
old Saskatchewan thinking, Mr. Speaker. That’s the old 
Saskatchewan. The new Saskatchewan, we can try things. We 
can innovate. We can compete. We can do things that other 
places do and society won’t collapse. 
 
So I mean it’s not that surprising, not that surprising from the 
other side, when all they do is . . . They’re just negative about 
ideas, new ideas for our province, new ideas for the province 
going forward. I think if you have no ideas to begin with like 
they have over there — no ideas, no plan — you probably 
won’t like somebody else’s. 
 
So again we ask those members opposite . . . I think the 
member from Centre, earlier in his speech he mentioned about 
there was a few things in the Throne Speech that he wanted 
more details on. He wanted more details. What’s the fine print? 
Now of course throne speeches, you’re not going to have 
hundreds of pages of exact documents. You’re going to have 
your vision of where . . . and some announcements of course. 
But we’d love to hear any sort of policy or thoughts about what 
they would do, how they would do it differently, and how they 
would pay for it. That might be nice to see. It might be 
something to see. The people of Saskatchewan be able to see 
what they thought. 
 
So the only thing I’ve really heard in the last little while from 
our friends opposite is a couple of sort of hackneyed slogans 
that are pretty empty. I’ve heard, more eggs in more baskets. 

More eggs, more baskets. I’m not sure what that means. Maybe 
that was brought out around Easter time, Mr. Speaker, but we’d 
like to know exactly what that means. Is that part of your plan? 
Is that part of your official platform? Are you going to go to the 
people with more eggs, more baskets? Okay, fine. What does 
that exactly mean? Let’s have some details. 
 
And what I’ve also heard from the Leader of the Opposition, 
one of his little slogans he likes to say, looks in the camera and 
he says, for me, politics, it’s not about the province doing well. 
It’s about people doing well. 
 
Well that’s true obviously, but I think it’s so obvious a 
statement that it doesn’t really mean anything. Of course it’s 
about the people. Everything about this document is about 
people, right? We don’t make highways to cover up weeds. We 
make highways for it to be safe to travel in our province, for 
people to get our goods from place A to place B, from Regina 
to Saskatoon, right? So it’s so obvious. That’s like the coach of 
the Riders saying to the Rider nation, he says, football for me is 
just not about the Riders doing well. It’s about the team doing 
well. Of course that’s what it’s for. That’s what it means. The 
member from Arm River, if he said, farming for me isn’t about 
the crops doing well. It’s about canola doing well. Of course, 
that’s patently obvious. That’s what it’s about. 
 
Everything in this document is about people, okay? We don’t 
have the poverty reduction strategy just to put out press releases 
or what have you or what it might be. Everything in here is 
about the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This building was built by the people of Saskatchewan. The 
institutions we inherited from our forefathers — that was 
people. How do we help people? How do we progress in our 
society? So of course it’s always about people. So that’s all 
we’ve gotten from the NDP is some empty rhetoric. We’re 
waiting to hear some concrete examples. How would you pay 
for it? What would you do? What would you do differently 
rather than just simply criticize the government all the time? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, coming up here on Friday is 
Halloween. And a lot of times, I guess, in my family and all 
over the neighbourhood, it’s a lot of fun that night for the kids 
of course. And people decorate their yards with what? Witches 
and ghosts and goblins and mummies and all those sorts of 
things, right, for the kids to have fun. Give them a little scare. 
 
Now but with the NDP fearmongering, I kind of wondered, I 
wonder what they would decorate their houses with to scare 
little kids to come up. And I imagine maybe the member from 
Rosemont, he might have a picture of a P3 project, maybe a 
highway or a waste water treatment plant. That might scare the 
people. The member from Lakeview, he might have a Texas 
company. It might be a Texas company, not just a Texas 
company that we buy things from, a good . . . What really might 
scare people is . . . Well I’ll get to that in a second. But one of 
the members, they might have liquor bottles. They might have 
liquor bottles not sold by the government. That might really 
scare the kids coming through. So again what we see from the 
NDP is scare tactics. 
 
At my place I might put up a few signs that would really scare 
the kids and adults that are chaperoning those youngsters that 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5521 

come through the neighbourhood. Certainly I think they’d get 
scared by the NDP’s policy of the past — higher taxes, the 
litany of failed investments in other areas. I might put a couple 
potholes on my driveway. I might close down a bunch of 
schools and a bunch of buildings. I might represent that 
somehow. And so those are certainly . . . I might put a few 
black potatoes from SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] in my front yard. That might scare the 
kids. I might even put a spectre of Dwain Lingenfelter on my 
front yard. That would really scare the kids, I think. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a little fun at the end of my speech there 
about things that are certainly . . . that might scare the kids as 
they’re going out through their Halloween. But certainly I’m 
going to wrap up my comments. I could go on and on about all 
the great things that keep our Saskatchewan strong in this 
document, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to go ahead and support 
this Throne Speech that keeps our people and our province 
strong. And certainly the scariest thing out there this Halloween 
or any other time is the members opposite forming government 
again, so let’s not let that happen. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
going to be a hard act to follow, talking about scaring people on 
Halloween. 
 
So it is with great pleasure that I rise today in the House to 
discuss the Throne Speech. So I’d like to start off and thank my 
family, particularly my daughter, and just thank her for the 
patience and definitely sacrifices that she has to make for me to 
be here. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, Adrienne, for 
all her hard work and for . . . definitely she goes above and 
beyond for our constituents. And also I’d like to thank Kirsten, 
Shelley, and Tennille from my office in Central Services, which 
is a little bit of an adjustment now that I have to deal with four 
people instead of just one, but definitely I appreciate all their 
hard work and their dedication to their job and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituents for allowing me this 
opportunity to represent them in the House. 
 
So with all my speeches or any kind of speeches that I do, I 
always dig for quotes and try and find something to resonate 
with something that I’m speaking about. So this one is from 
Mahatma Gandhi and it’s “The best way to find yourself is to 
lose yourself in the service of others.” 
 
And I think this is very timely when we talk about the men and 
women of our armed forces. I’d like to thank them who put 
their life on the line every day to ensure our freedoms and join 
my colleagues in expressing my condolences to the families of 
Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent. 
As a former military wife I realize the sacrifices that these men 
and women make, as well as the sacrifices that their families 

have to endure, especially those who go overseas for an 
extended tour and don’t see their families for months and 
sometimes years. I’d like to also thank the different branches of 
emergency services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Democracy is a beautiful thing and I feel very fortunate to live 
in this country and am quite proud to call myself Canadian. And 
I realize the efforts and sacrifices the veterans have made in the 
past to ensure our freedoms. So I’m very proud to be Canadian 
and that I have an opportunity to live in a country where I have 
access to education, and encourage my daughter to pursue her 
dreams without any kind of legislative constraints. And she’s 
free to marry whomever she wishes, Mr. Speaker, so I’m very 
cognizant of that. There are women and girls in this world who 
aren’t afforded those rights. 
 
So it gives me great pleasure to speak about the great things 
going on in our province right now. And I have seen this 
province grow and prosper over the last few years and, you 
know, being born and raised in Saskatchewan and just seeing 
the different changes from when I was younger to now, and I’m 
very honoured to be part of this government, making a 
difference. 
 
So I was recently appointed as Minister of Central Services by 
Premier Wall, on June 5th of this year. I know I have a lot of 
work ahead of me and I take pride in my work, both within my 
constituency and within government. There is still a lot that we 
as a government need to do. And we have made many changes 
already and we continue to work hard daily. And as a newly 
appointed minister, you know, there’s a little bit of a learning 
curve for this summer, and this year was a year for big changes 
for me. I’m responsible for both the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company corporation as well as Central 
Services. 
 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] offers the 
residents of Saskatchewan bus service as well as freight 
services to communities across Saskatchewan, which is a very 
important service to our rural communities within 
Saskatchewan. STC has bus terminals in Regina, Saskatoon, 
and Prince Albert, and this agency network reaches 
communities throughout the province. STC continues to 
enhance amenities, provide expanded online ticketing, and 
deliver key promotions and sales to encourage ridership growth. 
I would encourage all of us to ride the bus and let STC do the 
driving. 
 
So as Minister of Central Services my duties include the 
day-to-day operations of all government owned and leased 
buildings, which is another learning curve for me. We currently 
own 457 buildings and lease 230 buildings and we maintain 
244, and are always ensuring these buildings are up to code. 
 
We are currently working on the rollout of Windows 7 and had 
great success with this program so far. 
 
So Central Services also has a wide variety of 
government-owned vehicles that are used within our ministries 
and other government entities. 
 
The Ministry of Central Services provides a wide array of 
internal government services to over 12,000 government 



5522 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

employees. When I first got appointed as minister I absolutely 
had no idea what this entailed. Its main lines of businesses are 
human resources, accommodations, transportation, and IT 
[information technology] services. 
 
So Central Services was also pleased to announce the launch of 
a new SaskTenders website. The redesigned SaskTenders site 
will be home to all procurement opportunities for executive 
government and Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. In addition 
to the municipal, academic, school, and health sectors operated 
through Ministry of Central Services, the SaskTenders website 
facilitates government purchases from the private sector and the 
procurement of billions of dollars in goods and services each 
year. Mr. Speaker, similar sites are available for procurement 
opportunities in Alberta and British Columbia as part of the 
New West Partnership. The New West Partnership allows 
Saskatchewan businesses greater access to tender opportunities 
across Western Canada. 
 
So part of the work that my ministry is able to do is echoing, 
you know, the Throne Speech, that business needs to continue 
to grow, at the same time strengthening our province. And I’m a 
big proponent of this. I have six years of business school. I have 
an undergraduate degree in business as well as an M.B.A. 
[Master of Business Administration]. But as the new minister, 
I’m also learning and applying that knowledge. 
 
So Saskatchewan’s small businesses employ 31.7 per cent of 
our workforce and pay over $6.2 billion in wages and salary 
each year. And since 2003, they’ve created more than 19,000 
new jobs. And this side of the House has the ambition, desire, 
and the right approach to continue to keep Saskatchewan strong 
and to foster that growth, and we want to see all the people of 
Saskatchewan benefit from this growth and strength, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We all know that this strength and this record population 
growth, it didn’t start under the NDP government. We’re 
reminded of what we always hear about the dark days under the 
NDP, when population growth was stagnant and our best 
exports were our young people. And I was one of those young 
people who left, but once I had children, well children — my 
daughter and my niece — I definitely wanted to come home and 
it was a good time to come home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we are now talking about doubling our exports by 2020 and 
introducing our new-growth tax incentive. And this will help 
businesses create new jobs while boosting their sales outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So according to Stats Canada, the number of people living in 
this province was 1.125410 on July 1st, 2014. And the 
government set a goal in 2007 to increase the population by 
100,000 people within 10 years, and we’ve done it in six. And 
we have set a new goal, so 1.2 million by 2020, and I am 
confident we’ll be able to reach and exceed that goal as well. 
This rapid growth demonstrates that we have a strong economy, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I go visit family a lot in the southern 
US [United States] and I like to tell our story, and they like to 
hear it actually. So it’s definitely something to be proud of. 
 
So let’s consider what the NDP thought of the growth and 
strength in our province. You know, former NDP MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] Doreen Hamilton, she 
said the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase our population 
by 100,000 in 10 years is more wishful thinking than 
statistically attainable. And for me to have gone away and then 
come back and actually have lived in a city of 8 million and 
seeing what that does to the tax base and the growth, definitely 
it was the right idea. 
 
So in the last 16 years . . . You know, I always hear from 
members opposite how great it was under the NDP government. 
And I’ve heard from public and even family, and for those that 
they claim to represent, a different story, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, they talk about health care a lot, but they seem to forget 
that they’re the ones who closed the Plains hospital and that 
they closed 52 rural hospitals, they closed 100 schools, and that 
1,200 nursing home beds were shut down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to speak about some personal experiences with our 
health care system in the last year because I’ve experienced 
first-hand, and I’m sure others have, many others in 
Saskatchewan who are dealing with a sick parent or a sick 
spouse or somebody very close to them that’s ill. And my 
experience was with palliative care within the Saskatoon area. 
We did have a palliative care bed for my mother at St. Paul’s 
for a while but we wanted to bring her home and have more 
personalized care for her, as well as home care nurses. And her 
support team were absolutely amazing. So I have nothing but 
good things to say about the people who choose this profession 
and who basically make terminal patients comfortable in their 
last few months or weeks of their life. 
 
So my mom lost her battle with colon cancer in early 
September, and I was very fortunate to spend time with her this 
summer before she was called home. But the nurses who cared 
for her and her doctors were absolutely amazing. I have nothing 
but good things to say about our health care system. The health 
care supports that my mom received were exemplary, and as 
Canadians we are fortunate to have the system that we have in 
place. And definitely health care in Saskatchewan has its 
challenges but they really, when it comes to addressing some of 
the issues that are going on with health, you know, people’s 
health today, we definitely . . . I think we should be thankful 
and grateful about the systems that we have. 
 
So this Throne Speech only reiterates this government’s focus 
on continuing to plan for growth and keeping this province 
strong. We will continue to take the right steps, Mr. Speaker, to 
encourage economic growth. And with economic growth then 
we do have the means to put money into the health care system, 
as well as our social services system, as well as our education 
system. And definitely I think, especially with what’s gone on 
last week, we should definitely be thankful and grateful for 
what we have and what our veterans do and what our Armed 
Forces do every day in order for us to afford to live in the 
Western society that we do. 
 
So you know, exciting things have been happening in 
Saskatchewan. The first new potash mine to be built in the 
province in 40 years — what other state or province can let 
people, you know, can declare that? It’s actually quite amazing. 
Uranium production is up. Manufacturers are on track to ship 
record amount of product this year. Introduction of a 
new-growth tax incentive, continuing to build and strengthen 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5523 

relationships by participating in trade missions to key 
international markets and reducing international trade barriers, 
and making trade within our country more open. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So through the New West Partnership, Saskatchewan is 
working with Alberta and British Columbia to harmonize 
labour standards and occupational health and safety regulations, 
provide further support to local businesses. The Ministry of 
Central Services has, you know, we have launched the new 
SaskTenders website, which we’re very proud of. 
 
And we have a plan for economic growth that builds on the 
strength of Saskatchewan’s people, resources, and innovation to 
sustain Saskatchewan’s place among Canada’s economic 
leaders. We need to continuously invest in our economy, 
infrastructure, skilled workforce, and education of our children. 
So our goal as a government is to continue working hard for the 
people of our province, listen to their concerns, and do all we 
can to ensure Saskatchewan continues to move forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting time in our province, with 
unemployment hitting an all-time low of 3.5 per cent, well 
below the national average of 6.8 per cent, and Saskatchewan’s 
unemployment rate remains the lowest in Canada for the 22nd 
consecutive month. You know, that’s definitely something to be 
celebrated. So you know, we will never look back, and we will 
continue embracing the strong economic growth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support the Throne Speech and not the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much. It’s a great pleasure to 
stand in my place today and reply to the Speech from the 
Throne that was brought down last week. 
 
As many members have done, I think it’d be fitting if I also did 
recognize and give condolence to the family and friends of 
Corporal Nathan Cirillo, who was killed while standing guard at 
the National War Memorial in Ottawa, and also recognize 
Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and the fellow officer who was 
attacked in Quebec on the previous Monday. These were 
senseless and cowardly attacks, and it’s very unfortunate that 
that happened. 
 
I think we have to recognize the House of Commons 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Kevin Vickers, who, if I understand the story 
about the Sergeant-at-Arms, he was a retired RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] officer who had never discharged 
his firearm in all those years as an RCMP officer. And he was 
the gentleman who was at the right place and the right time and 
took down the assailant that did the attack in Ottawa. So thank 
you to him very much for what he did doing his duty. 
 
But it’s a very wonderful thing that we have people like him in 
our House of Commons and in our legislatures around the 
country. You know we have to thank our own Sergeant-at-Arms 
and the security people who protect us every day here in this 
building and do a wonderful job, and they keep you very, very 

safe. 
 
Biggar constituency, like the province, is very strong. There’s 
just a number of great things that are happening in Biggar 
constituency like there is in many constituencies around the 
province. And you know, I’ll speak about the highways, but in 
Biggar constituency we have a number of major highways 
crossing through the constituency, and they’re all in very good 
shape. 
 
I would have to also admit that many of the thin membrane 
highways have problems. We have a pilot project in place that a 
couple of rural municipalities are taking part in. And you know, 
the problems with the thin membranes have been exacerbated 
by the wet weather that we’ve had, and our maintenance crews 
have done a very good job. Always could be done quicker in 
filling the potholes, but for the most part, highways in the 
constituency are very good. 
 
Look at the town of Biggar, the great things that are happening. 
Prairie Malt Ltd. now is bringing back their production up to 
100 per cent. They’ve been down to 50 per cent for some time, 
and so they’ve announced that they’re going to hire seven new 
employees and bring back the production to 100 per cent, which 
is very good news. They’re a major employer in the town of 
Biggar. 
 
Other employers in town are AGI, which makes tanks for the 
oil field, oil and gas industry. They’re a major employer, and 
very thankful to have them. E-Kay manufacturer makes various 
equipment or adaptions to short-line equipment for augers and 
crop dividers and things like that. So we have a real bustling 
business community in Biggar with all the other businesses, the 
spin-off businesses and many other businesses that are 
operating in the town of Biggar. 
 
These businesses have brought in a number of immigrant 
workers through the nominee program. Got to know many of 
them, especially from the Philippines. They are very productive 
citizens. I know many of them that go to the Catholic church, so 
they fill our church every Sunday and obviously also our 
schools in Biggar, so this is just another part of a strong 
economy in the province and in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
Along with this of course is a booming real estate market. Many 
new homes are being built in Biggar. A new condo 
development has just opened up. Many people have just moved 
into there. And also a new business development being planned 
inside the town of Biggar, so there’s a lot of great things 
happening. 
 
You know, there’s new housing in and around, not just in the 
towns and villages in the constituency but in the rural areas. 
Small holdings, pretty well every small holding has been 
purchased. Some have had to be repaired or revitalized, and 
many new houses have also been built out in the rural areas of 
the constituency. 
 
Another community like Borden, Saskatchewan, who had a 
potential huge flooding issues last year and survived it . . . Quite 
frankly it was very tense for many days. But it cost a lot of 
money to do trenching and water diversion, and PDAP 
[provincial disaster assistance program] and SaskWater had 



5524 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

come through and really helped the village of Borden get 
through their financial costs of the potential flooding. 
 
Borden, like Radisson, like Langham and other communities, 
Asquith, Perdue, Biggar, Delisle, Vanscoy, you know, many of 
the people are commuting from those communities into 
Saskatoon to work. And also many people from Saskatoon 
drive out to these communities to work in schools and in 
businesses as well. So it’s very active in the constituency. 
 
Langham, there’s a proposal to have an oil . . . not an oil, a gold 
processing plant that is being planned. It would be 200 
construction jobs, 100 full-time jobs. We’re hoping that’s going 
to go ahead. That would be a huge economic boom for the town 
of Langham. 
 
They already have a tentative agreement with the Langham 
town council to use their treated sewage water, which would 
reduce the amount of water they would need from the Dalmeny 
aquifer, and also Fortune Minerals has also said that they would 
not have a permanent waste storage facility on site. It’d be 
temporary, and they would find a permanent storage facility 
someplace else. It might not even be in the province. So the 
company has gone a long ways to alleviate some of the 
concerns that people had. And so now it’s in the hands of 
Corman Park, and hopefully that will be approved and 
construction can start soon. 
 
On the provincial front of course, Mr. Speaker, you know, in 
June employment hit a record high of 577,000 people working 
in the province. In June unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 
per cent, the lowest unemployment rate ever in this province. 
Quite amazing. 
 
Of course our province has a balanced budget, and recently 
Moody’s upgraded Saskatchewan’s credit rating to AAA, their 
highest possible rating. That’s an incredible statistic and 
incredible strong performance of the provincial economy. 
 
Saskatchewan exports have increased by 63 per cent. 
Manufactured shipments have climbed by more than 50 per 
cent. 
 
The Saskatchewan population is now at an all-time high of 
1.125 million people, which is incredible, representing an 
increase of 123,000 people in the past seven years. This is 
incredible in many ways, given what the NDP had always said 
about being statistically impossible to grow the province by 1 
per cent and under the Saskatchewan Party government the 
population has grown more than 1 per cent, which is very 
encouraging for the future of the province. 
 
Why are people moving to Saskatchewan? Well obviously 
there’s economic development. There’s things happening in this 
province, you know: a new potash mine being built by K+S, 
Legacy near Bethune; uranium production is increasing; the 
Cameco Cigar Lake mine; Saskatchewan setting new records in 
oil production. The forestry industry’s coming back with seven 
mills now operating in the province and two more expected to 
reopen in 2015. And you know, our province has done things to 
help, and our government will introduce a new-growth tax 
incentive tied to the creation of new jobs by the manufacturing 
processes as they expand their sales outside of Saskatchewan. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our government is also very active 
promoting free trade. It’s a common saying that there’s more 
free trade between countries than there is between provinces. 
And Saskatchewan is leading in this country to break down 
barriers through the New West Partnership and with Canada’s 
Agreement on Internal Trade to break down these barriers so we 
have free-flowing goods and services and people across this 
country so that wherever there’s the economic diversity or 
improvements, that Canadians can move to that area, which is 
generally Saskatchewan and Western Canada, to take advantage 
of the growing economy, a strong, growing economy. Of course 
on the international field, working with the federal government 
to have free trade agreements with Korea and European trade 
agreement and so on. So it’s very encouraging to see those 
types of things being done and our government working hard to 
improve trade across this province. 
 
Another area of great importance is the shortage of skilled 
labour in this province. And I just know from my own personal 
experience, a young lady that we know very well needs to get 
her grade 12. She’s working hard at it, you know. She’s likely 
going to get it through the adult basic education, which really is 
a prerequisite to go on to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] or other training so that they 
can get training to work in jobs that there’s a real shortage in in 
the province. 
 
Our government will increase the number of the adult basic 
education training seats by 775, eliminating the 2012 wait-list 
and bringing the total number of seats to 9,355, an increase of 
nearly 60 per cent since 2007. Our government will boost the 
number of apprenticeship seats by 300, bringing the total 
number of seats to 7,000, an increase of 86 percent since 2007. 
Saskatchewan took a leading role in national negotiations on the 
design of the new Canadian Job Grant which provides 
employers with up to $10,000 per worker to cover the cost of 
training. And the list goes on and on of great things that our 
government is doing and with the federal government and other 
provinces to encourage trade and investment across this 
province and across this country. 
 
Since 2008, you know, we’ve known that there’s a huge 
infrastructure deficit in this province. And it’s not going to be 
fixed overnight by any stretch, but since 2008 ministries and 
Crown corporations have spent close to $16 billion on a range 
of capital projects, including hospitals, highways, schools, and 
power plants. That’s an incredible investment. And more needs 
to be done, and our government intends to do that. 
 
[19:45] 
 
This year alone nearly $3 billion have been committed to renew 
and expand the province’s infrastructure by using projects, by 
initiating a number of P3 projects. And these projects include 
nine joint-use elementary schools located in Regina, Saskatoon, 
Martensville, and Warman; the Regina bypass project, the 
largest transportation project in Saskatchewan history; and the 
Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford integrated correctional 
facility. A 225-bed Swift Current long-term care centre is now 
under construction, saving $13 million by using the P3 
[public-private partnership] approach. And the list goes on and 
on. 
 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5525 

Our government has recently partnered with the city of 
Saskatoon and the federal government on a P3 project to build 
the North Commuter Parkway Bridge and have offered the 
same partnership with Prince Albert to build their second 
bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so it’s an ongoing concern, infrastructure, but our 
government is committed to narrowing that gap of 
infrastructure deficits and staying above, ahead of the curve, 
actually, as development and the economy expands in this 
province, and continue to encourage growth in this province. 
 
I think the Premier’s words on this next item said it all: “Not 
one more dollar will be spent on building a new liquor board 
store.” And that’s just a common sense thing but, you know, the 
previous NDP government wouldn’t ever think of having 
anyone but the government spend money on liquor board stores. 
We’re committed to infrastructure, that money that we’re not 
spending on liquor board stores obviously going into 
infrastructure where it’s needed. You know, new liquor board 
stores in the province will be built and operated by the private 
sector, and there are two new private liquor stores operating in 
Saskatoon and one in Regina, with another one in Regina 
opening soon. So some very common sense things, common 
sense approach as far as liquor board stores. 
 
As I was speaking about infrastructure and highways in the 
Biggar constituency, there’s just a number of areas on the 
highway front that needs to be mentioned: Highway 16, work is 
being done on the new twinning project from Saskatoon to 
Clavet; on Highway 7, new passing lanes between Delisle and 
Rosetown are under construction; pre-construction work 
continues on twinning of Highway 7 from Vanscoy to Delisle; 
Highway 6 and 39 from Regina south to Estevan. 
 
Again, our government is committed to infrastructure and we’re 
moving ahead on that as quickly as we can under a balanced 
budget using P3s and other forms of financing, but this is very 
encouraging to see that type of investment in highways. 
 
Under health care, you know, when we took over as 
government in this province, I mean health care was, quite 
frankly, in disarray, and how far we have come. Our 
government on a number of areas has moved forward. And the 
one area, a number of areas, but in the coming months the 
commissioner appointed to lead a review of mental health 
services in the province will release a 10-year mental health and 
addictions action plan. 
 
Last year our government announced the creation of an Urgent 
Action Fund to improve the quality of care for residents of 
long-term care homes. Our government has provided $10 
million to health regions for specific initiatives and an 
additional 3.7 million for ongoing programs. This funding will 
be used to purchase 700 pieces of equipment, hire additional 
staff, and supporting training staff. 
 
And I think this next item really speaks to our government and 
our Premier and our vision about what needed to be done in this 
province. And we have, in 2011 our government established the 
Saskatchewan surgical initiative and set a bold objective 
ensuring no patient wait more than three months for surgery. 
Can you imagine, you know, 15 or 20 years ago to say that 

surgeries would be done in three months? It was just unheard 
of. People were waiting 18 months, 24 months for surgeries. 
And now because of this effort within the health care system, 
the number of patients waiting more than 3 months for surgery 
is down 81 per cent. It’s amazing. Talk to anybody who’s 
waiting for a hip or knee transplant or many other procedures 
and had to wait for years, quite frankly, before they could get 
their procedure, the suffering and pain that they endured. And 
now we’re down to nearly three months wait for those people. 
So it’s quite incredible. 
 
Other areas, you know, our government will amend The 
Pharmacy Act to enhance the scope of practice for pharmacists 
by giving authority to administer vaccinations and other drugs, 
as well as ordering and assessing and using lab tests. And since 
2007, the number of doctors practising in the province has been 
increased by 400, while the number of nurses in all designations 
has increased by more than 2,600. 
 
On the education file, our government recently received the 
results of its historic student-first consultation. More than 120 
engagement sessions were held involving nearly 1,000 students, 
parents, caregivers, teachers from across the province, and more 
than 1,500 submissions were received online.  
 
This session our government will introduce legislation to make 
the regulatory process for teachers similar to that in other 
jurisdictions and other professional bodies within our province. 
And over the past seven years, our government’s spent more 
than $700 million on education infrastructure, a 268 per cent 
increase. Forty new schools have been built or are in the 
planning stage. This year new schools have opened or will open 
soon in Swift Current, Lloydminster, White City, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on with the number of 
great initiatives in this Throne Speech. 
 
You know, I have to say a few words about agriculture. You 
know, it’s still a very, very important part of our provincial 
economy, and our government stands with the agriculture 
sectors, farmers, and ranchers. The government’s contributing 
$4.5 billion — or agriculture is contributing $4.5 billion — to 
Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product and sustaining 50,000 
direct and indirect jobs. In 2013 Saskatchewan set a record for 
agricultural exports for a third consecutive year with sales of 
$11.7 billion, and we’re on track to meet our goal of increasing 
the agricultural exports to $15 billion by 2020. And you know, 
rural Saskatchewan is growing with the rest of the province and 
is doing very well, and agriculture is a big part of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I will take my seat now and let other 
members have an opportunity to reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. Again this Speech from the Throne is a great indication 
of how our economy is doing, how the people of Saskatchewan 
is doing, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand in this House. It might be the last time to speak to a 
Speech from the Throne. We’ll find out whether the federal 
government decides to go earlier or just at the regular forum, 



5526 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

but if it is the last time it’s certainly an honour to enter the 
debate here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of my colleagues have already 
spoken about the events that took place in Ottawa last week and 
they were tragic events, whether it was the event that took place 
at the cenotaph in Ottawa and then on the Hill, or the event that 
took place in Montreal. I think, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard 
over the past few days, you heard constantly from Canadians 
who have said, well we didn’t expect that we would see 
something like this on Canadian soil. Somehow or other we’ve 
been very fortunate and we’ve been truly blessed and we have 
not had circumstances of that tragic nature hit us, but I think it’s 
a stark reminder of the fact that no matter where you live, if you 
don’t work to preserve the freedoms that we’re going to be 
honouring the men and women in the next few weeks . . . 
Actually it’s about two weeks from now on Remembrance Day. 
We’re going to be thinking about all the men and women who 
have fought in two major wars, the Korean War, and then the 
wars since then. And they worked hard, and they gave their 
lives so that we could enjoy what we take for granted, many of 
us take for granted. And then we see what happened the other 
day, and I would suggest that it’s a stark reminder to each and 
every one of us that we need to continue to work to ensure that 
we preserve what we have and not just take for granted the 
freedoms. 
 
And we want to thank the families of the individuals who lost 
their lives, and we want to extend our sympathies and our 
prayers as they struggle in this difficult time in their life. But 
let’s never forget that incidents of this nature can happen at any 
time. Let’s work to preserve our freedoms. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what really encouraged me as well, 
as I was watching the news the following day, and to see the 
members in parliament, how they all stood together. I think that 
speaks highly of who we are as Canadians. 
 
And whether or not we have different political views, and in 
this Chamber as well, I think we need to recognize that every 
member who has had the opportunity in the past and who sits 
here today, sits here today because their constituents gave them 
the opportunity. And we should learn how to work with and get 
along with, even though we may have totally different views 
when it comes to the political realm because we are all human. 
We make mistakes as well. 
 
So I want to compliment the Prime Minister and the Leader of 
the Opposition and the third party leader in Ottawa for the 
leadership they gave last week. And to all of my colleagues 
here, let’s continue to build relationships. We may have 
differences of opinions, but that should not interfere with our 
ability to show respect, one for the other. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we talk about the Throne Speech that 
was presented the other day, I’m going to speak about a few 
things in my constituency as well as just a number of the 
initiatives that have been brought forward by the Throne 
Speech. But first of all, I want to speak about the people of this 
province, and I’d speak about people in Moosomin. I had the 
pleasure of attending a couple of events, one sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Elks and Royal Purple and the other sponsored 
by, put on by the Shriners. 

First of all, the event that the Shriners sponsored, this event was 
to raise money to go to Shriners hospitals. And if you’re not 
aware of what Shriners hospitals do, they are hospitals that are 
really specifically geared to meet the needs of individuals with 
very specific health problems. We had a young couple and I 
believe they were from the community of Willow Bunch, they 
brought their young child. He’s eight years old now but he was 
born with some very significant health issues. And if it wasn’t 
for the Shriners stepping up to the plate and helping them get to 
Montreal where they could receive the treatment that he needed 
— and then it’s I believe three times a year they still have to go 
back, Mr. Speaker — this little boy probably wouldn’t be with 
us today. And it was quite an emotional time as he was . . . You 
know, as an eight-year-old, and I was amazed at how he could 
read and how he talked about his life, and it was so nonchalant. 
Like, that’s just how it is. But it was a pleasure being part of 
that fundraising dinner. 
 
And then the Elks and Royal Purple, and they were speaking 
about the work they do for young children and men and women 
who have problems with hearing and need cochlear hearing 
implants. And, Mr. Speaker, there again I think in both events 
the number of people who came out and the fundraising and the 
way the people gave of themselves speaks again of who we are 
as Saskatchewan people, and the fact that we’re not just 
thinking of ourselves but we’re willing to think of our 
neighbours and willing to reach out and help those less 
fortunate amongst us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time we in Saskatchewan are truly blessed 
with a growing and strengthening economy. But as the Throne 
Speech said, a strong economy is the foundation of a strong 
province with an excellent quality of life for all of its people. 
Now we can take that for granted or we can continue to work to 
improve who we are, what we are, and what we have to offer 
the people of this province. And I believe there isn’t a person in 
this province, even in this Legislative Assembly, who is not in 
favour of a growing and strengthened economy. And many of 
my colleagues have already spoken about the positive impact of 
that strengthening economy. 
 
For example, the population in this province now over 1.125 
million people; 577,000 people working as of June — a record 
high for employment in this province — and a record low for 
unemployment of 3.2 per cent. And you know, the constituency 
of Moosomin is an area that we can say low unemployment is 
really creating a problem for us. And how many times do you 
have people talk about low unemployment creating a problem 
for you? But I constantly hear from businesses, businessmen 
and women in my constituency, about the challenges of finding 
individuals to fill the job opportunities that are there. 
 
And so many of these businesses are truly appreciative of the 
Saskatchewan-Canada immigration program that has enabled 
them to bring people from other parts of the world, in many 
cases a lot of men and women from the Philippines who have 
come and fit right in. And they’re just part of the community. 
And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes they make us 
look just not the most progressive people. They’re very 
outgoing and hard workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they’re 
sure a welcome addition to our communities. 
 
[20:00] 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5527 

And talking about a strong, growing community and economy, I 
look four miles down the road. I don’t have to go very far to not 
see how our economy is growing, as I see what was the Seed 
Hawk manufacturing plant, now under the ownership of 
Vaderstad manufacturing out of Sweden, and they just entered 
into another major expansion this year. By the time their 
expansion is completed I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 
looking to have around 480 employees at that little plant just 
outside of the community of Langbank. 
 
I’ll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a real economic 
boom for our constituency. And so I thank the young man who 
had the vision in the first place in designing that direct seeding 
equipment and putting the plant and believing they could 
operate a plant successfully in rural Saskatchewan. The member 
from Melfort talked about a number of initiatives and private 
manufacturing plants in his area. And what we have seen, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have seen the ingenuity of Saskatchewan 
people in building and putting their ideas, bringing them to 
fruition and helping this province grow. 
 
Part of the Throne Speech was talking about expanding the 
New West Partnership. When we formed government in 2007, 
there was an initiative at that time that was taken to try and 
address the issues of different weight restrictions from one 
province to the next and how it impacted the trucking industry. 
And over the past few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been 
able to come to a common agreement, which I know the 
trucking industry and those working in my area are really 
pleased to see because it sure made it a lot easier travelling 
across Western Canada, just to have a uniform weight 
restriction that everyone could operate with rather than having 
to change a load every time you moved into a different 
province. 
 
And with that in mind, we have the New West Partnership, and 
Saskatchewan is working currently with Alberta and BC to 
harmonize labour standards and occupational health and safety 
regulations. And I know for the business community, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s a very strong initiative that they 
certainly want to see move forward. 
 
But as I was mentioning earlier, I talked about the workplace 
and the challenges we have in finding people to fill the job 
opportunities. Adult basic education has been in this province 
for a number of years. And I again have had the privilege of 
attending a number of ABE [adult basic education] grads in my 
area, in my constituency. I guess the one thing that really 
impresses me and really makes my heart feel good — whether it 
was the governments of the past or where we are today — is the 
fact that you can see the joy in these individuals’ lives as they 
have gone back through the ABE program and been able to get 
their grade 12 matric, and now they’ve got a certificate that they 
can take as they move forward and try to expand their education 
and apply for job opportunities. 
 
So what this Throne Speech is doing is expanding the number 
of opportunities for people that enter the ABE program. And 
through this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we trust we will be able to 
enable individuals by giving them the tools that will allow them 
to apply for the job opportunities that are not only maybe in 
their area, or maybe leaving the community and moving to 
another community within the province to fill jobs. 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not all about government. At 
the PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic Region] conference 
I attended this year and as well as Midwestern Legislative 
Conference, there were a couple private businesses who came 
and made presentations. And while the individuals that were 
making the presentations commented about the importance of 
university education or tech training, they said, you know, a 
university degree or tech training doesn’t necessarily always 
give an individual the right tools to fit the workplace that may 
be looking for employees. 
 
So what they have done is they’ve decided, why don’t we invite 
people to come and work with us and we’ll train them on the 
job. And one individual mentioned that one source of 
employment individuals actually happened to be the 
correctional facility in their state. 
 
And they said they found that when they took these young men 
who had served their time for whatever crime they were 
spending time in a correctional facility or a prison, and they 
trained them, they became some of their best employees. In 
fact, they became their best employees. When they had the 
opportunity . . . First of all, the fact that they were given an 
opportunity after having spent time behind bars, and now could 
do something for themselves, they said it just made them as 
employers feel so good to see that someone was so happy and 
pleased to have had someone believe in them to provide the 
training and then give them the job opportunity. And that’s 
what the new Canada Job Grant will do for many people. It will 
give individuals, and working with the federal government and 
businesses, the opportunity of working to train people to fit the 
job opportunities that are out there. 
 
My colleagues have spoken of many of the 3P projects that 
have been and are ongoing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And while I’m not going to get into P3 projects individually, I 
know that within the next few weeks or a month or so where the 
new health care facility in Kipling will be opening — I believe 
at the end, roughly the end of November if I’m not mistaken — 
they’re looking to move the heavy-care patients from the 
Willowdale Lodge across town into the new facility, and then 
shortly into the new year have the acute-care part of the facility 
open. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that didn’t happen overnight, didn’t 
happen by chance overnight. In fact I’ve been here since 1986 
and I’ve been lobbying for that, and it finally got there. And so I 
thank my colleagues for the fact that they recognize the need for 
a facility in Kipling. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I think about it, there 
was a period in time, even in my own constituency, where some 
of the other communities thought, you don’t need a hospital in 
Kipling. And one of the communities, they’ve got a pretty good 
health facility and a pretty good doctor base, and comments 
from a couple of doctors along the same lines. And you know, 
when Kipling went down, even this past summer it was down 
for about eight months. And then the folks from Wawota and 
Redvers and Carlyle started showing up at Moosomin. They 
were beginning to ask me, is anything happening in Kipling? 
We’ve got to get that open because we’re not going to survive 
here with the number of patients coming our way. 
 



5528 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only are we pleased and the 
Kipling area and the surrounding area that’s served by that 
facility, but I know the community, even the health caregivers 
in the constituency are pleased to see this facility moving 
forward. And I want to thank the people of Kipling for the work 
they have done, because it isn’t all government money. There’s 
a lot of private money going into that facility and the work 
they’ve done in raising it. And I’m looking forward to a dinner 
on Saturday evening, probably the last one, a fundraiser for this 
project because I believe most of the money is now in place. 
And it’s kind of going to be kind of a windup dinner and 
fundraiser just for people to have a good time as we look at our 
new facility. 
 
There is one facility, however, in my constituency that 
desperately needs work. And I know I’ve been in contact with 
the Minister of Health and the Minister of Rural Health, and the 
former minister of Rural Health has been out to that facility. 
And it’s the heavy-care facility in the community of Grenfell. 
 
Now whether or not we get to it while I still have the 
opportunity to be a member of this Legislative Assembly or not, 
I don’t know. But I do know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a facility 
that needs work. And not just needs work, it’s one of those 
where as individuals, when you’re looking at spending money, 
my views are why would you put good money after bad? Why 
not just replace the facility like it needs to be replaced? But I 
also realize that there are so many projects that are needed 
across the province of Saskatchewan. So hopefully in the 
not-too-distant future we might be able to do something for the 
community of Grenfell. 
 
Highways is always, in rural Saskatchewan, an issue. And I had 
a parcel of highway, and there again it took me a lot of years to 
get there. It was kind of a parcel of 16 kilometres of highway, 
actually 20 kilometres between the community of Kipling and 
No. 9 Highway. People get to Kipling and they see a sign. 
Actually the last sign that was out there kind of spoke very 
highly of the highway. It basically said, drive this parcel of 
highway at your own risk. So people would take the grid roads 
around that piece of highway. 
 
But over the last few years . . . And thanks to the member from 
Maple Creek who was minister of Highways when we first 
formed government. He took the time to travel that piece of 
highway and recognize what kind of shape it was in and push 
for that highway to be completed. Highway 48 from Kipling to 
No. 9 is one of the nicest stretches of highway you’ll find in the 
province of Saskatchewan now. The company that built the 
highway did an excellent job. And people are certainly pleased 
to see the work that was done, the fact that they don’t have to 
find rural roads to get around, find their way from one place to 
the other.  
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Yes, I believe it was 
an article in The Citizen in July, and I forget which one, but 
they commented about the fact they could hardly believe how 
much traffic was on that road. And I mentioned for years that if 
that highway was complete, you would be surprised at the 
amount of traffic. And the traffic flow going through to 
Kenosee Provincial Park was just unbelievable. I had people 
from Regina, when I was down at the park, telling me, thanking 
me for the highway, thanking us for the highway. They said, we 

didn’t have to go to Whitewood and south, the No. 1 to 
Whitewood and south, and add another 20 or 30 minutes. We 
could go right through. And what a beautiful highway that’s 
been built there. Thank you very much. 
 
And that’s just part of the highway expenditure budget that we 
have had for the past number of years and are currently working 
on as we try to meet the needs of a growing province because, 
as we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not just people coming to 
the province. We can have a growing population. A growing 
population also means more vehicles on our highway system. 
And we know what the challenge is in our two major cities as 
we look at the bottleneck that’s beginning to grow in the 
province of Saskatchewan because of growth. 
 
Supporting communities. One of the things that I believe our 
municipal governments are really pleased to see is the fact that 
they know from year to year exactly what they will be receiving 
from the provincial government. For years, and I mean years, 
the municipal governments had to wait until budget time to see 
whether or not they’d get a morsel out of the budget so that they 
could plan their local budgets. And the commitment of this 
government to 1 point of the 5 per cent sales tax to municipal 
governments means that revenue sharing this year will be $265 
million, and that local governments, as they’re planning their 
budgets, they don’t have to wait for the provincial budget. They 
already know what will be coming into their hands and they can 
plan their budgets. And I know municipal governments are 
certainly pleased to have that. 
 
I also want to say that . . . I want to thank the individuals, the 
men and women who have been working with the PDAP 
program. Our area was hit quite dramatically with flooding 
again this year. And in fact there are areas in my constituency in 
the southern part and certainly going down to the American 
border where there are farmers still trying to get crop off the 
ground because of the excessive moisture. But also in many 
communities and farm operations the significant rainfall created 
a lot of problems for people in their dwelling places. And I have 
to say to those working in the ministry and the PDAP 
employees, thank you for the time and effort and the work you 
did, because this year was a cakewalk compared to 2011 when 
it came to PDAP claims. 
 
And I might just put a plug in, I really appreciated the work that 
the member from Wood River did in 2011. Because after he 
took hold of the file, was given the responsibility, a lot of 
people respected and appreciated what was done because there 
was an individual that took the time to go out and listen to and 
inspect what was going on. And I believe that as a result of 
what was done it enhanced and gave us the opportunity for 
PDAP to work much more smoothly this time around. And I 
trust from the work that was done at that time and this year, our 
PDAP program will be refined to the point that any time an 
emergency of this nature happens, it will be right there and it 
will be certainly meeting the needs of people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to close by commenting on one 
other thing that we as a government have made a commitment 
to in this provincial Throne Speech, the co-operation with the 
. . . the work that we’ve been doing to help families and to help 
individuals with disabilities. As a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, from the time I was elected, it’s always been on my 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5529 

heart to ensure that people who have to deal with health issues 
and disabilities as a result of things beyond their control, that as 
government we should be there to assist them. And I’m pleased 
to see how we put the money into different programs which are 
helping, whether it’s families or individuals, giving them a 
better quality of life. 
 
[20:15] 
 
And one of the things that is happening right now, we are 
increasing opportunities for low-income families to own homes 
in co-operation with organizations like Habitat for Humanity. 
Here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would we just do it on 
our own if there’s an organization already out there working to 
provide and help people, low-income people? Why wouldn’t we 
work together with them to help meet the needs of the 
low-income families? And I was pleased to see that we’re 
working together with Habitat for Humanity. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, since 2009 our government has committed 
$7.85 million to assist Habitat for Humanity build 134 houses in 
12 communities. 
 
And we pledge to make Saskatchewan the best place to live for 
persons with disabilities. The Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability program is an important part as well of our effort to 
fulfill that promise. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think by our actions we’re putting into 
practice just a common principle of reaching to help those who 
are less fortunate than we are. And I’m proud to be part of a 
government that over the years has seen fit to recognize the 
needs of people with disabilities, and help families who have 
individuals with disabilities as well, to ensure that they have a 
better quality of life. 
 
And one other program I would like to speak to and comment 
on is the program we have to assist operating rinks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. In my constituency, one of the 
biggest complaints I heard every year was the cost of power in 
community rinks. And the community rink affordability grant 
program that was designed in 2012 is again being implemented 
this year. Since 2012, $3.2 million has been invested in the 
program, with more than 380 communities benefiting. This year 
our government will commit 1.7 million to the program. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what that means is these local rinks will 
continue to operate and provide the opportunities for young 
men and women and seniors to get out and curl if they’d like, 
enjoy curling or skating. Or as we see at the Ochapowace First 
Nation and their new arena, they’ve even created a walking 
track in their facility. Mr. Speaker, that is another positive 
program that I hear a lot about and that community 
organizations are certainly pleased to see. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without taking any more time, it’s 
certainly been a pleasure to sit in this Assembly as a member, 
and I look forward to see . . . And I support the Throne Speech 
that was laid down before us just the other day. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to be 

batting cleanup at this time of the year with the World Series 
going on. I’ll do the best I can, Mr. Speaker. Anyway it is a 
pleasure that I rise in the House today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
speak to the 2014 provincial Throne Speech. 
 
And like many of my colleagues before me on both sides of the 
House, I do want to reflect a little bit on the events of last week, 
on that tragic and senseless loss of life of two of our finest 
protectors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, I’m reminded of 
the words of Winston Churchill. I believe he’s quoted as saying 
that the worst form of government is democracy, except for all 
others. When you really think about what’s taken place in our 
country last week, it is an exact testament to that statement. It’s 
a statement that shows just how vulnerable our democracy can 
be when innocent lives are taken in the manner that Corporal 
Cirillo’s and Master Warrant Officer Vincent’s were. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no doubt that acts like that test our system but 
certainly not our resolve. 
 
You know, I’m reminded of my dad somewhat as I think about 
the past. My dad landed in Sicily with the American Fifth Army 
as a tank driver, and through the course of the next two years 
drove his tank up the eastern side of Italy and fought at the 
Battle of Monte Cassino, one of the fiercest tank battles in the 
Second World War. 
 
In 1976 I had the occasion to bring mom and dad to Europe 
where I was teaching school. And my mom, being strong 
Catholic, I knew that she would enjoy a trip to Rome and the 
Vatican, and so we made that trip. And then dad started talking 
about Monte Cassino and the road south, and so we decided to 
drive on to Pompeii and Naples. I thought it was going to be a 
. . . well it was a marvellous trip. But an interesting dynamic 
took place during that road, during that time from the road 
south of Rome to Naples. It’s about a three-hour trip by Italian 
autoroute. My dad’s eyes were glued, absolutely glued to the 
countryside on his left. He never spoke a word for three hours 
driving from Rome to Naples. I can’t imagine the thoughts that 
were going through his head as he viewed that countryside and 
the lives that were lost and the sacrifices that were made to 
protect the freedoms that we have in this House today. It was an 
absolutely poignant moment for me, and I didn’t really figure it 
out until we got back to Germany and we started talking about 
that. 
 
I’m reminded also of 1976-77. I was teaching school in 
Germany. Colleagues like my friend from Wood River were 
flying the CF-104 Starfighter, a plane that has all kinds of 
nicknames, one of them being the widow-maker. It was 
essentially a rocket with two little feathers on the side that they 
called wings. The aircraft would fly like light, but the one 
problem it had, it couldn’t turn very easily, and I think the 
member from Wood River would concur with that. During 
those two short years in Germany, we lost three very close 
friends: Shaw, Danko, and Reid, who because of that aircraft 
and the flying conditions and the theatre that they flew in was a 
very crowded airspace, and they had difficulties. 
 
I think about the trip that we made from West Germany into 
East Germany and then into East Berlin and standing on the 
Berlin Wall, a wall that was built by the East Germans to keep 
out the influences of the West. Imagine that. To try to keep out 
the influences of the West, they built a wall. All the anti-tank 



5530 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

devices and land mines were on their side, not ours. So I’m 
reminded of the importance that our protectors — our police 
forces, the security here at the building — provide for us so that 
we can maintain this democracy that we hold so dear and so 
that people like Cirillo and Vincent, my dad, and the member 
from Wood River’s colleagues didn’t lose their lives in vain. So 
I reflect on that from last week. 
 
Again like my colleagues before me, I want to reiterate what a 
pleasure it is for me to be able to represent the constituents of 
Regina Douglas Park who saw fit in 2011 to elect me as their 
representative. 
 
You know, as a boy, this building and these grounds were my 
playground. The dome, the park, they were an adventure. But 
over time as we all grow and learn, I came to understand that 
this building and what it represents is a beacon, and it’s really 
gratifying to see the restoration of our dome. 
 
I can only imagine Walter Scott when he began his thoughts 
and designs around this building. If you think about Regina in 
those days, there wasn’t a house south of this building. It was 
just prairie. You could see Wilcox from 12 feet in the air on 
your ladder when you were doing your Christmas lights. You 
could see Wilcox. It was that close and that flat. 
 
So to erect this structure on that land and the dome that Walter 
Scott forecasted would be the beacon for this province, a 
beacon of pride and a beacon of strength and a place that we 
would be able to call home . . . and as soon as we saw that dome 
and that building from whatever distance it was, from wherever 
we were coming from, we knew where we were and what we 
stood for. And that vision is second to none. 
 
As I said, it became a beacon of leadership and a beacon of 
pride. And in fact last year it was green pride. The dome was 
green there for a while and of course we all beamed with Rider 
pride. And of course a beacon of strength where 100-plus years 
in this building, obviously it was built to last, just like our 
people. 
 
Again, as is customary, I want to acknowledge my wife Karen 
who has shared with me this adventure of being an MLA and 
cabinet member and part of this great team that we have on this 
side of the House, and I thank her for that. 
 
My sons, Chris and Cam and their five grandchildren; Michelle 
and her three grandchildren, the latest eight-week-old Scarlett 
Anne, and what a darling she is. I thank them all, and my 
daughter Melanie of course, for their support. 
 
Becky Mason, Brittany, and Ron Naidu over in our 
constituency office, the three of them share that office and work 
together to help their two members, the minister from Regina 
Dewdney and Regina Northeast and myself, with our duties. 
 
My brother Pat and Sharon, his wife — my older brother Pat, 
who is just so proud to be a part of all of this — my sister Lois 
and her husband Brian. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is strong and it’s never 
been stronger. Strong leadership, Mr. Speaker, as witnessed 
again last week. We witnessed our resolve. We witnessed that 

that resolve is solid, that we will not be deterred, that 
democracy will not be compromised, obviously expressed very 
eloquently, poignantly by our Premier in carrying on with the 
day, with the routine. We were not going to be deterred, Mr. 
Speaker, with the routine of the Throne Speech. And during his 
remarks, he just delivered a very genuine, again poignant, and 
moving message to this House and the people of Saskatchewan, 
the impact that that day had on all of us. 
 
I want to acknowledge the members of our cabinet, who are 
leaders in their own right. Being a cabinet member has onerous 
responsibilities of leadership — the hours, the countless hours, 
the dedication that our cabinet members and members of 
treasury board put in to make sure that our views are 
represented and that the work of the ministries is completed is 
second to none, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve experienced. And so I 
thank them. 
 
But to all of the MLAs, most importantly perhaps our MLAs, 
because without you the sacrifices that have gone before us 
would be senseless, absolutely senseless. So I thank MLAs on 
both sides of the House for putting your names forward, letting 
your names stand for leadership in your particular communities, 
in your constituencies to make this lifestyle that we have what it 
is today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our economy, Mr. Speaker, is strong. And you’ve heard it 
already in the House: Moody’s AAA rating; record 
employment, 577,000 employed; balanced budgets; 63 per cent 
increase in exports; $16 billion on infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
No question that we’ve demonstrated that our economy is 
strong. However as has been said many times in this House, our 
greatest strength of course is our people — 1.125 million 
strong. Never been higher, never been stronger, Mr. Speaker. 
We are strong individually. We are strong as a community and 
we are strong as a province. 
 
A couple of stories about strength on an individual level. Two 
of my constituents are Denis and Edith Chisholm, married 61 
years young — 61 years. Denis Chisholm, of course, having 
served as police chief when he retired. Before that he was an 
RCMP member, and before that he served in the second war. 
 
[20:30] 
 
A very interesting story was told to me, and I know that there 
will be some more words on this in the future in terms of a 
member’s statement, I believe. When Denis Chisholm was in 
France waiting to come home, he and a buddy were standing on 
the French side of the English Channel, looked across and said, 
I wonder if we could swim that. Well, last summer, 2014, his 
granddaughter Meghan swam the English Channel, swam the 
English Channel for her grandfather. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will hear more about that, but that is an 
indication of the individual strength of Saskatchewan people, 
the resolve that we have to get things done. 
 
Another short story on a somewhat sadder note. A good friend 
of mine, Doug Gillespie, in Saskatoon passed away about two 
weeks ago. His obituary was in the paper on October the 6th. 
Doug died from cancer. Doug was an example of strength; he 
was given six months and he lasted six years. He fought and 



October 27, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5531 

fought and fought, and through all of that struggle he worked 
with young entrepreneurs. He worked with young people. He 
coached soccer. He never missed a beat. And through all of that, 
he founded the Saskatchewan chapter of beads for glory, an 
organization that helped families whose children were perhaps 
struggling and suffering from severe sickness. And so, another 
example of Saskatchewan strength and Saskatchewan courage, 
and we thank Doug for that. 
 
We are strong at the community level. The Throne Speech 
articulated the situation in Carievale and how people came to 
the support and help of a family. I think about the strength of 
North Central in Regina, and how after a Maclean’s article they 
were rated the most violent crime-ridden community in the 
country — in the country — and how they have turned that 
around. Violent crime is down 18 per cent, and property crime 
is down 12 per cent in North Central Regina. That’s because 
community got together, demonstrated their strength, and were 
able to move forward. 
 
I think about Pinehouse Lake and how they turned their 
community around, and how thriving they are now. I think of 
Sandy Bay and Yorkton’s family resource centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sandy Bay, I met a young mother of five children who, up until 
the establishment of the family resource centre, she claimed she 
was basically confined to her house, afraid to come out. Why, 
Mr. Speaker? Why was she afraid to come out of her house? 
Not because of what was happening in the community. She was 
embarrassed she couldn’t read. She couldn’t articulate. She was 
illiterate. But because of the family resource centre and the 
tentacles that reached out into the community, she was able to 
overcome some of those literacy fears, some of those personal 
engagement kinds of apprehension, and was able to face her 
community, is actively involved in that family resource centre, 
and is now helping out there. That’s a story of community 
strength, Mr. Speaker. Over 40 per cent . . . 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Over 40 per cent of the families 
in Sandy Bay are utilizing that resource centre where they learn 
parenting skills; coping skills; skills on how to touch, talk, read, 
and play with their babies so they can provide the proper kinds 
of parenting skills and modelling that children need. 
 
The family resource centre in Yorkton is another example of 
proactive planning by a community. Our family resource 
centres are a direct product of the work done by the child and 
youth committee, Mr. Speaker. In one building in Yorkton, 
there are 20-plus community-based organizations that have 
come together in one building to eliminate silos so that it’s a 
one-stop shop where parents can come with their families or 
with their children, with their issues, and not be turned away to 
go to another building or another street or another venue, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s all in one place. Another very fine example of the 
work that our child and family committee has done, a proactive 
approach to solving some of our issues. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we’re strong provincially, and one only 
needs mention the efforts of Telemiracle and the funds raised 
by Telemiracle to help — the most productive Telemiracle per 
capita anywhere. And of course our motto, Mr. Speaker, “from 

many peoples, strength” is all about the strength of our 
province. 
 
Specifically about the Speech from the Throne and its contents, 
Mr. Speaker, I really want to just spend a couple of minutes 
talking about the list of must-haves that our opposition has 
proposed. I think it’s called a list of must-haves, and I kind of 
coined that as an NDP warm and fuzzy way of saying a list of 
demands. And we would say a list of demands, whereas the 
warm fuzzy is an initiative that I’ve had some experience with, 
Mr. Speaker, and it really doesn’t work. I call it the cardiac 
method of measurement. If it feels right, it must be right. We 
don’t need to measure. If it just feels good, it’s good. 
 
So with that list of demands, their must-haves, they talk about 
stop ignoring the $2.2 billion in needed repairs to hospitals and 
care facilities. There should be a bracket behind that which 
states, which we created. In response to that, since 2008 the 
ministries and Crown corporations of Saskatchewan have spent 
close to $16 billion, $16 billion on a range of capital projects 
including hospitals, highways, schools, and power plants. This 
year alone, Mr. Speaker, $3 billion has been committed to 
renew and expand the province’s infrastructure. 
 
Another demand, build much needed schools in a responsible 
and transparent way rather than the government’s current 
flawed, expensive P3 rent-a-school plan. Again a bracket that 
might say, after we closed 176. So in our response to that, over 
the last seven years we have spent over $700 million in 
education infrastructure, a 268 per cent increase since 2007. 
Forty new schools have been built or are in the planning stage. 
And this year new schools have opened or will soon open in 
Swift Current, Lloydminster, White City, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Another, work with First Nations and federal government to 
swiftly solve the unacceptable inequities in education for First 
Nations children. Well I can quote here, “Aboriginal enrolment 
in post-secondary institutions is increasing.” Government will 
continue to support the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technology, will continue to support the First Nations 
University of Canada, will continue to support Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, and all post-secondary institutions. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve also instituted the shared services initiative, which allows 
First Nations to enter into partnerships with local school 
divisions so that they are able to provide the same kind of 
services to children on First Nations as our provincial students 
are getting, Mr. Speaker, a significant investment in our 
Aboriginal children on-reserve. I couldn’t be more proud of that 
initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, focus on diversifying our economy by supporting 
programs that encourages business development and job 
creations. It’s the old more eggs in more baskets. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, over the past seven years there have been 70,400 new 
jobs created in Saskatchewan. Of those fewer than 10 per cent 
— 6,600 — were created in the resource sector. Let me break 
that down: construction, 18,000 jobs; health care, 10,700; 
resources, 6,600; science and technology, 6,200; education, 
5,800; agriculture, 5,300; all other sectors, another 17,800. And 
if you divide that by 13, that’s a baker’s dozen basket. That’s 
5,415 baker’s dozens. That’s a lot of eggs in a lot of baskets, 
Mr. Speaker. I rest my case on that. 



5532 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2014 

Just very quickly, Mr. Speaker, one of the foundational 
principles of course of our democracy is having the freedom to 
speak and of providing individuals with that opportunity. 
Tonight is one of them. This government wants to provide the 
people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to discuss MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging]. We want to discuss them. That’s 
one of the features of our democracy, one of the principles of 
our democracy — discussion. Privatizing liquor sales, we want 
to have a discussion. And the P3 approach to funding 
infrastructure, we want to have that discussion. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are interested, and it’s on 
the record, in the status quo. No discussion, just the old father 
knows best. We all know about father knows best. That was 
about a 1950s TV program. No discussion on MRIs, for 
example, just the status quo. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what is the status quo? Well simply, if you 
want an MRI, go to Alberta, get one. Go west, get one. Come 
back, give the results to a doctor. Doctor doesn’t care where 
that MRI came from. You’ve got your MRI and you can get on 
with your treatment. Status quo. What kind of a system do you 
call that one? If that’s the status quo, we’re for it. 
 
No discussion on liquor sales, Mr. Speaker, status quo. The 
warm fuzzy might be, don’t rock the boat, baby; don’t tip the 
boat over. Another ’70s probably disco tune. All that’s missing 
is the white belt. 
 
No discussion on P3s, Mr. Speaker, just the status quo. Let’s 
wait another 20 years for a new school. 
 
Interesting though, interesting question to ask, and I’m sure 
they’re thinking about this. If they could only find a way to do 
something with all those new people moving to Saskatchewan, 
that would be something. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll leave that at that. The old 
Saskatchewan, we don’t want to go back to that, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re very, very comfortable with the direction we’re heading. 
And with that I’ll turn out the lights. Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that we adjourn the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt . . . Excuse me, the House. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. — not a.m., p.m. — tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:42.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5519 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5521 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5523 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5525 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5529 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


