
























































Hansard: March 19, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 19, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4773 
 March 19, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure and an honour, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, to welcome the many guests that we see that 
have joined us for budget day. The presentation of the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, is obviously an important event in the life of our 
province, and represented here in this Chamber today, outside 
of the members of the Chamber, are leaders from across the 
province, people who are involved in their community at every 
possible level, Mr. Speaker, those who are helping to build the 
province in Canada. And so we just want to welcome them here 
to their Legislative Assembly. We’re grateful that they take the 
time to come. We also want to thank them for their service, 
their respective service to their communities and to the 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just take one small licence and single out 
two, Mr. Speaker. My mom and dad, John and Alice Wall, are 
here and I’m going to take every chance I can to say welcome 
to them lest I get in trouble a little bit later, Mr. Speaker. We’d 
just ask all members to welcome all of our guests to the 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in extending a welcome to all the guests that we 
have in the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of 
diversity in the crowd in terms of areas of the province 
represented and different organizations, but there’s one thing in 
common with everyone in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s that we love Saskatchewan and want the best for our 
province. So I thank everyone for the contributions that they are 
making to our province and thank them for joining us today 
here in the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to join the Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition in welcoming our guests here today. 
So welcome to your Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present petitions against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over for a 
for-profit Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro linens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost profits of an 
Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Wawota, Carlyle, Kisbey, Arcola, Manor, Radville, Oxbow, 
Estevan, Redvers, Windthorst, Coronach, Weyburn, Stoughton, 
and Fillmore. I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind our guests in the 
galleries not to take any photographs, please. I recognize the 
Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many northern people. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 
standing today to present a petition on highways, all from 
throughout Saskatchewan. And this petition is in reference to 
the Cumberland House highway. Their prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize that upgrades, repairs, and 
maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 
residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 



4774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

And as in duty bound, [Mr. Speaker], your petitioners will 
ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from all 
throughout Saskatchewan, and I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the replacement of the gym at 
Sacred Heart Community School here in Regina. The 
petitioners point out that the gym has been closed since last 
spring due to safety reasons. They also point out that this issue 
has been raised since 2007 with the Sask Party provincial 
government without resolution. They point out that, as a matter 
of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart needs a gym. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the last one of petitions on this matter that 
have been submitted both through this Assembly, and directly 
to the Minister of Education, representing over 1,000 citizens 
from all over Saskatchewan. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Sask Party 
provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed from citizens from 
Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Women of Influence Award 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize one of my constituents, Linda Turta, who is 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of Ram Industries in Yorkton, 
and was recently named a woman of influence by SaskBusiness 
magazine. SaskBusiness magazine defines Women of Influence 
as: 
 

. . . those who shape the business, social and public life of 
Saskatchewan through their expertise and achievement as 
well as their willingness to give back as volunteers. It 
acknowledges a body of work rather than a single event. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear to see why they chose Linda as one of 
the recipients of this award. In the past, Linda has served on the 
former Good Spirit REDA [regional economic development 
authority] and is now a member of the city of Yorkton 
economic development committee. She also sits on the 
Saskatchewan apprenticeship board and the provincial 
Manufacturing Council and has been highly instrumental in the 
highly effective and successful capital campaign in support of 
the Parkland College’s new Trades and Technology Centre. 
 
Most notably Linda left her career in real estate management in 
Regina to return to Yorkton and become CEO of Ram 

Industries, which was Yorkton’s 2012 Business of the Year. 
Mr. Speaker, Linda is a significant influence in the east central 
Saskatchewan business community. And I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating Linda Turta for becoming one of the 
SaskBusiness magazine’s Women of Influence and wish her all 
the best in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Budget Priorities for Opposition 
 
Ms. Chartier: — In the lead up to the budget, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] opposition set out seven simple priorities for 
today’s budget speech. First people want an end to the $40 
million contract with an American lean consultant, especially 
after this government wouldn’t find the $8.5 million needed for 
urgent requests for more seniors’ care staff, equipment, and 
repairs. We also need action on setting minimum quality of care 
standards and minimum staffing ratios in all seniors’ care 
facilities. The NDP has called for these minimum standards in 
Bill 606 as a vital first step to fixing this growing seniors’ care 
crisis. 
 
We have also called for this government to reroute standardized 
testing money into teaching. Students need one-on-one help in 
the classrooms. This means supports for teachers, like the 
important work of educational assistants. Saskatchewan 
classrooms are overcrowded. This government needs to reduce 
class sizes by implementing appropriate class size caps to help 
students get the attention every child needs and deserves. 
 
Instead of its secretive P3 [public-private partnership] 
rent-a-school scheme, this government needs a transparent, 
cost-effective plan for Saskatchewan to build, own, and operate 
its own schools. And we’ve called on the government to reject 
the Premier’s plan to pay for bridges and overpasses by 
increasing education taxes. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we are calling on this government to 
address the high cost of living and increased out-of-pocket 
expenses for families who have been paying more for fewer 
services from the government. Today, this government can take 
action to lower costs for Saskatchewan families and start 
respecting the budgets that families manage every day. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Honouring Carole Sanderson 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend my 
colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers and I had the pleasure of 
attending the Prince Albert Council of Women’s Hall of Fame 
induction ceremony for Carole Sanderson who passed away last 
August. 
 
Carole was an education advocate and recognized as a leader by 
all who knew her. Graduating with a Bachelor of Education in 
1960, Carole Sanderson was one of the first indigenous, 
post-secondary graduates in the province. During her lifetime, 
she was an important member in establishing the Saskatchewan 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4775 

Indian Cultural Centre, the First Nations University of Canada, 
and the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. Carole 
was a real model for education, always encouraging others to 
pursue more education, regardless of their age. In her words, 
“We urgently need an educated workforce. You are the warriors 
of tomorrow, and the degree you attain will be your greatest 
weapon.” 
 
She lived by this motto which is evident in her children. Her 
daughter, Dawn Robins, accepted the award on Carole’s behalf. 
Dawn commented on how, because of her humble nature, 
Carole would often have to be encouraged to accept major 
awards such as the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and the Order 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
recognizing the great life and contributions of one of Prince 
Albert’s most influential women, Carole Sanderson. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Reporting of Financial Statements 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The last 
time this government delivered a budget, the Provincial Auditor 
said it was full of errors and unreliable. The auditor said, “You 
should expect to receive accurate and reliable financial 
statements and accurate and reliable financial information from 
the government.” But she said this government’s last budget 
was not accurate and it is not reliable. And as a result, this 
government was the first government in Saskatchewan’s history 
and Canada’s history to actually fail its audit. The auditor said 
this government was wrong to say it had a $60 million surplus 
when it actually had a $600 million deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. Nothing short of books we can 
trust will be acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
the opposition. This government needs to listen to the 
Provincial Auditor and fix the four major problems that led to 
the failed audit.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this government needs to report its budget on a 
summary basis. The NDP and the Provincial Auditor have been 
pushing for this for years, and this government no longer has 
any choice. It must move on this because surely one failed audit 
is embarrassing enough, especially when it’s the first time in 
Canadian history that a government has failed its audit. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 

Students Against Bullying Bill 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Friday I had the privilege of participating in the Speaker’s 
outreach program for grades 4, 5, and 6 at Wadena and 
Kelvington schools. As part of the process for this day, a mock 
legislature was held. While both schools had prepared their 
students for the visit, I was very impressed with a bill titled 
Students Against Bullying that Kelvington students had written 
and were debating. 
 

The bill started with “We, the students of Saskatchewan, want 
all students to feel good about themselves and to treat all other 
students with respect,” and then went on to 10 actions that 
could be taken to achieve this. 
 
I’d like to read part of the transcript of the second reading: 
 

Every day, people stop doing what they love because other 
people tell them they aren’t good enough. Believe in 
yourself, because you are worth it, and you’ll be able to 
soar higher. We all have the power within us to make a real 
difference in this world. Let’s get started right now because 
one life is too many to lose. Let’s get our children into 
schools where they feel safe and secure from bullying and 
create a positive attitude towards all people, despite their 
background or their appearance. 
 

The opposition group in the school had some very good 
questions, like if you stop one bully, are there not more, like a 
dozen, waiting to take their place? How does making a child 
feel good about themselves not make the bully, someone who 
already has low self-esteem, have a stronger desire to act out 
against the newly elevated person? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are now planning to make 
amendments to the bill. From what I was able to observe, our 
legislature will be in very good hands when the students 
become the future parliamentarians in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you to the students of Robert Melrose School. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Battlefords Trade and Education Centre Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last month 
my wife Linda and I had the pleasure to attend a Mardi Gras 
evening to help raise funds for the Battlefords Trade and 
Education Centre building fund. This was the second annual 
Mardi Gras, and it was a wonderful evening with a great meal 
and live and silent auction items. The event sold out nearly two 
weeks in advance with approximately 400 tickets sold. The 
organizers are overjoyed that they were able to raise over 
$53,000 that will be put towards their building fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to have contributed 
funding to assist with the capital cost of this much needed new 
facility, but with cost escalating, much more funding is needed. 
The Battlefords Trade and Education Centre is a non-profit 
organization that provides support services for individuals with 
disabilities, assisting them in their pursuit of independence and 
quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are presently operating out of a 100-year-old 
building that is in poor condition, and I know that everyone 
working in that building is anxiously awaiting the day when 
they can move into their new home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was not only successful in raising a 
substantial amount of money, but organizers also tell me it was 
equally important in that it helped raise the awareness for the 
great work ongoing at BTEC [Battlefords Trade and Education 



4776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

Centre]. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in thanking and congratulating Tammy 
Heinemann and her crew of 30 great volunteers who did such a 
wonderful job in organizing this evening and raising much 
needed funds for a great cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Grain Transportation Backlog 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, without doubt the biggest 
economic issue facing Saskatchewan today is the grain 
transportation backlog. Working with our federal colleagues, 
our government has taken action. Our committee of ministers 
and members have met with all the interested parties — the 
railways, the grain handlers, the national government, and 
producers. 
 
We put together a solid plan for action in the near term, a plan 
which was accepted and enacted by the federal government. We 
put together a plan to fix the problem in the long term, 
including the need to ensure accountability between shippers 
and railways, the need to ensure grain companies fulfill their 
obligations to producers. We need to ensure at least 13,000 
grain cars per week on the tracks, and we need an increase in 
penalties from the current 100,000 to at least $250,000 per day, 
with those funds collected going to producers. 
 
We also know who hasn’t taken this issue seriously — the 
NDP. They have not even bothered to contact the federal 
government at any point — no letters, no phone calls, nothing. 
The Leader of the Opposition has had all session to address this 
matter. He hasn’t. Fifty-six questions and counting from him in 
question period and not one on the grain backlog — zero. The 
Leader of the Opposition has a chance today to make that right. 
He can stand in his place, do the right thing, stand up for our 
agriculture producers. Will he do it? We’re about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government, Mr. 
Speaker, signed a $40 million lean contract with just one US 
[United States] consultant. This government, Mr. Speaker, is 
flying in Japanese senseis from Japan and paying them $3,500 a 
day to provide some sort of training to our health care workers, 
and it’s actually requiring health care workers, Mr. Speaker, to 
learn Japanese words and phrases and use them. 
 
All that is bizarre enough, Mr. Speaker, but it’s especially 
troubling to see this dismissive approach to the very real 
concerns that are being raised about this $40 million lean 
project. My question is for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. How 
many concerns does he need to hear before he’ll finally listen 
and scrap this lean pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so 

the NDP are advocating that we cut a program that has already 
paid for its costs in two of the four years of the program. This 
initiative has already found savings for the health care system 
greater than the full cost, Mr. Speaker. This initiative has also 
improved patient-centred care. And these are now a matter of 
record. Mr. Speaker, he says that, by the way, advising that the 
government cancel a program that’s actually generating savings 
to the Health ministry, he’s advising that this is Saskatchewan 
common sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is anything but Saskatchewan common sense. 
Saskatchewan people want to see improved health care. They 
want to see patient-centred care. They want the front line 
engaged in the process and they want to save money, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re open to adjustments and changes in the 
program. But the principles, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue with. 
Because better health care while bending the cost curve, that’s 
Saskatchewan common sense. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier was actually 
listening to what front-line health care providers were saying, 
he wouldn’t be giving responses like that because he would 
know, Mr. Speaker, that any of the achievements that have been 
made are not the result of the $40 million contract with a US 
consultant. They’re not because this government is choosing to 
fly in senseis from Japan and paying them $3,500 a day. And 
they’re not because they’re forcing front-line health care 
workers to use Japanese phrases, Mr. Speaker. That stuff has all 
simply gotten in the way. 
 
Even the lean deputy minister states, Mr. Speaker, that any 
improvements that have been made are because the ideas have 
come from the front-line health care workers. My question for 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why the extravagant $40 million 
contract with one US consultant? Why are they flying in senseis 
from Japan to speak with Saskatchewan health care workers 
when what they really need to do is simply listen to front-line 
health care workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — That is precisely what lean is all about. And 
for the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and say the $36 
million already saved in the new approach to managing blood 
inventory, which was precisely the result of the lean initiative, 
precisely a result of this particular consultancy, if he’s now 
saying that that’s not part of lean, he’s just fundamentally 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday he was quoting from SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] in terms of their concern about lean. While he was 
quoting that, a nurse was paying attention in Saskatoon. And 
here’s what a nurse said, and this goes directly to the premise of 
the member’s question that lean has nothing to do with the 
improvements we’re seeing. She points out that because of lean 
. . . She was always frustrated as a nurse in terms of weighing 
newborns on cold steel scales with just a little bit of tissue on 
them. And we have the quote here; we could table it, Mr. 
Speaker. But she indicates that she had the suggestion that we 
should have warmer scales. And as a result of the new process 
in place where front-line carers are listened to — she attributes 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4777 

it to lean, by the way, not the government — they’ve just taken 
a little blanket, Mr. Speaker, a flannel blanket to make sure that 
newborns are more comfortable during the weighing. 
 
It’s a small point. It’s not the $36 million we’ve saved in the 
blood inventory, but she says that’s what lean’s about. She likes 
lean. When is the NDP going to get with the program, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, why do we need to spend $40 
million to listen to a nurse about good ideas on how to improve 
the system? Why, Mr. Speaker? Why do we fly in senseis from 
Japan when we should be listening to a nurse on how to make 
the situation better for Saskatchewan patients? 
 
This Premier, Mr. Speaker, this government needs to listen to 
what the nurses in the province are saying. And what they’re 
saying, Mr. Speaker, is that this government’s approach to lean 
is not working. They’re stating that there are red flags with their 
lean project. Mr. Speaker, the province’s nurses point out that 
the impact of the government’s lean project is having a negative 
effect on patient safety and on quality of care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have the deputy minister saying that any advancements 
that have been made have been because they’ve listened to 
front-line health care workers. We have nurses and other health 
care professionals who are saying the negative consequences of 
lean are having an effect on patient care and the quality of care, 
Mr. Speaker. So my question is to the Premier: why not save a 
bunch of money, just listen to the front-line health care 
providers, Mr. Speaker, and finally put to rest the Premier’s 
lean pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member across the way 
says, why do you need a consultant to listen to front-line 
workers? Mr. Speaker, where were they for 16 years? Where 
were they for 16 years presiding over the longest surgical wait 
times in the country, cutting the number of nurses, cutting the 
number of doctors, Mr. Speaker, closing down long-term care 
beds? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Government of Saskatchewan that 
believes you can get a lean consultant for a short-term contract, 
save more than the cost of contract, and then have a long-term, 
embedded, new approach to health care in terms of listening to 
the front line. Guess who else is doing it. NDP Manitoba’s 
doing the same thing. Major health care centres from around 
North America have retained the same firm and are achieving 
the same results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, this is what 
that same president of SUN said about lean in August 2013, just 
last August when lean was in full effect: 
 

There are many commendable transformational changes 
happening all around us under the umbrella of lean systems 
management. They range from primary health care design 
to the Saskatchewan surgical initiative and new models of 
care such as collaborative emergency centres. 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what’s changed with SUN, but that’s 
what they were saying about lean in August, Mr. Speaker. It is 
delivering better care, and it’s doing it more efficiently, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’ll continue in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What’s changed, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
government has lost its way on the lean initiative. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, is flying in senseis from Japan to 
speak to front-line health care workers. Yesterday the nurses 
said, Mr. Speaker, that this government needs to go back to the 
“drawing board,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why $40 million on one US consultant, Mr. Speaker? Why 
senseis being flown in from Japan? Why are we paying health 
care administrators, presidents of health regions, Mr. Speaker, 
hundreds of thousands of dollars? Why do we have these layers 
of administration and now this government wants to add a 
completely . . . another layer of US consultants, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this approach has been completely unacceptable 
because it is affecting patient care and it is affecting the quality 
of care. But, Mr. Speaker, this government loves shiny objects, 
and it’s been caught, Mr. Speaker. It’s been caught hook, line, 
and sinker: $40 million on one consultant, Japanese senseis, 
Japanese-English dictionaries, Mr. Speaker, kaizen promotion 
offices all over the place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: when will enough be 
enough? When will they pull the plug on this lean pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I guess we’ve been caught reducing the 
time between diagnostics and care because of lean. I guess 
we’ve been caught, Mr. Speaker, in terms of eliminating the 
number of cancelled appointments in mental health and 
addictions. I guess we’ve been caught saving $36 million in 
managing the blood inventory alone because of lean. I guess 
we’ve been caught saving over $1 million in how we do vaccine 
management. I guess we’ve been caught employing the same 
innovative approach with the same consultancy that leading 
health care institutions around North America have been doing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member stands up and says, well that quote 
from August was too long ago. The reason that the position of 
SUN has changed is that a lot of time has passed since August. 
How about January the 15th, 2014, when that same president of 
SUN said, “The most exciting aspect of the lean process is that 
registered nurses are being engaged alongside the entire health 
care system on the front end of the change”? That’s eight weeks 
ago. Is that timely enough for the Leader of the Opposition? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Patient Care and Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier needs to check 
his inbox because there is a very different story being told from 
front-line heath care workers across the province. 
 



4778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale brought 
forward the case of Ron Caron. He’s 65 years old, has 
dementia, and desperately needs a spot in long-term care. But 
this government told him that he cannot go into long-term care 
because his needs are too high and there simply aren’t the 
front-line health care workers available to care for his needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine having a loved one who needs care 
and being told no by the government, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what’s happening to many families right now. It’s heartbreaking 
for these families, Mr. Speaker, and it’s frustrating — 
especially, especially at a time when government is choosing to 
spend $40 million on one US consultant and choosing to fly in 
Japanese senseis, Mr. Speaker, at a cost of $3,500 per day. 
 
My question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why is his 
government prioritizing fat US contracts with consultants, Mr. 
Speaker, and neglecting the basics that need to be fixed in 
health care and seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s good politics for the 
member to repeat those elements of his question. It’s good 
policy for us to repeat the truth of this. The truth is, whatever is 
going to be invested over four years in lean has already been 
recovered in efficiencies in two years. And we’ve seen 
improvements in patient-centred care. 
 
With respect to the case that the hon. member raises, Mr. 
Speaker, the Health minister tells me that even as of this date, 
while it was raised in the legislature earlier, the critic that raised 
it has not yet brought the case to the Minister of Health’s 
attention. We will look in . . . This government takes these 
cases seriously when they’re raised by the NDP, Mr. Speaker, 
or raised by anyone else. No, we have not seen them come 
forward with any details. We absolutely can look into the 
specifics of the case, and we will. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that it was under this 
government that we did see an increase in capacity in terms of 
dementia care in Saskatoon. We did it, Mr. Speaker, through a 
P3 with the Catholic Health Ministry, known as Samaritan 
Place. That Leader of the Opposition, when he was the Health 
critic, fought that Samaritan Place project every single day that 
he could, maybe because the Catholic Health Ministry was 
involved, maybe because it wasn’t done the old government 
way. There’s new dementia capacity with more needed, Mr. 
Speaker. The next time a project comes like that, regardless of 
whether it’s a faith-based organization or not, will he stand up 
and support it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the statements that the Premier 
makes about Mr. Caron’s case are absolutely ridiculous. The 
Health minister was here, Mr. Speaker, and hearing the 
concerns, and as of this morning, Mr. Speaker, mid-morning 
today there’s been no progress on the situation, according to 
Mr. Caron’s daughter. 
 

His case is hardly an isolated one, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier 
read through the 250 pages of urgent requests that came from 
seniors’ care facilities, he would know that the issue of people 
being turned away from care facilities because they require too 
much care is a common problem right now. 
 
On page 206 of the urgent requests, the Saskatoon Health 
Region has this to say: “There are clients that cannot currently 
be placed in long-term care as they have complex needs which 
require additional staffing that is not currently available.” 
That’s from the Saskatoon Health Region. But instead of fixing 
those problems, Mr. Speaker, instead of addressing what’s 
broken, this government, Mr. Speaker, is transfixed on its shiny 
lean project. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will this government get its 
priorities straight? When will they fix the basics and address 
seniors’ care and health care needs here in the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the case of this 
family, I can inform the Assembly today that one of our senior 
officials asked an NDP senior official on the day it was raised, 
outside in the rotunda, if that official could please get us the 
contact information for the family because they have not 
contacted the government. That was now . . . Two days ago? 
Yesterday? Mr. Speaker, we haven’t heard from the NDP. If 
they would please provide us the contact information that they 
have — because they haven’t contacted the government as they 
were invited to do by our officials out in the scrum — if they 
will do that, we will look into the matter. 
 
And you know, what’s more, Mr. Speaker, what this side of the 
House will continue to do, we’re going to continue to invest. 
We’re going to hear about it in a moment from the Minister of 
Finance. We’re going to continue to invest in health care 
infrastructure. Gone are the days of the NDP closing long-term 
care beds in rural Saskatchewan. Gone are the days of them 
closing the Plains, closing 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker. Gone are 
the days when those members opposite would ignore seniors by 
not once even indexing for inflation the seniors’ income 
assistance program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has made progress in terms of health care. 
We’ll talk more about it, I’m sure, in a moment. And the work’s 
not over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sheila, Ron’s daughter, has 
emailed directly with the minister. He needs to check his inbox. 
 
Care facilities sent in 250 pages of urgent requests for 
desperately needed staff, equipment, and repairs. But instead of 
fixing the basics that are broken, instead of meeting those 
urgent needs, this government actually rejected $8.5 million in 
urgent requests from facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government said no to meeting those urgent 
needs. They said yes to $40 million to John Black and 
Associates. They said yes to $3,500 a day for Japanese senseis 
to be flown in to the province, Mr. Speaker. And what that 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4779 

means for people like Ron Caron is that there’s no help for him, 
and there’s no long-term spot available for him, Mr. Speaker. 
And what it means for far too many of our parents and for our 
grandparents is that the quality of care that they are receiving is 
simply inadequate. 
 
My question is to the Premier: why doesn’t he listen to those on 
the front lines who say that this lean project is not working? 
Why doesn’t he invest those dollars right into the front lines 
where Saskatchewan patients, Saskatchewan seniors, need 
them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Here is 
exactly what the front line is saying about lean. Here are 
testimonials from registered nurses. Now we want the Leader of 
the Opposition to pay attention. He says his inbox was full over 
the weekend and we certainly believe that. By the way, we’d 
invite him to redact the names if they’re worried about their 
names being disclosed, invite him to table those emails so that 
we can improve lean, because we’re taking him at his word that 
his inbox is full. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here are some testimonials. He’s saying, 
listen to front-line workers. Here’s what they’re saying — 
nurses. This is about lean: “To get rid of so much waste and see 
how we can spend more time with our patients was enough to 
keep me wanting more.” Here’s another one: “Patients now get 
to spend more time with their nurses as we don’t have to spend 
time running to the fax machine, clarifying physician orders, or 
looking for missing medications.” There’s about nine more. 
We’ll get to them all. We’re happy to read exactly what 
front-line workers are saying about this, including SUN who as 
recent as January said that this was transformative and 
important for the system. 
 
Well they’re saying yesterday changed. Fair enough. We’ll find 
out more about it Friday. The bottom line is there is a side in 
this House that is listening to the front-line workers when it 
comes to health care. It’s why we now have more nurses than 
we’ve ever had. It’s why there are more doctors than there’s 
ever been. It’s why we’re building long-term care facilities in 
rural Saskatchewan, not closing them. It’s why there’s a new 
hospital coming for Moose Jaw and more good news in a 
moment in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Use of Resources in Education 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know this 
government’s costly lean project goes well beyond health care 
and seniors’ care. It’s forcing lean onto our education system 
also. I guess that’s fitting because this government’s approach 
to education is not one listening to those on the front line or 
pursuing common sense ideas. Rather its approach to education 
is one of top-down decision making, refusing to listen to 
educators, and ramming simplistic decisions onto classrooms. 
 
To the Education minister: will Japanese senseis be flown in to 
train our already overwhelmed and under-resourced teachers as 
well, the very teachers ignored and disrespected by that 

government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot 
of teachers in our province. All the teachers that we have work 
hard. They perform good service. We value them. We look 
forward to having ongoing consultation and discussion with 
them as to how we can make our system better. 
 
Earlier in the session we appointed Russ Mirasty and Patricia 
Prowse to meet with teachers and to work on how we were 
going to roll out a Student First initiative and that we would 
want to do everything in that where we had teachers, students, 
parents, educators, and administrators involved. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to tell the members opposite and the teachers in 
our province, it’s an initiative that we believe in and we think 
they do as well. And we look forward to working with them on 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that was a really 
straightforward question, and not a single answer from the 
minister. You know, instead of focusing on the basics and 
ensuring the classrooms have the right resources in place to 
deliver the best quality education for our kids, instead of doing 
that, this government is continually distracted by its costly pet 
projects. We see that in terms of the lean project. We see that as 
well with standardized testing. This government is ignoring all 
of the evidence, all of the concerns, and plowing ahead with its 
wrong-headed standardized testing agenda. To the minister: 
why is this government putting money into lean and 
standardized testing when it should be fixing the basics in our 
schools instead? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have got great students 
in our province. We’ve got a strong educational system. We of 
course want it to be better, and we want to work with teachers 
to do that. We know we need to have a balance between testing 
and teaching. Mr. Speaker, I have got a quote that I’d like to 
read: 
 

. . . this is something that’s very important, that we want 
our students to achieve. And it’s great they’re making that 
commitment to do that with the additional resources to 
make sure that happens and there is a balance between 
testing and teaching. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is a quote from Hansard, March 11th, 2013, 
from the member from Saskatoon Centre. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s one of those situations where I agree with the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. We’ve had those type of situations before. 
He makes comments. He’s an educator. I’m sure he believes in 
that. I believe in it and I think our teachers do as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the evidence is pretty clear 
on standardized testing. They don’t improve learning outcomes. 
What does improve learning outcomes is having the right 



4780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

resources in our classrooms, the right supports for our teachers, 
the right help for our students. But this government has actually 
cut educational assistants in far too many classrooms all across 
our province, leaving teachers and students to deal with the 
challenges of overcrowded and under-resourced classrooms. 
 
Again to the minister: why prioritize things like lean and 
standardized testing instead of making sure the basics are taken 
care of in our education system, where they actually make a 
difference in the life of a student? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a question that’s 
been asked before in this House. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
remind the member opposite, and I will make exactly the same 
answer I did before. We have provided more resources to our 
classrooms than ever before in this province. 
 
Since 2007 we’ve increased operating funding by over 23 per 
cent; regular teachers, 566 more; student support teachers, 159 
more; psychologists up 37 per cent, speech language 
pathologists up 26 per cent, occupational therapists up 5 per 
cent, social workers up 12 per cent. In 2007 there were 3,546 
EAs [educational assistants]; now there are 3,601. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the members opposite 
on how to fund schools and how to develop the best education 
system we can. And we’re going to do it, and we’re going to 
continue it. There’s more work to do, but we’ll take no lessons 
from the people over there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, because of our many questions 
we’ve thankfully seen this Ag minister change his mind on a 
number of key issues. On open rail running rights, he originally 
said it was a dumb idea. He now says they could be part of the 
solution. 
 
On the $100,000-a-day rail penalty, last week it was good 
enough, but now he’s calling for that to increase to $250,000. 
On provincial lease payments, he sent threatening letters to 
farmers in crisis to pay their leases immediately, but now he’s 
giving them a breather until the end of July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he now needs to change his mind on pastures. The 
Community Pasture Patrons Association is working together on 
a plan that will save taxpayers money and run these pastures 
efficiently. It sounds like a lean approach to me, Mr. Speaker. 
But the minister is forcing these pastures to go out on their own 
instead of supporting the association. Why won’t the minister 
change his mind on community pastures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’ve 
changed my mind on too many things. One thing I’m pretty 
sure of is that I’m not going to change my mind on the way we 
deal with the former PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration] pastures. Another thing I haven’t changed my 
mind on is the rail transportation issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government and my ministry and myself have 
been working on this file since May of last year, long before we 
knew that we were even going to have a large crop or any crop 
at all for that matter, Mr. Speaker. We’ve met with all 
stakeholders. We’ve met with the . . . The Premier’s met with 
the Prime Minister. We’ve met with the Minister of 
Transportation, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture several 
times. 
 
We’ve met with CEOs and high-level officials from all of the 
other stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done all of these things, 
Mr. Speaker, and meanwhile we haven’t had any support 
whatsoever from that Leader of the Opposition or that critic for 
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. There hasn’t been a letter. There 
hasn’t been any kind of support for what the federal 
government’s doing, Mr. Speaker. Rather than lay in the weeds 
and take cheap political shots at the people who are active on 
this file, it would be helpful if they would co-operate with us 
and do something. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Community Pasture Patrons 
Association membership includes the majority of pasture 
patrons from 40 of the 62 community pastures in Saskatchewan. 
This government should be listening to them and working with 
them. But here’s what CPPAS [Community Pasture Patrons 
Association of Saskatchewan] director, and rancher Brent 
Cammer says: 
 

It’s frustrating when you hear your own Agriculture 
minister speak about the importance of patrons on this 
issue, yet refuses to put in place an affordable program in 
this province that not only recognizes the public good but 
also recognizes the vast differences of private leased land 
versus the community pasture leased land. 

 
To the minister: why is this government refusing to listen to 
pasture patrons, and why is it refusing to put in place an 
affordable and effective program for community pastures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 
the question, the minister has certainly been working on the file. 
The answers have been consistent, and the stakeholders 
continue to be engaged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The theme of this question period has been lean and, Mr. 
Speaker, while we’re pretty happy with the fact that lean’s 
already paid for itself and is availing efficiencies in 
government, it’s not as good as a couple of other lean projects I 
could point to. 
 
There was one in 2007 when the people of the province decided 
to lean out the NDP. And then there was another one in 2011 
where they decided the work wasn’t quite over, and they leaned 
them out a little bit more, leaned them out to the point, Mr. 
Speaker, where they can now have a caucus meeting in the 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4781 

member for Lakeview’s Suburban, Mr. Speaker. I think they 
should probably be a part of more constructive solutions, or it 
will soon be the case that they’ll be able to have caucus 
meetings in vehicles with much smaller carbon footprints, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to submit 
the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied by a 
message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you all please rise for a message from 
the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2015, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 2014, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. The 
Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
You may be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, colleagues, and visitors, I am honoured to rise 
today to present our government’s 2014-15 budget. 
 
I want to thank my cabinet and caucus colleagues and all of the 
government officials who contributed their expertise and hard 
work to this budget. Thank you as well to the many groups and 
individuals who provided recommendations on what should be 
in this budget. 
 
And I want to thank the many family and friends that are here, 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon. I am so pleased to have so many 
friends and family seated throughout the Chamber. Thank you 
to all of you for being in attendance today, but a special 
welcome to invited friends from Invermay, Buchanan, Canora, 
Yorkton, Hawarden, Milestone, North Battleford, Saskatoon, 
and of course here in Regina. Thank you for being here. 
 
I’m also pleased to have a few family members seated on the 
floor of the Assembly. I would like to introduce my niece Barb 
and her husband Todd Asmundson, and my niece Cheryl 
Saunders who all travelled here from Saskatoon. My nephew, 
the little guy, Chris Krawetz from Kelowna, BC [British 
Columbia]. My daughter Lindsay, who lives in Calgary and 
came to hear her first budget address delivered by me, and my 
greatest supporter and best adviser, my wife Gail. Thank you. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is tradition that the Minister of Finance wears a 
new pair of shoes on budget day. Today I’m breaking from that 
tradition and wearing an old pair of shoes. These shoes are 
actually half a size too small for me, so they’re a little tight, just 
like this budget is a little tight. 
 
But that’s not why I chose these shoes. You see, these were my 
father’s shoes. He only wore them a few times, including on his 
89th birthday — November 1, 2006 — when I introduced him 
in this Assembly. Dad passed away just a few weeks later and I 
know he would be happy that someone is still getting good use 
out of these shoes. Mr. Speaker, I wear these shoes today to 
honour my Ukrainian-Canadian heritage and to honour my 
father, the son of a Ukrainian immigrant who stowed away on a 
cattle ship to escape oppression and create a new life in a new 
world for himself and his descendants. 
 
Today one of those descendants has the tremendous honour to 
stand in these shoes and deliver a budget in this Chamber that 
represents all of the freedoms we enjoy in this great province 
and this great country, while remembering that even as we 
speak the people of Ukraine must struggle to secure those same 
freedoms. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July 2006 a lengthy article appeared in The 
StarPhoenix chronicling the history of Saskatchewan’s 
population. That article included this stark statement, and I 
quote: “The story of Saskatchewan’s population is one of boom, 
bust, and stagnation.” Mr. Speaker, not anymore. Today there is 
a new story, a new story for our population, a new story for our 
economy, a new story for Saskatchewan. It is a story of steady 
growth. Today the boom-and-bust cycle that shackled our 
province for decades is behind us. 
 
Today more people than ever before call Saskatchewan home. 
Earlier today we learned that Saskatchewan grew by over 
20,000 people in the past year to an all-time high of 1,117,503 
people. Our record is steady growth. Our goal is steady growth. 
And this budget is about steady growth. 
 
This year’s budget looks a little different. For many years, 
governments presented both an operating budget and an overall 
or summary budget, but the focus was always on the operating 
budget. Beginning this year, our focus will be on the summary 
budget as recommended by the Provincial Auditor. This 
includes . . . Stay tuned. There will be a lot more things that 
you’ll be pleased with. Stay tuned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes all government entities, for 
example, ministries and agencies, treasury board Crowns, 
commercial Crowns, school divisions, and regional health 
authorities. As well the summary budget includes our insurance 
organizations like the Workers’ Compensation Board, the Auto 
Fund, and the Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
During this session, our government will introduce legislative 
amendments reflecting the change and focus of the province’s 
budget and financial statements to a summary basis. Presenting 
the budget on a summary basis captures the complete picture of 
the Government of Saskatchewan’s finances and the total cost 
of providing programs and services to the people of 



4782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

Saskatchewan. By presenting the full picture of the 
government’s finances, there can be no question about the 
bottom line. And the bottom line is that this budget is a 
balanced budget — in fact this budget projects a surplus of $71 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this was not easy to accomplish. 
Total revenue was projected to be down 0.7 per cent from last 
year. That meant that some difficult choices had to be made. At 
the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
convention in early February, the Premier indicated we might 
need to consider a tax increase, but he also noted, for our 
government, increasing taxes is always the last resort. Our 
preference will always be to balance the budget by controlled 
spending. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce we have done 
just that. And this budget contains no tax increases, no 
education property tax increase, no personal tax increases, no 
business tax increases, and no increase in the taxes paid by 
credit unions. 
 
Our government has chosen to maintain the current special 
income tax treatment of credit unions, which credit unions 
estimate saves them $7 million annually. This small-business 
tax savings, combined with their exemption from provincial 
capital tax, results in an overall provincial benefit to credit 
unions of more than $12 million each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has delivered the 
largest income tax cuts in Saskatchewan history and the largest 
education property tax cuts in Saskatchewan history. Lower 
taxes are a big part of our government’s growth plan and help 
keep life affordable for Saskatchewan people. A family of four 
or more with an income of $75,000 will pay less in total 
provincial taxes and utilities than their counterparts in any other 
province, Mr. Speaker. Maintaining our low tax rates will keep 
Saskatchewan on the path of steady growth. 
 
While that’s good news, it meant making some difficult choices 
on the spending side. Overall summary spending is down about 
$28 million from last year. You will see that expense in the core 
operational plan which is a subset of the summaries. That 
forecast is to be just 2.3 per cent more than last year, well below 
the 3 per cent expense growth projected in the four-year fiscal 
plan published in last year’s budget. That means some areas 
funded by government will receive less than they might have 
been hoping for this year. 
 
While controlling spending means making some difficult 
choices, there is one area of government spending where I am 
pleased to announce a significant reduction. Debt charges are 
down over $50 million from last year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
more than $3 billion of government’s operational debt has been 
paid off over the past six years, saving nearly $1 billion in 
interest costs. 
 
Our government looks forward to the day when Saskatchewan’s 
operational debt is completely retired and a portion of resource 
revenues can go towards a new Saskatchewan futures fund as 
recommended last fall by Peter MacKinnon. Even with the 
decline in overall revenue and no tax increases, this budget 
makes important investments in infrastructure and important 
investments in people that will keep Saskatchewan on the path 
of steady growth. 

One of the key priorities of our government’s growth plan is 
building the infrastructure needed for a growing province. 
Whether it’s schools or hospitals, highways or high-speed data 
networks, water treatment or power generation plants, bridges 
or natural gas transmission lines, our government is building for 
the future. 
 
Since 2008, government capital investment — including third 
party capital — combined with Crown corporation capital 
investment is close to $16 billion, more than double what was 
spent the previous six years. SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy 
and the province’s other Crown corporations are meeting 
increased demand by investing in infrastructure, and they are 
upgrading to address a long-standing infrastructure deficit. 
 
Between 2000 and 2007, the Crowns spent an average of about 
$568 million each year on capital. That doubled to $1.1 billion 
annually between 2008 and 2012. Between 2013 and 2018, 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations will invest an average of 
$1.7 billion each year to maintain existing infrastructure and to 
build new infrastructure, triple the amount invested each year 
between 2000 and 2007. Capital spending by the Crowns is 
projected to be $2 billion in 2014-15, an increase of $100 
million from the previous year and well above the five-year 
average. 
 
[14:30] 
 
This year, major capital investments by our Crown corporations 
will include $1.2 billion: at SaskPower to develop new 
electricity generation such as clean coal, natural gas, and hydro, 
and to expand and renew the transmission and distribution 
systems that carry electricity to customers; $355 million at 
SaskTel which includes the expansion of its wireless network in 
rural Saskatchewan and its Infinet project providing reliable, 
high-speed broadband to multi-dwelling units and businesses; 
and $300 million at SaskEnergy to improve the safety of its 
system and expand pipeline and compressor capacity. 
 
In addition to these significant investments by the Crowns, this 
budget invests nearly $900 million in other capital projects 
across government. There is 124 million for municipal 
infrastructure; including more funding for the Regina stadium 
project, as well as $74 million in transfers to municipalities. 
 
A new commuter bridge is needed in the north industrial area in 
Saskatoon. Our government will work with the city of 
Saskatoon and the federal government to fund that 
infrastructure priority, with dollars expected to flow in 2015-16. 
 
This budget also contains a significant announcement for the 
city of Prince Albert. Our next major health facility investment 
will be in that city, with $2 million provided this year to begin 
planning the renewal of Victoria Hospital. 
 
Building, maintaining, and operating Saskatchewan’s extensive 
highway and transportation system is essential for steady 
growth. This year $664.5 million will be spent on operations, 
maintenance, and capital through the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure, an increase of $88.5 million from last year. This 
level of investment means our government is on pace to meet 
our commitment to invest $2.2 billion on highways and 
transportation over four years. This budget provides $405 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4783 

million for highway and transportation capital, including rural 
provincial highway upgrades in various locations throughout 
the province. 
 
Passing lanes on busy highways improve traffic flow and 
enhance safety. This year pre-construction work will begin on 
passing lanes for Highway 7 between Delisle and Rosetown. 
We are funding the construction of 19.5 kilometres of new 
twinned lanes for Highway 16 east of Saskatoon to Clavet. 
Planning and land acquisition for the Regina bypass project is 
under way, and construction on the west portion continues to 
advance. We are also funding pre-construction work for 
twinning projects on Highway 7 west of Saskatoon to Vanscoy 
and on Highways 6 and 39 in the southwest corner of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget provides over $96 million in capital 
funding for K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] schools, 
including $46 million for ongoing construction of 10 major 
school projects; 24 million for school maintenance, an increase 
of 4.6 million or 24 per cent from last year; 9.5 million to 
proceed with the construction of the new Langenburg school 
and Gravelbourg Elementary School; $7 million for 29 new 
relocatable classrooms and for moving 10 relocatables to 
schools with increased enrolment. 
 
This budget also provides over $4 million for the planning of 
four new major school projects: the replacement of Connaught 
and Sacred Heart elementary schools in Regina and the 
renovation of the K to 12 school in St. Brieux and the Sacred 
Heart elementary school in Moose Jaw. Planning continues for 
nine joint-use schools, each with a public and separate school in 
one building: three in Regina, four in Saskatoon, and one each 
in Warman and Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is also committed to building and 
maintaining our universities and other post-secondary 
institutions. This budget provides 32.6 million in 
post-secondary capital transfers, an increase of over 7 million or 
nearly 28 per cent compared to last year. Those transfers 
include 20.6 million for maintenance capital, an increase of 4.1 
million compared to last year; 6.5 million for continued 
construction of the Health Sciences facility at the University of 
Saskatchewan; 4.5 million for the Trades and Technology 
Centre at the Parkland Regional College in Yorkton; and $1 
million for continued construction of the Southeast Regional 
College facility in Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides for the building and 
upgrading of hospitals and other health care facilities, including 
the Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert, as I’ve already 
mentioned. This year $95 million for health-related capital 
investments includes 48 million for maintenance capital, 
equipment, and projects such as renovation of Saskatoon’s 
Parkridge Centre long-term care home; new provincial 
laboratory machinery and equipment; increased funding for new 
medical imaging equipment and replacement of a linear 
accelerator; 27 million for ongoing construction of five 
long-term care facilities in Maple Creek, Biggar, Kelvington, 
Prince Albert, and Kipling; $16 million to complete the new 
hospital in Moose Jaw; and 1.5 million for planning associated 
with the Regina Extendicare replacement and the long-term care 
expansion in La Ronge. 

We are moving forward on construction of the Swift Current 
long-term care facility as a P3 project with 2.1 million in 
early-stage funding allocated in this budget. The Saskatchewan 
Hospital and integrated corrections facility in North Battleford 
also continues to move forward with $2.5 million in early-stage 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investments in affordable housing is continuing, 
including $9.2 million for the first year of a five-year extension 
of the federal-provincial affordable housing agreement. That 
agreement provides joint funding for new affordable housing, 
home renovations, home adaptations, as well as rental and 
housing supplements. This budget also provides 750,000 in 
additional support to help Habitat for Humanity develop 
another 12 homeowner units across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government does not believe in growth for its 
own sake. Growth must have a purpose — to create a better 
quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. That’s why this 
budget supports children and seniors and people with 
disabilities. That’s why this budget supports people who need 
health care services for themselves or a loved one. That’s why 
this budget supports families. And that’s why this budget 
supports those who seek education and training as a path to 
meaningful employment. 
 
Record funding of nearly $5 billion will be provided through 
the Ministry of Health, an increase of 3 per cent compared to 
last year. This record level of funding includes $3.25 billion for 
regional health authorities, an increase of $107.5 million or 3.4 
per cent. 
 
Health authority funding includes 60.5 million for the surgical 
wait-list initiative, with the goal of meeting the three-month 
wait-list target province-wide by the end of ’14-15; an 8 million 
increase over last year for regional targeted programs primarily 
addressing renal disease, colorectal screening, and diagnostic 
imaging; over $13 million, which is an increase of 3.4 million, 
for the operation of five collaborative emergency centres and to 
enhance primary health care sites; and 1.7 million to develop an 
emergency department wait times and patient flow program. 
 
Our government recognizes the vital role of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency in our province’s health care system. That 
budget provides over $155 million in total funding, a 4.9 
million or 3.3 per cent increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. This will help to plan, organize, deliver, and evaluate 
cancer care throughout the province. 
 
This budget also provides $5.2 million, 2.2 million more than 
last year, to expand the rural doctor locum pool. And the rural 
family physician recruitment incentive program will receive an 
additional $435,000 this year to help attract doctors to rural 
communities. 
 
We are also providing 1.5 million in health funding to develop 
an innovative, hot-spotting pilot program to identify and 
provide more appropriate services to frequent users of the 
health system. Our health system struggles to meet the needs of 
patients with complex and varied issues, including those related 
to mental health. These patients may not require hospitalization, 
but they are using the emergency department. Just 1 per cent of 
patients account for 21 per cent of all hospital costs in the 



4784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

province. This is not a good use of resources, nor is it providing 
the help many of these patients need. In the coming year, a 
hot-spotting pilot program will begin in Saskatoon and Regina 
to identify and assist these high-cost, high-use patients, helping 
them receive the care they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, care for seniors continues to be a priority of our 
government. This budget focuses on a number of initiatives for 
seniors including 4.5 million for the Home First/Quick 
Response home care program, an increase of 2.5 million over 
last year. This innovative approach provides home care services 
in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. The program ensures 
that seniors have the supports they need to be able to go home 
more quickly after hospitalization and to reduce the unnecessary 
hospital admissions and emergency room visits. 
 
Our other initiatives for seniors in this budget include 
increasing the seniors’ income plan benefit by $10 per month to 
$260 for single individuals and $225 for each member of a 
married couple. Next year the single benefit will increase to 
$270, triple what it was in 2007. 
 
3.7 million for the seniors’ care urgent action fund to continue 
addressing issues in long-term care facilities and $800,000 to 
develop a new seniors’ house calls program for seniors with 
complex needs. This budget also provides increased funding of 
$217,000 for additional claims under the ambulance assistance 
program for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for growth sets a goal of 
making our province the best place in Canada for people with 
disabilities. Since 2007-08, funding for people with disabilities 
has more than doubled. This budget provides over $446 million 
for new and enhanced programming for people with disabilities 
and for increased utilization, an increase of over $84 million 
from last year. 
 
This includes investments of $166 million in funding for 
community-based organizations that help Saskatchewan people 
with disabilities, a $20.4 million increase over last year; 174 
million for the Saskatchewan assured income for disability 
program, a 55 per cent increase over last year. This will provide 
increases of $20 per month for a person in residential care, $50 
for single individuals, and $55 for couples who are living 
independently. 
 
[14:45] 
 
It will also accommodate a caseload increase of $4,200 
Saskatchewan people with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, momentum 
continues on Saskatchewan’s child and family agenda 
responding to the most urgent needs of our children, youth, and 
families. Our government is increasing support to child and 
family agenda initiatives by 8.7 million. This brings the total 
commitment in new funding to $62.5 million since the agenda 
was created in 2011. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a multi-ministry approach is focusing on critical 
areas of education, health, family supports, and community 
safety. Among the initiatives are the mental health and 
addictions action plan, expansion of the positive parenting 
program, expansion of the building partnership to reduce crime 
initiative, the Hub and COR [centre of responsibility] model, 

and an additional 15 new pre-kindergarten programs to improve 
reading outcomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 education 
will always be a priority for our government. This year’s 
Ministry of Education budget is $1.76 billion, an increase of 
52.4 million, or 3.1 per cent over last year. 
 
School operating funding provided to school divisions includes 
both 1.17 billion in funding from the Ministry of Education and 
646 million in revenue from the education property tax, for a 
total of $1.82 billion. This is up 2.4 per cent from last year. 
 
Saskatchewan is growing, and that means school enrolment is 
growing. This year’s budget provides over $19 million in new 
operating funding for school divisions to address projected 
enrolment increases of 2,140 students in the upcoming school 
year. This budget also provides $11 million — an increase of 
1.6 million or more than 17 per cent — to address enrolment 
pressures at qualified independent schools, historical high 
schools, and the Sakewew First Nations high school in The 
Battlefords. 
 
This budget also provides 11.3 million for CommunityNet 
bandwidth upgrades to substantially increase Internet speeds in 
schools. This is an increase of $2 million, or more than 21 per 
cent over last year. 
 
815,000 in new funding to implement the bullying and 
cyberbullying action plan. 
 
Our government continues to invest in the education of our 
children before they even reach kindergarten. This budget 
provides over $20 million — an increase of more than 6 per 
cent from last year — to support 15 new pre-K programs. This 
will bring the total number of pre-K programs across 
Saskatchewan to 316. This budget also provides funding to 
create 500 new child care spaces, bringing the total 
commitment of child care spaces in Saskatchewan to over 
14,200, an increase of over 5,000 or 55 per cent since 2007. 
 
Last year employment in Saskatchewan grew by 18,000, the 
largest job growth ever recorded in one year. Still, when 
Saskatchewan business owners are asked to identify the biggest 
challenge they face, it’s usually finding enough skilled workers. 
A well-trained, highly skilled workforce is key to our 
province’s continued growth and to achieving our goal of 
600,000 people working in Saskatchewan by 2020. 
 
It begins with education and training. This budget provides 
nearly $669 million for post-secondary institutions, operating 
grants, and targeted funding, an increase of 16.8 million from 
last year. This includes 489 million in operating and program 
funding for Saskatchewan’s universities and federated and 
affiliated colleges, 152 million in operating and program 
funding for technical institutes, and $28 million in operating 
and program funding for regional colleges. 
 
This budget also provides 216 million in funding that helps 
students afford post-secondary education. That’s an increase of 
9.4 per cent over last year. This includes $82 million for the 
graduate retention program, which allows post-secondary grads 
to recover the cost of their tuition up to $20,000 over seven 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4785 

years if they stay and work in Saskatchewan after graduation. 
Mr. Speaker, we know this program is working. Nearly 50,000 
recent graduates are taking advantage of this program, 50,000 
who are proud to call Saskatchewan home. 
 
The budget also provides 37.4 million for other ongoing 
provincial tax credits related to education costs and interest paid 
on student loans; 32.5 million for the Saskatchewan Student 
Aid Fund; 31 million for the provincial training allowance; 7.5 
million for the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings; and $7 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, which reduces tuition costs by up to $2,000 over 
four years for every new Saskatchewan high school graduate 
who pursues post-secondary education in our province. 
 
Our government is continuing to invest in the training of nurses 
and doctors. This budget provides 14.3 million for the final year 
of the registered nurse seat expansion to 690 seats; 13.7 million 
to continue the implementation of 100 new medical 
undergraduate seats; 10.4 million to continue the 
implementation of 120 new medical residency seats; 578,000 in 
new funding to double the number of perioperative nurse 
training seats at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology] from 18 to 36; and 360,000 — an 
increase of 150,000 — to increase the number of nurse 
practitioner training spaces by five. This brings the total number 
of spaces to 15, three-quarters of the way to our government’s 
commitment of 20 new nurse practitioner training seats by 
2015-16. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides just over $189 million for 
programs and initiatives that specifically benefit First Nations 
and Métis people. A significant portion of this funding is to 
ensure First Nations and Métis people receive the education and 
training they need to take full advantage of the new 
opportunities that exist in Saskatchewan’s growing economy. 
This includes 49 million for funding of First Nations and Métis 
initiatives through the Ministries of Economy and Advanced 
Education, including post-secondary funding and more money 
for skills training; and $6 million to double funding for 
initiatives related to the joint task force on improving education 
and employment outcomes for First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Adult basic education programs have helped many people get 
the skills they need to enter Saskatchewan’s growing 
workforce. The growth plan set a goal of eliminating the adult 
basic education wait-list. Last year’s budget added 300 new 
seats. This year’s budget includes 2.1 million to add a further 
700 seats. 
 
This budget addresses continued demand for a skilled 
workforce. Last year’s budget included funding to meet the 
growth plan target by adding 300 new apprenticeship seats. 
This year’s budget includes a $1 million increase for the 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission to add a 
further 300 apprenticeship seats. It also includes a $1.4 million 
increase in training allowances to support these new adult basic 
education and apprenticeship opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also contains our government’s 
support of farmers and farm families across Saskatchewan. In 
2014-15 more than $371 million will be spent through the 
Ministry of Agriculture. This includes new funding for crop 

insurance to introduce the livestock price insurance program. 
Budget also includes 34 million for AgriInvest, an increase of 
1.7 million due to higher program demand; 43 million for 
AgriStability and its administration, down from last year based 
on federal forecasts and lower program utilization; 79 million 
— an increase of 7.5 million over last year — for the 
federal-provincial Growing Forward 2 program; and $134 
million as the province’s contribution for crop insurance 
premiums. 
 
The people working for Saskatchewan’s rural and urban 
municipalities deliver important services to the people of the 
province. This budget provides over $394 million of direct 
provincial support to municipalities, an increase of 32.8 million 
or 9.1 per cent from last year, an increase of 153 million or 63 
per cent from the 2007-2008 budget. Mr. Speaker, that figure 
includes 257 million for municipality revenue sharing based on 
the formula of one point of the provincial sales tax. While this 
amount is down slightly from last year, it is still more than 
double the amount provided to municipalities in 2007. The 
budget also includes $47.2 million in other municipal funding 
for policing and for transit assistance for people with 
disabilities, as well as 1.2 million for provincial emergency 
response. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has what the world needs. Whether 
it’s potash, uranium, or oil, wheat, canola, or lentils, or 
manufactured products, more than ever the world is buying it 
from Saskatchewan. Our government supports Saskatchewan’s 
manufacturers, exporters, producers, and entrepreneurs. This 
budget provides $500,000 for start-up costs to establish a 
manufacturing centre of excellence and 3.4 million for the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, STEP. It’s paying 
off, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan had a record year for exports, 
reaching $32.3 billion in 2013 and making our province the 
largest exporter per capita in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a little over 100 years ago when my grandfather, 
my gido, first came to Saskatchewan, he did so because this was 
a place of great freedom and incredible opportunity. It was a 
place that offered a better life. It is still that today. That’s why 
Saskatchewan is setting employment records. That’s why 
Saskatchewan is setting population records, and that’s why 
Saskatchewan is firmly on the path of steady growth. 
 
This budget is meant to keep Saskatchewan on that path. It is a 
balanced budget. It contains no tax increases. It controls 
spending. It makes important investments in infrastructure, and 
it makes important investments in people. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget will meet the challenges of a growing province, and it 
will keep Saskatchewan on the path of steady growth. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
[15:00] 



4786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance, seconded by the 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook, has moved: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, it’s my honour to respond briefly to the budget that 
was tabled here today. Our response will reflect the listening 
that we’ve done across the province to the people of our 
province and what they’ve told us matters to them. 
 
I’d like to welcome everyone that’s joined us here today from 
across Saskatchewan to their Assembly. Thank you so much for 
joining us. It’s an honour and a pleasure to be joined here in this 
Assembly by community leaders from across our province, 
municipal leaders, business leaders, education leaders, working 
men and women, so many good friends and even family, 
including my wife and also my best adviser Stephanie, as well 
as my mom and dad, Craik and Faye Wotherspoon, and my 
mother-in-law Barb Willows. Maybe give us a wave. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you may know, Stephanie’s expecting our 
first child, and we’re only a few weeks away from her due date. 
So with all due respect, if she heads for the doors, I’ll be 
following her shortly thereafter. 
 
It’s fair to say that we’re joined by Saskatchewan people that 
are doing their part in our province — those that are investing, 
creating jobs, and creating opportunity. Those that are working 
harder than ever to deliver services where it counts in the lives 
of families, and in the life of their own families. Those that are 
doing all they can do to lead, like our municipal leaders, and 
our education leaders. And this is the story all across 
Saskatchewan; families, workers, businesses are all doing their 
part. 
 
But sadly, government is dropping the ball when it comes to the 
services that families count on. I don’t think many people 
across our province will be very pleased with the budget when 
they get to know the budget. It’s a budget that doesn’t take into 
account Saskatchewan families’ needs and hopes. Despite the 
rhetoric we hear today, it’s a budget that actually cuts health 
care and education. It’s a budget that has nothing to address the 
seniors’ care crisis across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is this government has tabled a budget 
that really only has cuts and crumbs for Saskatchewan families. 
This budget squeezes families and the services they count on, 
ensuring that for another year that the strong economy will only 
benefit government, not the people of the province. 
 
Despite having over 50 per cent more revenue coming into 
government’s coffers, government is heaping financial strain 
onto municipalities, health care, schools, universities, and 
students. And who will pay the price for that, Mr. Speaker? Is it 
a loved one in seniors’ care by not receiving the standard of 
care or dignity they deserve? Is it a family in a health crisis that 
can’t access the needed services and professionals at an 
emergency room when seconds matter in their life? Is it a 

student sitting in an overcrowded classroom without the 
supports or educational assistants they deserve and that they 
need? Or is it families all across Saskatchewan, with higher 
bills and costs on every front, working harder and harder but 
slipping behind? Of course, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
who’s left to pay the price for those types of choices, that type 
of budget, Saskatchewan families and taxpayers know they 
always do. 
 
In advance of this budget, the NDP laid out seven simple 
must-haves as budget priorities. These are the priorities that 
Saskatchewan families, hard-working people, moms and dads, 
university students, young workers, and seniors tell us that 
matter most to them. But, Mr. Speaker, those priorities, the 
priorities of families, of seniors, of students, those priorities 
were ignored by that government in this year’s budget. Mr. 
Speaker, shockingly despite the NDP’s list of seven priorities, 
and those being a common sense, meat-and-potatoes, must-have 
list, the government managed to tick off just one of those seven 
boxes because, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget that is full 
of cuts and crumbs for Saskatchewan people. The message this 
budget sends to everyday families is, brace yourselves. The 
things you count on that really need improvement are likely to 
get even worse with this sort of budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are working harder than 
ever right now. They deserve a budget that uses our strong 
economy to benefit them now and well into the future. They 
deserve for the strong economy to translate into better hospitals, 
smaller classrooms, and improved cost of living. They deserve a 
government that invests in people instead of wrong-headed, 
costly pet projects. 
 
Saskatchewan families have raised concerns over the high cost 
of living while the basics they count on, like education, health 
care, and seniors’ care, get worse. But this budget calls for 
another $51.9 million to be cut from health care. I’m not sure 
why that wasn’t part of the minister’s speech here today. We 
called on the government to end contracts that are making 
Saskatchewan a cash cow for consultants, including one 
contract with an American lean kaizen consultant that’s costing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers more than $40 million. 
 
Additionally this government disregarded concerns of many 
front-line health care workers and professionals who say the 
program hurts patient care instead of helps. The budget doesn’t 
redirect the millions that are being spent on these expensive 
contracts into better health care or front-line services. 
 
The budget re-announces $3.7 million already allocated to 
address urgent care in seniors’ care homes, and not a single new 
dollar to address the deplorable conditions caused by lack of 
staff and the government’s removal of minimum standards. We 
called for action to address the seniors’ care crisis in this 
province, including minimum standards and enough staff to 
properly care for seniors living in care homes. The seniors of 
this province frankly deserve nothing less. 
 
The budget also allocated more to pay for software required to 
plow ahead with an old-fashioned, outdated standardized testing 
regime. We had called for that funding for standardized testing 
to be redirected into teaching to ensure more one-on-one help 
for students, like increasing the number of educational 



March 19, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4787 

assistants in the province. We called for a plan to reduce and 
cap class size, but the budget does nothing to address the 
number of students crowded into crammed classes all across 
Saskatchewan. While classes are bursting at the seams, adding 
more kids, the dollars are stagnant, leaving kids without the 
learning environment and one-on-one attention that they 
deserve. 
 
Despite the desperate need for more classrooms and smaller 
class size to relieve the overcrowding, the government cut the 
Education capital budget by nearly 20 per cent this year, taking 
$23.4 million from school building and repairs that are needed. 
We called for Saskatchewan to build, own, and operate schools 
itself, build more cost-effectively and quickly. The 
government’s P3 rent-a-school scheme will only receive a small 
amount of dollars here this year as we see in this budget — to 
work on design, I understand — guaranteeing that it’s at least 
another year before shovels could be in the ground on the 
ill-advised plan of that government that will have the private 
sector own and operate the schools for our children. 
 
We demanded action to address the high cost of living. The 
reality is, while Saskatchewan families are being asked to pay 
extra far too often, the government is plowing ahead with 
another budget that does nothing to relieve families’ financial 
pressures. And on this front it’s clear that that Premier and that 
government is out of touch with the household reality of far too 
many across this province. 
 
By giving our growing municipalities less this year, more 
financial strain is dumped on residential property tax payers. 
Big increases they’ll be facing and are facing at a time when the 
government is already increasing the monthly cost of SaskTel 
Internet, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], and of course many other costs as well. 
 
Now the one must-have priority that the government took from 
us is a welcome flip-flop on the wrong-headed plan of the 
Premier and the government to raise the education tax to pay for 
bridges and overpasses. We strongly opposed this tax hike and 
were pleased to see them not hike that tax here today on 
families. And it’s chuckles today, but there’s been nervous 
nights for many families thinking one more bill was coming 
down from this Premier. 
 
We believe education property tax should be for education, and 
that with 50 per cent more revenues flowing to that government 
since 2007 there should be more than enough money to get the 
job done without raising taxes on families. 
 
When it comes to the environment, this government’s record is 
not a good one. This budget cuts climate change initiatives, 
including go green, and reduces . . . reducing greenhouse gas 
emission projects by 35 per cent of their funding. That’s a cut of 
83 per cent since 2011. The only thing on climate change that 
we should be cutting is our emissions, and this government 
hasn’t done that either. And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier goes to 
the United States and says Canada needs to give the US a little 
more environmental elbow room. The Premier says that we 
need to talk up our environmental record. Every time he says 
that, he comes back from the States to this legislature and 
makes cuts to environmental initiatives. 
 

Saskatchewan could, should, and must become a leader in 
reducing carbon emissions. But at the moment this province is 
trailing the pack, moving farther away every month from the 
government’s watered down emissions targets. Mr. Speaker, 
quite frankly on this front, government’s actions are weak. 
 
The cuts to agriculture are also stark in this budget. At a time 
when producers are already squeezed because of the grain 
transportation crisis and in part because of slow actions of 
government, grain is still piled up in bins and on fields all 
across Saskatchewan while bills are piling up for producers who 
haven’t been paid for a record crop they produced. Producers 
deserve better from their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to speak briefly about northern 
Saskatchewan. We’re happy to see some investment in 
long-term care beds in this budget after a . . . And I do want to 
attribute something here as well, so thank you for that 
investment, but fought by the community and also by the 
member from Cumberland. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much more for the North — no 
investment into roads, the roads that I think the member from 
Athabasca, who drives these regularly, refers to as gravel goat 
paths, Mr. Speaker. They’re not safe, Mr. Speaker, and there are 
families in minivans and commercial trucks and school buses 
with kids on these roads daily. The infrastructure, the economic 
development, and the opportunities for the people of the North 
that they need to unlock the full potential of that region and of 
the people simply aren’t in this budget. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Sadly this budget reveals the government will not build a 
Heritage Fund any time soon. While both the NDP and an 
independent advisor, Peter MacKinnon, advocate a plan to start 
thinking long term and putting money away into a savings plan, 
the government stubbornly refuses to contribute a dime to 
Saskatchewan’s future until the debt is paid off, they say — a 
mission for which the government’s moving in the wrong 
direction. Backing away from the Heritage Fund represents a 
broken promise of that Premier and a lost opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And in an unprecedented jump, the government will add $1.5 
billion of debt this year alone and has actually increased debt, 
total government debt, by $4 billion since 2009. Mr. Speaker, at 
that rate we won’t have a Heritage Fund started any time soon, 
quite possibly never if that’s the approach of this government. 
The government is using the non-renewable resource dollars 
that are coming in for just getting by, just paying the bills, 
keeping the lights on — nothing being saved for the future. 
Where’s the investment in a Heritage Fund, in schools, in 
hospitals that should come with an economy like the one we’ve 
been blessed with for the better part of a decade? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a few steps in the right direction. 
We’re pleased to see a shift to the summary budget, the 
summary focus, something we’ve been calling for. This is a 
good step. With some reorganization of the budget, we’ll 
continue to track the implementation of the new system of 
reporting to ensure Saskatchewan people have nothing short 
than honest, transparent books they can trust. 



4788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2014 

As you’ll recall, the government’s last budget failed an audit, 
the first government in Canadian history to fail an audit. We 
made it clear that the official opposition, the people of 
Saskatchewan would not accept another set of improper books 
that wouldn’t pass the auditor’s scrutiny. So this is a positive 
step. But let me be clear. The position of that government was 
unsustainable and unacceptable. Every single person in this 
room, the businesses across Saskatchewan have to follow the 
rules. It should be the same for government. 
 
I’m also pleased to see a small investment into following up on 
the anti-bullying initiatives, something we’ve called for. This is 
something that’s important. We’ll certainly track the progress 
on this front, but it’s critical that students all across 
Saskatchewan have safe learning environments. 
 
It’s also good to see the previously announced manufacturing 
centre of excellence being funded in this budget. And I’m very 
pleased that this government did not pursue its ill-advised tax 
hike on credit unions, something we strongly opposed, credit 
unions that we’ve reminded the minister are a vital part of the 
Saskatchewan economy, in fact doing more than 50 per cent of 
the business lending to small- and medium-sized businesses. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP is disappointed that six of seven of 
the NDP’s must-haves were not met by this disappointing 
budget. How many Saskatchewan families have had their needs 
ignored by this government and this budget? How many 
Saskatchewan families who were hoping for better health care, 
smaller class sizes, new publicly owned schools, or an end to 
the seniors’ care crisis will be disappointed today? People tell 
us that government hasn’t been listening, and this budget really 
shows that government is absolutely not listening to 
Saskatchewan people and doesn’t understand what 
Saskatchewan families are facing today. And it’s become 
evident that despite a strong economy and the hard work of 
many, that government is failing to get the job done where it 
matters to Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families deserve better, and because 
Saskatchewan families deserve better the NDP will not be 
supporting the budget. While I’ll have more to say on this 
budget tomorrow, provide a more detailed analysis and critique 
and a local perspective, it’s been my privilege, my honour to 
enter debate here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I move that this debate be now 
adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be resumed 
on Thursday, March 20th, 2014. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be resumed 
on Thursday, March 20th, 2014. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, I 
want to first say thank you to our guests who joined us today 
and for your co-operation in observing the rules of the 
Assembly. 
 
I would now like to extend an invitation to our guests to join the 
members for tea in the Legislative Library to your right as you 
leave the Assembly and in room 218 to the left. I ask that our 
guests allow the members of the Legislative Assembly to leave 
first by the side doors. 
 
At this time I will place the question. The Government House 
Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:22.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4773 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4773 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4773 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4773 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4773 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4773 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4774 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women of Influence Award 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4774 
 Budget Priorities for Opposition 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4774 
 Honouring Carole Sanderson 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4774 
 Reporting of Financial Statements 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4775 
 Students Against Bullying Bill 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4775 
 Battlefords Trade and Education Centre Fundraiser 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4775 
 Grain Transportation Backlog 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4776 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4776 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4776 
 Patient Care and Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4777 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4778 
 Use of Resources in Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4779 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4779 
 Support for Agricultural Producers 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4780 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4780 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4780 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4781 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4781 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4781 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4786 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4788 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


