




















































Hansard: March 25, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, MARCH 25, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4881 

 March 25, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 

this Assembly several visitors this afternoon. Today we have 

students who have been articling with the Ministry of Justice 

and the courts in Saskatchewan since June of last year. I had a 

chance to briefly talk with them earlier today and I was very 

impressed by their energy, their knowledge, and their 

enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if these students are any 

indication of the legal profession in Saskatchewan, the future is 

in very, very good hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, accompanied by Jeffrey Crawford from the 

ministry, we have Leona Andrews, Ali Shah, and Lerissa 

Thaver who have been articling with the Ministry of Justice. 

Maybe just if you could give a wave. 

 

Leona Andrews obtained her law degree from the University of 

Saskatchewan’s College of Law after completing a Bachelor of 

Arts in political science and psychology at the University of 

Alberta. Her previous experience includes time as a summer 

student at the Saskatoon Correctional Centre and volunteer 

work with Victim/Witness Services Unit in Lethbridge. 

 

Ali Shah obtained his law degree equivalency from the 

University of Toronto. He also holds degrees in law and 

journalism from the University of the Punjab in Lahore, 

Pakistan. Before coming to Canada, Ali worked as a lawyer in 

Lahore. His work experience includes time with Cooper 

Barristers as a student of law in Toronto. 

 

Lerissa Thaver studied at the College of Law in Saskatoon after 

completing a Bachelor of Arts in psychology with great 

distinction at the University of Regina. She’s worked with the 

Regina Open Door Society and has also put her legal expertise 

to use with organizations such as the Canadian Civil Liberties 

Association and Just Rights college law students’ group. 

 

Annie Alport and Michael Stevens also join us in the 

Legislative Assembly today. Annie and Michael have been 

articling with the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

Annie Alport graduated from the Saskatchewan College of Law 

after completing a Bachelor of Arts in political science and 

Italian at McGill University in Montreal. Her legal expertise 

includes work as a summer student with the Miller Thomson 

law firm. Annie also was the president and founding member of 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Student Animal 

Defense Fund. 

 

Michael Stevens is another College of Law graduate from 

Saskatoon. He obtained his law degree with great distinction 

and also holds a Bachelor of Arts in history. Michael worked as 

an editor for the Saskatchewan Law Review and is an active 

volunteer with Habitat for Humanity. 

 

We also have with us today Jared Biden who is articling with 

the Court of Queen’s Bench and Colton Fehr who is articling 

with the Provincial Court. 

 

Jared Biden graduated from the University of Saskatchewan 

with great distinction after receiving a Bachelor of Arts in 

philosophy, also with great distinction. He has worked as an 

editor for the Saskatchewan Law Review and represented the 

College of Law in the national Gale Moot legal competition in 

2013. 

 

Colton Fehr graduated from Saskatoon’s College of Law at the 

university with distinction after completing a Bachelor of Arts 

in political science with a minor in Russian. Like Michael and 

Jared, Colton has served as an editor of the Saskatchewan Law 

Review. His experience includes work as a volunteer student 

with Saskatoon’s CLASSIC [Community Legal Assistance 

Services for Saskatoon Inner City Inc.] program where he 

assisted inner-city clients with a variety of legal issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as always I’m proud that we have a strong group 

of articling students and wish them all the best in their future 

endeavours. Please join me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Justice in welcoming all of the new 

lawyers-to-be, I guess very soon, to the legislature. It looks like 

sometimes that there are too many lawyers in the legislature, 

but there aren’t. And so what I would say is, always include in 

your career plan to work hard at whatever you’re doing, but 

then consider serving the people of the province in the 

legislature. Welcome, all of you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 

privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the Government 

of Saskatchewan announced its plans to privatize health care 

laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 

Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen, and that as a result of 

that decision to privatize health care laundry, six non-profit 

health care laundry facilities will be closed within two years in 



4882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

the communities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, 

Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And we know that the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at risk 

as health regions lose direct control over health care laundry 

services and that the privatization of health care laundry will 

mean that fair-wage jobs will be replaced, poverty wages, and 

public accountability will be lost. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s health care laundry, which will result in 

the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. 

 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions will lose direct 

control over laundry and thereby will have a significantly 

reduced ability to quickly and effectively respond to 

infectious outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents that 

are in support of safety on Dewdney Avenue and rerouting that 

current heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. 

They’re concerned by the unacceptable delay of this 

government to address a problem, a safety issue created by this 

government. And their prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of city centre, to ensure the safety 

and well-being of communities, families, residents, and 

users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government simply ignored 

the calls to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled the RPO. 

That means the dream of home ownership is destroyed for 

many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing them 

the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud 

to present a petition in support of Highway 918. And Highway 

918 is the only road to and from the community of Patuanak and 

the English River First Nations in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

commit to repairing and upgrading Highway No. 918. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people that have signed the petition are 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatonian Honoured at Breaking the Silence 

Conference 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of attending the 

17th annual Breaking the Silence conference at the University of 

Saskatchewan this weekend. It was a fun and informative 

weekend focused on issues of sexual orientation and gender 

expression in our schools. 

 

Each year at the conference, a person or organization that has 

had a long-term impact on social justice for sexual minorities is 

honoured with the Peter Corren Award for Outstanding 

Achievement. This year the award honoured Don Cochrane, 

professor emeritus at the U of S and the organizer of the first 

Breaking the Silence conference in 1998. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was moving to hear the words of Murray Corren 

on why Don Cochrane was so deserving of this award, and I 

quote: 

 

The Breaking the Silence conference would have never 

happened and grown year after year if it had not been for 

Don Cochrane. He has inspired and motivated people to 

become involved and provided them with outstanding 

leadership that is necessary for such an achievement not 

only to survive, but to grow and mature into the 

extraordinary event that it is today. I can think of no more 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4883 

deserving recipient for the Peter Corren award, and I’m 

delighted Don’s tireless efforts, enthusiasm, and 

dedication are finally being recognized and celebrated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Don Cochrane for his very deserving receipt of the Peter Corren 

Award for Outstanding Achievement. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Habitat For Humanity Key Ceremony in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

inform members that today we’re celebrating another Habitat 

for Humanity home dedication. Today keys were presented to a 

Habitat for Humanity partner family, Robert and Kathy Bennett 

and their two children, Hannah and Logan, to mark the 

beginning of a new future in a home of their own. 

 

I am pleased that the government was able to assist Habitat by 

contributing $50,000 to build the Bennetts’ new home. 

Additional funding was provided by Conexus Credit Union and 

Mosaic potash corporation, with the land and building permits 

donated by the city of Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, this is truly a 

wonderful example of how communities can work together to 

reduce their monthly expenses to give a family more financial 

freedom. 

 

Like Habitat and its partners, our government, through the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, continues to work hard to 

meet the diverse housing needs of Saskatchewan people. Mr. 

Speaker, our government has committed a total of $7.85 million 

for Habitat for Humanity across the province since March of 

2009, and we can see the results of this investment with each 

and every build. 

 

This is what the Saskatchewan plan for growth is all about: to 

keep our province growing, improve our quality of life, and 

continue to make Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, 

and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Saskatchewan Book Awards Brunch 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last Sunday Linda and I had the 

opportunity to attend the Saskatchewan Book Awards brunch at 

the Delta Bessborough Hotel in Saskatoon. This brunch was an 

opportunity to showcase the Saskatoon and area finalists in the 

running for the upcoming Saskatchewan Book Awards gala on 

Saturday, April 26th at the Conexus Arts Centre in Regina. 

 

The Saskatchewan Book Awards aim to highlight talent, 

celebrate excellence and diversity in Saskatchewan writing and 

publishing. In Saskatoon this weekend, Marie Battiste, Lisa 

Bird-Wilson, Mari-Lou Rowley, and Allan Safarik were the 

guest readers, giving listeners an early chance to recognize the 

depth of Saskatchewan talent leading up to the awards. 

 

Each year the Saskatchewan Book Awards presents numerous 

awards to acknowledge the accomplishments of our province’s 

authors and publishers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to take this opportunity to 

congratulate all of the nominees for their outstanding works and 

wish them best of luck leading up to the awards gala next 

month. I would also like to extend thanks to the Saskatchewan 

Book Awards staff and board for incredible work in raising the 

profile of Saskatchewan books, authors, and publishers. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Hoopla 2014 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House today to congratulate all the schools that 

participated in the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 

Association basketball championships, Hoopla. 

 

Hoopla is Saskatchewan’s March Madness, Mr. Speaker, and 

by all accounts the competition was as intense. Forty-eight 

teams from all across the province descended on Regina to vie 

for provincial titles in their respective divisions. Ten champions 

were decided, Mr. Speaker, five girls’ and five boys’ teams. 

 

In the girls’ division, Mr. Speaker, it was Middle Lake 

Avengers, Wynyard Bears, Caronport Cougars, Notre Dame 

Hounds, and the Regina Campbell Tartans. In the boys’ 

divisions, Mr. Speaker, it was LCBI [Lutheran Collegiate Bible 

Institute] Bisons from Outlook, Saskatoon Legacy Christian 

Eagles, Regina Harvest City Reapers, Moose Jaw Peacock 

Toilers, and the Regina LeBoldus Golden Suns. 

 

Thanks to the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association, 

the hosting schools, the volunteers, coaches, parents, and 

players, this event was a huge success. Mr. Speaker, we are 

very proud of all the athletes and the very hard work that they 

put into each practice and game and the level of sportsmanship 

displayed. Special thanks of course to all the coaches, trainers, 

volunteers, and parents for all the time, effort, and support that 

they provide our young student athletes. Well done, everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing the 

Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association on the success 

of Hoopla and congratulating all the teams and coaches on their 

hard work. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Rejuvenation of Moose Jaw’s Balmoral Apartments 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March the 7th 

I, along with Palliser Member of Parliament Ray Boughen and 

officials from MMRD Properties, officially opened Balmoral 

Apartments in Moose Jaw. 

 

Balmoral Apartments is a 100-year-old building on Moose 

Jaw’s Main Street. This heritage structure underwent massive 

renovations to rejuvenate the entire apartment block while 

keeping the heritage ambiance which is prevalent in many 



4884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Moose Jaw structures. 

 

The building had to be vacated due to the extent of the 

renovations, but upon completion 23 apartments were totally 

upgraded, including all new bathroom fixtures, fridges and 

stoves, lighting fixtures, as well as electrical and plumbing 

upgrades, structural repairs, and renewal of interiors right down 

to the laminate floors. 

 

This renovated structure is the most recent achievement in the 

government’s housing plan. Working together with the federal 

government and with the private sector, we were able to provide 

additional low-cost housing in Moose Jaw’s tight housing 

market. Our government continues to work with partnership 

organizations to develop housing opportunities, and the nearly 

$100 million investment in our community is greatly 

appreciated in assisting low-income residents. 

 

I want to thank MMRD Properties for their experience and their 

expertise in renovations and to thank the federal government for 

assisting in housing developments in Moose Jaw. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

National Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, March is National Colorectal 

Cancer Awareness Month. Colorectal cancer is 90 per cent 

preventable and easily treated if detected early. It is the second 

most diagnosed form of cancer in both men and women. We 

encourage everyone to do their part in preventing cancers by 

maintaining a healthy lifestyle, getting regular exercise, and 

avoiding tobacco use. 

 

Our government has also strengthened our prevention and 

detection efforts. Last year the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

working with health regions and the Saskatchewan disease 

control lab, expanded the colorectal cancer screening program 

to cover the whole province. Mr. Speaker, the program saves 

lives by identifying colorectal cancer long before any symptoms 

are present. 

 

Every two years, Saskatchewan men and women between 50 

and 74 years of age are able to complete the test in the privacy 

of their homes with an easy-to-use test kit. More than 70 per 

cent of people with abnormal test results end up needing 

treatment. Annual funding for the program is about $3.6 

million, with another $2 million to health regions for additional 

diagnostic procedures needed by patients with abnormal test 

results. We encourage anyone who receives a test kit to do their 

part in the detection of colorectal cancer by mailing in the kit 

and pursuing follow-up diagnosis if needed. 

 

Thank you to the people of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 

and the health regions for all that they do to combat colorectal 

cancer. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Restaurateur Receives Legacy Award 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I was 

honoured to bring greetings on behalf of the Minister 

Responsible for SaskPower to the 2013 Legacy Awards brunch 

hosted at the Travelodge hotel by the Prince Albert & District 

Chamber of Commerce. 

 

SaskPower took part in the event as a sponsor of the Legacy 

Award, which is named after one of Prince Albert’s earliest 

settlers and entrepreneurs, Samuel McLeod. This year’s 

recipient of the Samuel McLeod Legacy Award was Mrs. Maria 

Yannacoulias, who is the proud owner of the Venice House 

restaurant in Prince Albert and has been so since 1976. Over the 

past 37 years, she has seen countless changes to the community 

and restaurant industry. Her advice to all business owners is, 

and I quote: 

 

You have to know your customer, know your city. To the 

best of your ability you give the people what they want — 

you’re willing to work hard, work long hours but work 

smart. Be able to adapt to change, but not lose your 

identity at the same time. Make a good product and stand 

by it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Venice House has been an important part of 

Prince Albert for decades. Maria is a big inspiration to the 

business community and is certainly deserving of this award. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Mrs. Maria Yannacoulias of Prince Albert on 

being the recipient of the 2013 Samuel McLeod Legacy Award. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provision of Home Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the Premier 

confirm that people who need home care in our capital city are 

being rejected right now because there is currently no capacity 

for home care to take on any new clients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are looking to provide supports to seniors right 

across the province, whether that be through long-term care, 

personal care homes, and the subsidy that’s provided for 

low-income individuals, as well as an innovative program 

called Home First/Quick Response which is an enhancement to 

the existing home care that is already provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will know that the budget 

that just came out, that we have an opportunity to vote on, that 

will see record increases to the regional health authorities, Mr. 

Speaker — $4.99 billion budget for health, a record-level 

investment, Mr. Speaker — to provide such services as home 

care across the regions. 

 

To the Leader of the Opposition’s question, I’m not familiar 

with any concerns that have been raised recently with home 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4885 

care in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a memo was circulated on Friday 

stating that home care cannot take on any new clients. An email 

we’ve received says that no new clients will be taken on for 

probably at least a week, but they don’t actually know when 

they will be able to fix the situation and start taking new clients 

again. 

 

So my question is to the Premier: why is home care stretched so 

thin that it can’t take on any additional clients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll certainly look into the situation that the Leader of 

the Opposition has outlined. Considering the fact that regional 

health authorities would have just found out late last week what 

their budget numbers would be and don’t in fact set their 

budgets until a couple months from now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

certainly look to find out what, endeavour to see what the 

problem is in terms of the memo, any memo that perhaps may 

have been circulated. Mr. Speaker, because I do not have that 

memo, I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition if he’d table that in 

the House. Then I could have access to it. 

 

But what I can say to the members opposite is that the home 

care budget for the regional health authorities in the last full 

year under the NDP [New Democratic Party] was $122.5 

million. That’s just what the government paid. That didn’t 

include the fees that home care recipients paid. In the ’13-14 

budget year that is just ending at the end of this month, it’s 

$168.9 million, a 48 per cent increase in just six years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government should be paying 

attention to the patients and the residents in the province right 

now who need home care today and are not receiving the 

program because it’s not available. If the discharge plan for 

patients in hospitals right now includes home care services but 

there aren’t home care services available because the system is 

stretched so thin under this government, then those patients 

have to stay in the hospital. 

 

So my question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: how many 

patients are stuck in hospital beds because this government 

doesn’t have the proper home care services available? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

regional health authorities work with each of our patients on a 

discharge plan, whether that be, Mr. Speaker, back to their own 

home. In some cases, there may be some respite available for 

individuals that need that additional support, Mr. Speaker, or 

perhaps it’s back to a long-term care facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through some of the work that we’re doing that 

does, yes, include lean methodology, Mr. Speaker, even today 

the regional health authority, Regina Qu’Appelle Regional 

Health Authority reports that in the last three months since a 

new electronic bed management system has been put in place 

for that very issue of discharging patients, Mr. Speaker, in the 

last three months, compared to the same three-month period a 

year ago, the occupancy rates have been reduced by 10 to 20 

per cent at the General and the Pasqua Hospital. The time that 

people are waiting from the emergency room admission to a 

bed within the acute care setting is down nearly 55 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re making improvements, and certainly I would 

offer the opportunity for the Leader of the Opposition to table 

the memo. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, this 

government should know what’s happening in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region and should know what’s happening 

for people here in Regina who need home care services. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, this government said it was going to 

spend $5.5 million for a new home care program for Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, perfect evidence of the disconnect 

between what patients and residents are feeling here in the 

province and what this government would like to clap and 

thump on their desks for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing home care program is stretched so 

thin under this government that it’s turning people away that 

desperately need home care here in our capital city. And 

patients that would otherwise be discharged from the hospital 

but who need home care as part of their plan to go home are 

stuck in hospital beds without the proper supports to go back 

into their homes. And this pattern fits, Mr. Speaker, with this 

government’s approach of neglecting the basics, neglecting the 

basics for seniors’ care, neglecting the basics in health care. It 

has all the money, Mr. Speaker, for a US [United States] 

consultant, for Japanese senseis, and for pet projects, but it’s 

neglecting the basics. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is this government neglecting 

the existing home care program to the point that it can’t even 

take on any new clients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve mentioned before, the home care budget for 

regional health authorities has increased nearly 50 per cent 

since when the time the members opposite were in government, 

Mr. Speaker. I think at that time, in those six years, the rate of 

inflation hasn’t increased 50 per cent. The rate of our clients 

within home care haven’t increased by 50 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that that shows that we are putting significant 

supports. In fact in the year that’s just ending, nearly $170 

million in regional health authority budgets will go directly into 

home care. 

 

In terms of, Mr. Speaker, I think the comment by the Leader of 



4886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

the Opposition, the Home First/Quick Response program, Mr. 

Speaker, that is an important program. That is something 

innovative that we’re doing in Saskatchewan that we’ve learned 

from other jurisdictions that have piloted. We’re trying that here 

in Regina, in Saskatoon, in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, to help 

return those seniors home more quickly, Mr. Speaker, to defer a 

placement in an acute care bed where possible and with the 

hopes that that senior will not even have to go into an acute care 

bed, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pilot project. I think it’s going to work 

well and it is an investment in the seniors of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the pilot 

project but ignores the fact that he’s starving the existing 

program. The existing program is not able to take on new 

clients. 

 

Let me get this straight, Mr. Speaker. This government has $40 

million for a US consultant, $3,500 a day for Japanese sensei, 

and who knows how many more millions for its lean project. 

Yet our home care program is stretched so thin, Mr. Speaker, 

that it can’t even take on new clients. 

 

The Premier needs to listen to this. It’s turning away individuals 

who need help, leaving them in hospital beds, Mr. Speaker, and 

leaving seniors out in the community without the supports that 

they so desperately need. And we have no idea, Mr. Speaker, 

when the home care program will actually be able to take on 

new clients again. 

 

My question to the Premier: when will this government get its 

priorities straight and start focusing on the basics in health care 

like having the appropriate home care services available for 

people here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to the Leader of the Opposition’s question 

around the memo, you’ll forgive me, Mr. Speaker, if I say that I 

will wait for the regional health authority and the Ministry of 

Health to actually confirm that a memo actually does exist, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ll certainly look into that situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to home care, the home care budget 

within the regional health authorities has increased 48 per cent, 

from $122 million to nearly $170 million up to the end of the 

year ’13-14 which ends at the end of this fiscal year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the supports that we do provide for our 

seniors, whether that be home care, whether that be a new 

program called Home First/Quick Response, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think will be a good benefit to the seniors that are in our care 

that perhaps do not need placement within the system, Mr. 

Speaker, this is all about a continuum of care for seniors. With 

respect to the Leader of the Opposition’s specific question, 

we’ll certainly follow up on the concerns that he’s raised. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier and the 

Health minister steadfastly refused to provide the grand total of 

what it will spend on its lean project in health care. Either the 

government doesn’t know the full cost of its massive lean 

project in health care, or it doesn’t want the public to know the 

full cost. Either way it’s unacceptable. To the Health minister: 

how much will taxpayers be paying for its lean project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

I mentioned yesterday to the Leader of the Opposition in his 

questions, what we’ve spent to date is approximately $26 

million. That’s $18.8 million of the Ministry of Health, which a 

major part of that is the $40 million that we’re estimating that 

we’ll spend should the contract go the full length of the four 

years, Mr. Speaker, which would be about $40 million. 

 

To date, the regional health authorities have spent $6.7 million. 

Mr. Speaker, I think with the regional health authorities now 

receiving their dollar allotment in the budget here just a week 

ago or not even more than a week ago, Mr. Speaker, the 

regional health authorities will be looking to put forward what 

their plans are in terms of the deployment of lean this year as 

well as next year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that this is an investment that, first of all, 

it’s paid for itself, Mr. Speaker, with $40 million in savings so 

far to the system. That’s in the first little over two years of 

actual deployment within the system, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

that we’ll see more in terms of savings, terms of patient safety 

and efficiencies within the system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, just in the 2013-14 budget year, 

taxpayers spent 17.2 million on kaizen promotion offices. This 

government spent almost $300,000 on international travel for 

lean training this past year. And the year before, they spent 

$430,000 on international travel for lean training. So that’s 

almost $18 million right there, just on the kaizen promotion 

offices and international travel. And that is over and above this 

government’s $40 million contract with John Black. 

 

To the minister: why won’t this government be transparent with 

the total amount of money that taxpayers are spending on this 

massive lean project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

just want to correct the member opposite. The lean kaizen 

promotion office within the Ministry of Health resides within 

the strategy and innovation branch. It employs five employees, 

Mr. Speaker, two that were existing strategy and innovation 

branch employees that have now been assigned directly to lean, 

Mr. Speaker, and three additional staff within the Ministry of 

Health that were reassigned to lean, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4887 

new dollars, Mr. Speaker. It’s a reorganization within the 

Ministry of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know, and I’ve said the number already, 

approximately $18 million from the Ministry of Health in the 

first two and a half, close to two and a half years of lean, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that some of that does involve the work of 

the kaizen offices, some of it does involve travel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that under the member from Lakeview, when he was 

the Health minister, a fund was established where, over a 

two-year period, $400,000 went to the Five Hills Health Region 

to begin lean work, Mr. Speaker, within that health region; also, 

Mr. Speaker, which is 0.2 per cent of Five Hills health budget 

over that same time, which is 0.2 per cent of what we expect to 

spend over a four-year period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families are 

footing the bill for this government’s massive lean project and 

they deserve to know how much in total they will have to pay. 

We know the $40 million contract with John Black. We know 

about the $17.2 million for kaizen promotion offices just in 

2013-14. We know about the $730,000 just for international 

travel for health administrators in the last two years. We know 

that doctors are being paid $30,000 each for lean training, and 

we know about the $3,500-a-day Japanese sensei. To the 

minister: what is the total tab? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try this again. Mr. 

Speaker, $18.8 million from the Ministry of Health and, to date, 

6.7 million spent by the RHAs [regional health authority] 

themselves. Mr. Speaker, that includes what has been spent 

under the JBA [John Black and Associates], in terms of the 

terms of the contract of JBA. There was also some lean work 

that was done prior to the JBA contract, Mr. Speaker, through 

other work that was done prior to JBA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the member opposite also want me to include 

the $400,000 that was spent under the NDP government to 

implement lean in some projects? I believe there was 70 

projects in Five Hills over two years. Does she want me to 

include the travel that was spent by five health officials and 

regional health authority officials who travelled to Seattle in 

2005 for training and development and to participate in rapid 

process improvement work, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, this is 

really just an extension of what has taken place for several 

years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — And the meter continues running, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again either the government doesn’t 

know the full cost of its massive lean project in health care or it 

doesn’t want the public to know its full cost. 

 

Here is what we do know: a $40 million consultant, $17 million 

kaizen promotion offices, $730,000 for international travel for 

health administrators, $30,000 each for doctors to get lean 

training, and $3,500 per day for Japanese senseis. And that is 

not the total bill, Mr. Speaker. Again to the minister: why won’t 

he share the full details? What will the full cost be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the work that we’re doing in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — just remind the members 

opposite if they didn’t know this, and I’ve mentioned it a couple 

of times — there was a fund established for lean initiative. I 

believe 70 initiatives were funded in Five Hills over two years.  

 

And here’s an excerpt from the evaluation of the project under 

the member from Lakeview: “The region has successfully 

pioneered the adoption of lean across all the aspects in the 

health care enterprise. As a result of the success experienced in 

the Five Hills Health Region, the province is in a position to 

implement lean throughout the health care sector.” We, Mr. 

Speaker, thought that that was, I think, a good idea in terms of 

trying to find efficiencies, trying to find cost savings, improving 

the health outcomes, improving the quality care and safety 

record of the health system, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And here’s what we’re hearing from front-line staff. Here’s 

from a registered psychiatric nurse: “As a nurse, I fully support 

the implementation of lean in Saskatchewan health care and am 

extremely proud to be on this journey within the province.” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, just in the last four years 81 

vulnerable children, those in the care of Social Services and 

those who have just left the system, have died. Eighty-one 

deaths of vulnerable children just since 2010, and that doesn’t 

include the deaths from natural causes. It’s heartbreaking, Mr. 

Speaker, and it ought to be a cause for major concern for this 

government. That’s why many were incredibly concerned to see 

this government’s budget when it cut $5.6 million in salaries 

from the child and family services division of Social Services. 

 

To the minister: how can this government justify cutting jobs in 

the child and family services division? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

members opposite. We know that the death of any child is a 

tragedy, and we know that all the workers that we have in this 

province work together with the caregivers and with 

government to see what we can be doing better. When we look 

at the budget that has been spent and the one that was released 

last week, we know that there was additional money spent to 

the child and family agenda to ensure that there is more money 

for the workers. We’re making sure that money is spent to go 

across ministries so we can evaluate the work that’s being done. 

Any time there is a death, we review it not only within the 

ministry but we work with the Children’s Advocate as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is not a . . . We continue to invest in our 



4888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

children. There is fewer children in care, and we know that 

every one of these children are special. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that the work that we do continues. Our job does not 

mean that we are trying to take children into care. We must 

keep them safe and keep them with their families if at all 

possible. But, Mr. Speaker, there is not a cut when it comes to 

our children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, when we know that 81 children 

have died, either in care or shortly after leaving the system just 

since 2010, we should be seeing significant improvements to 

child protection and family services. And here’s what the 

budget document says, the child and family services division, 

and I quote: 

 

Provides programs, services and financial assistance to 

protect children from neglect and abuse and support the 

safe care of children through a continuum of family 

arrangements. It also operates residential facilities for 

youth who require structured living arrangements. 

 

This is an incredibly important unit because its job is to protect 

some of our most vulnerable citizens — children and youth in 

care. Again to the minister: why is this government choosing to 

cut front-line jobs in the child and family services division? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 

opposite is aware that there is no cuts to the front-line services. 

In fact what we have is 90 more front-line workers for fewer 

children in care. Our goal is to make sure that we have . . . that 

children are supported within their own home if possible. If not, 

we make sure that they are going into foster homes where there 

is support as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the Linkin system. We no longer have 

children being kept track of on paper. We have a structured 

decision-making process. We have an assessment to see what 

we can be doing for our children. 

 

 Every time there is a child death, we look at it through the eyes 

of families and people that are loving the children to see what 

else we can do. In fact I had the opportunity lately to speak to 

the ministers in Alberta as well to see if together we can decide 

what else we can be doing in learning best practices from each 

other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no cut for our children. There is more 

workers for our children. And our goal as a government is to 

keep our children safe. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Children’s Advocate has said repeatedly that this government’s 

cut to staff at Social Services are having a negative impact on 

children in care. And here’s a quote from the Children’s 

Advocate in September, and I quote: 

 

The quality of case management and case planning has to 

improve. If that’s a resourcing issue, which I believe it is, I 

know the ministry has added 90 staff, but the ministry as a 

whole also has cut over 100 staff members. 

 

To the minister: why is this government refusing to listen to 

these warnings and failing to properly protect children in care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, we 

make sure that the work that we’re doing within the ministry, 

within the administration, within the policies, whatever we’re 

doing within ministries, yes, we make sure we do that work in 

an efficient manner as possible.  

 

What we do not look for is cutting care for children. What we 

do not . . . We make sure that there are front-line workers. 

We’ve cut back the number of . . . There are fewer children in 

care. There are more contact people to be able to go out and 

meet with our families. There is more help for our foster 

families. There is more help for assessment. 

 

And there is working across ministries, the first time in Canada 

where we’ve had the chance to look across ministry and make 

sure we see the children through the eyes Education and Social 

Services and Health at the same time. We’re looking at more 

money for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, more money for 

autism, and more money to protect our children. There is never 

a doubt in this province that children are our first priority, and I 

cannot say the same for the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — But this is the fact that the minister does not 

dispute, they’ve cut $5.6 million in salaries. That is the fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is perhaps no greater responsibility of 

government than to protect our most vulnerable citizens. Yet we 

keep hearing major concerns about our child protection system: 

81, 81 vulnerable children have died just since 2010 and that 

does not include deaths from natural causes. And in December, 

the Provincial Auditor reported that this government is still not 

doing enough to protect vulnerable children. Yet this 

government is cutting front-line workers in the child and family 

services division. 

 

To the minister: when will this government listen to the auditor 

and the Children’s Advocate, stop cutting front-line workers, 

and start properly protecting vulnerable children? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I cannot say 

often enough how much everybody’s heart aches when we hear 

about the death of a child. We know that many of the children 

that come into care in this province are medically fragile. We 

also know that the number of children that come into care, we 

automatically think that they are younger children, ages six and 

down. Children are also what we would call young adults up to 

the age of 18 years old. And we look at the statistics, we find 

that some of them have died from homicides. Some of them 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4889 

have died in car accidents. Some of them have died from 

suicides. Every one of those breaks our hearts. 

 

But we have not cut front-line workers. We do not cut money to 

the care of our children. What we do is work together to make 

sure that we can protect the lives of the most vulnerable and the 

most valuable asset we have in the province, and that’s our 

children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should go back and 

read through the government’s own child welfare review report 

from 2010. Here’s what that report said, and I quote: 

 

High caseloads and worker turnover result in lost 

continuity in planning, increased time children spend in 

care, attachment and relationship challenges for children, 

and increased recruitment and training costs for the 

Ministry and agencies. 

 

To the minister: this government knew about this issue for the 

last four years from its own review. Why is it cutting staff when 

its own review and Children’s Advocate and Provincial Auditor 

all have called for better support for vulnerable children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member, I have 

said — and I know, and I believe he knows it as well — we 

have not cut support for vulnerable children. There may be . . . 

There are cuts within the ministry. We decide how we can do 

things in a better way. We decide that processes may be done 

differently. We look at the way the money is spent so we can 

take money and put it to the front line. Every time we go to 

treasury board, every time we go in front of the caucus we say, 

what else should we be doing? They tell us, look after the 

children in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 90 more front-line workers. We have 

fewer children in care. We have more supports for those 

children that are in care and we have supports for a family who 

need help for their children as well. Mr. Speaker, that is a 

priority for our government. It always has been. It always will 

be. And I do not care how many times the member opposite 

asks that question, children matter on this side of the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 264 through 266. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

264 to 266. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 267 through 275. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 267 to 275 inclusive. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it truly is 

an honour and a privilege to be able to stand in this House today 

and speak to what I believe will be the best budget in our entire 

nation. Before I begin though, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of 

people that I would like to thank, and that is my family and 

friends who have supported me now for a number of years of 

being elected. I have a dad that has been just incredibly 

supportive of my career as well as three amazing daughters who 

have been as well. 

 

I have the best staff ever back home in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 

I have Susan Dunne who entirely runs my office and does a 

super job of it. And here in Regina I think I have the best staff 

in the building. 

 

I also want to thank my constituents, Mr. Speaker. I represent a 

super riding. Humboldt and the surrounding communities right 

through to the edge of Saskatoon are very progressive, 

industrious people, and I am truly proud and honoured to be 

able to represent them. 

 

And I want to thank the Minister of Finance and treasury board 

for all of the work they do because I know, I served on the 

treasury board for three years since we’ve been in government. 

I know it’s a lot of hours. It’s a lot of work. So I truly am 

grateful for the work that they did. 

 

I’m proud of this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to speak 

in favour of this budget. It is a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a balanced budget with no tax increases. It’s a balanced 

budget with no debt increases. And it’s a balanced budget 

because they have controlled spending, and yet it still found 

money to invest in infrastructure and to invest in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my responsibility in government right now is 

Crown Investments Corporation, known as CIC. And I know 

last night I was listening intently as the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana spoke about the debt. And so I think that since much of 

that debt quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, and definitely the debt 

increase, has been in the Crown corporations, I would like to 

address that very issue. Because there is quite a difference, quite 

frankly, of debt within Crown corporations than the debt within 

the operations of government, and significantly different. 

 

In our first six years in government, Mr. Speaker, we invested 



4890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

in the capital within SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], and SaskEnergy by nearly $8 billion. 

We know that the Crown corporations are vital to the growth 

within our province. We know that we need to keep our Crown 

corporations strong, and we need to have them moving forward 

in order to sustain the growth within our province. 

 

This investment, Mr. Speaker, in infrastructure within the 

Crown corporations is 140 per cent more than the NDP spent 

during their final six years in government. The NDP who say, 

quite frankly, that they support the Crowns, did not put their 

money where their mouth is. And they didn’t support the 

Crowns because there was an infrastructure deficit within our 

Crown corporations. 

 

Now in 2014 we’re estimating that we’ll be spending an 

additional $2 billion. Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s because we 

understand how important our Crown corporations are, how 

critical they are to the growth that’s happening within this 

province, and how they are important to the quality of life for 

the people within our province. So the net debt within Crown 

corporations is rising. But the important thing that we need to 

watch is that it’s rising at a slower pace than total asset growth. 

From 2008 to 2013, Mr. Speaker, Crown debt increased from 

3.6 billion to 6.1 billion, which is a $2.5 billion increase. We do 

not deny that, Mr. Speaker. It is in the summary financial 

statement. That is an increase in debt. 

 

But during that same period, Mr. Speaker, which is very, very 

important — and the member from Regina Rosemont should 

listen very, very carefully because he has a lot to say right now 

— during that same period, Mr. Speaker, Crown assets 

increased by more than 4 billion. Mr. Speaker, from 7.7 billion 

to 11.8 billion is the value of the assets. That is a dramatically 

greater increase in the value than the debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share this and I want to quote, and that 

is: 

 

Even after taking into account the debt of state-owned 

enterprises, which forms the major part of debt financing, 

the government still maintains a debt/GDP ratio of 

between 11.2 and 12.6 per cent until at least 2017. This 

compares very favourably with large provinces like 

Ontario and Quebec, both of which maintain net 

debt-to-GDP ratios in excess of 35 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that quote is from the Conference Board of 

Canada report when it says Financing Growth in the New 

Saskatchewan, June 2013. Again, I want to just repeat the 

important part of that and how it is that we are mindful of 

managing the debt within the Crowns, and point out that the 

debt-to-GDP ratio is between 11.2 and 12.6 within our Crown 

corporations, whereas similar Crowns in other provinces such 

as Ontario and Quebec is as high as 35 per cent. 

 

So like any business, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations borrow 

to help fund their capital spending. And we need to manage that 

borrowing and we are. Each Crown corporation has a debt ratio 

target. We are watching those targets, and we are ensuring that 

they remain strong and supporting the people within our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP again will point out that debt. They will 

criticize that debt. But to give you examples of what kind of 

infrastructure our Crown corporations are investing in, I would 

just like to point out that SaskPower has invested $286 million 

in new generation to meet the existing demand within our 

province. They have invested 495 million for transmission and 

distribution in generation maintenance and upgrades and 248 

million for customer connections. 

 

I am just curious, Mr. Speaker, what of those expenditures the 

NDP would like SaskPower not to make? We are a growing 

province. There’s a lot of new connections that are required 

within our province. There is a lot of additional transmission 

that different investors and businesses are requiring within our 

province. Is the NDP suggesting that we shouldn’t 

accommodate those connections? 

 

And maybe they are, Mr. Speaker, because I remember very 

well sitting in opposition when they were quite pleased and 

quite comfortable with the fact that our province wasn’t 

growing. They didn’t see any purpose to growth. I can give 

quote after quote of different NDP cabinet ministers that were 

. . . They just didn’t even think it was statistically possible for 

our province to grow. There was a cabinet minister said that 

growth is not necessarily a good thing because if we don’t grow 

that means there’s more for the rest of us. They laugh at those 

quotes now. We laughed at them at the time too because they 

were hilarious. 

 

But in fact, it is the same old NDP. It is the same old attitude. 

Nothing has truly changed over there. In fact, 45 per cent of the 

members over there, Mr. Speaker, were in cabinet. They were 

able to make decisions, and those are the decisions they chose 

to make. Those are the attitudes that they have, and that has not 

changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about what the NDP did have as 

priorities when they were in cabinet when it came to the Crown 

corporations. They question the debt, and we can justify the 

debt in infrastructure that’s necessary to support the growth 

within our province. 

 

But what did the NDP have as priorities in the Crown 

corporations? Well, Mr. Speaker, they lost 15 million in 

Channel Lake, which was a SaskPower natural gas subsidy. 

They lost 2 million in South American power company. They 

lost 16 million in NST Chicago, which was a US Midwest fibre 

optics company. They lost 9.4 million in Persona Inc., which 

was a Newfoundland cable company. They lost 24.7 million on 

Retx.com, which was an Atlanta dot-com company. They lost 

6.7 million in tappedinto.com, which was a Nashville dot-com 

company. They lost 3 million, Mr. Speaker, in clickabid.com, 

which was an Internet business of some sort. They lost 5.6 

million in Soft Tracks Enterprises Ltd., which was a wireless 

electronic payment company. They lost 90.8 million, Mr. 

Speaker, in Navigata Communications, which was a BC 

[British Columbia] communications company. They lost 10 

million in Craig Wireless, which was a Manitoba Internet 

company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I much prefer the investments that our government 

is choosing for our Crown corporations — which is expanding 

the transmissions, which is expanding the number of 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4891 

connections, which is supporting Saskatchewan people and 

Saskatchewan businesses — to this whole entire list of 

out-of-province, crazy ventures that the NDP thought was so 

important when they were government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, I saw the NDP press release. I listened 

very carefully to Regina Rosemont’s speech. He is the NDP 

Finance critic, and the whole theme is cuts and crumbs. And I 

listened to all of it, and I just . . . It was very hard to try to take 

it seriously. It really was difficult to try to think it was 

seriously. He’s correct. He just said now it was too long. I 

absolutely agree. His speech was way too long, and it was 

nonsense. It was utter nonsense. And what it was was the 

typical NDP of playing politics over good policy. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And I need to remind not only the NDP opposite, because they 

seem quite mystified by this, but the public in general that the 

NDP that are sitting in this room here today, that have the 

criticism, calling this budget cuts, you know, nothing but cuts 

and crumbs, 45 per cent of those NDP sitting in this Assembly 

today were cabinet ministers in the NDP government when it 

was government in our province. Forty-five per cent of them sat 

in cabinet. They had every opportunity to make decisions on 

how they wanted to spend money. 

 

And so let’s see how they spent money. Let’s just see what their 

priorities were, Mr. Speaker. And they’re saying that our budget 

does not meet their priorities. Well okay, are their priorities 

health? Is that a priority for the NDP? Because their last budget, 

Mr. Speaker, to this budget today, health spending has been 

increased by 45 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 45 per cent is the 

increase in health spending. 

 

During that time period, Mr. Speaker, inflation has only been 12 

per cent. So if health was such a priority when their members 

were sitting in government, why didn’t they act like it? Why 

didn’t they act like that was a priority when they were able to 

make the decisions? And now they sit back and they say, oh 

you’re doing this wrong. You’re doing that wrong, not enough 

money. We’ve increased funding by 45 per cent. 

 

How about education? When they were government, Mr. 

Speaker, they called it learning, but now it’s education. You go 

back to their last budget, you compare it to ours. And the 

increase in funding in education, Mr. Speaker, from their time 

when they could make decisions to our government today is 78 

per cent, 78 per cent increase for education funding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Advanced — that’s K to 12 — advanced education, Mr. 

Speaker. What about that? Was that a priority for the NDP 

when they sat and they had decisions, they could make the 

decisions? Well not really, Mr. Speaker, because in the years 

when we’ve been government, inflation’s been 12 per cent. 

We’ve increased funding for advanced education by 22 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. Yet that’s, all of a sudden now when they 

can just criticize they don’t think that’s good enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had community resources. Now we call it 

Social Services, and I was the minister when we first formed 

government. There was questions on that very issue today, 

which is kind of shocking. The increase in funding under our 

government has been 54 per cent. Mr. Speaker, when they talk 

about children in care, Mr. Speaker, when we formed 

government and I was the minister, there was 21 children in one 

foster home. That was what we inherited from the NDP. That’s 

where their priorities were when they were able to make the 

decisions. And now all of a sudden it’s just a joke. They’re 

denying that that ever happened. That government didn’t exist? 

Well yes, 45 per cent of them were in that government. It did 

exist and that was their priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highways. You know we have the member from 

Athabasca who was asking about highways. He’s got lots to say 

all the time. He was Highways minister, Mr. Speaker. He was 

the Highways minister that never got anything done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if all of this increase in funding, a 45 per cent 

increase in Health funding, a 78 per cent increase in K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education funding, 22 per cent 

increase in Advanced Education funding, 54 per cent increase in 

community resources or Social Services funding and, Mr. 

Speaker, 53 per cent increase in Highways . . . I’m sorry I 

forgot to mention that earlier but we’ve increased Highways 

funding by 53 per cent. If all of that is crumbs, what would we 

call the NDP budget? What should we call what they gave for 

the people of Saskatchewan? A smidgen, speck, pinch, sliver? 

I’m not sure, but if ours is crumbs and we have increased 

funding in all our areas or priorities, what on earth were they 

thinking when they were able to make those decisions? 

 

Municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, up 109 per cent from 

the NDP days. Mr. Speaker, the U of S, the U of S alone has 

seen a 61 per cent increase in operating grants when the 

enrolment at the U of S has only been an 8.7 per cent increase. 

The U of R [University of Regina], maybe that was crumbs. 

Crumbs? Forty-five per cent increase in funding; increase in 

enrolment, 12.1 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, K to 12 operating grants, 24 per cent increase 

under our government; enrolment increase, 1.5 per cent. K to 12 

capital: now that’s an interesting one because again the member 

from Regina Rosemont has a lot to say about school capital. He 

has a lot to say considering he sits with a party that when in 

government was on average closing a school a month. He’s got 

lots and lots to say about what our government is doing for 

school capital, K to 12 school. We’ve increased the funding 

over the NDP by 859 per cent — 859 per cent. Mr. Speaker, is 

that crumbs? Is that crumbs? 

 

You know, it’s kind of interesting. Now you know, now the 

member from Rosemont’s a little appalled because he said 

we’re just living in the past. Okay, fair enough. Mr. Speaker, 

let’s just talk about right now. Let’s talk about what’s 

happening now. Let’s talk about this specific budget. And what 

is that member going to do? That member has stood in this 

House and asked questions about school capital. We’re building 

schools in this budget. Is he going to vote for it? 

 

That member stood in this House — many, many questions — 

and asked about going to summary financial statements instead 

of GRF [General Revenue Fund] funding for their budget. 

We’ve done that, Mr. Speaker. Is he going to vote for it? 

 



4892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

You know, he doesn’t know what to criticize anymore. He 

knows he has to because it’s a matter of politics over good 

policy. They don’t have policy. That’s why they don’t know 

what good policy is. Because they’ve taken everything off their 

website. They have a leader that hasn’t made any policy. They 

have never made a statement. There was the tree book. I have it 

with me, but I understand they took it off their website. There is 

no policy There is no plan. There is no direction. Mr. Speaker, 

they have no clue what to do to help facilitate growth within our 

province, to encourage the growth within our province. They 

aren’t even all that good at criticizing because what they 

criticize one day, they change their mind and do it differently 

the next day. So I don’t even think they’re very good at that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they have a past. And quite frankly, nothing’s changed. 

They don’t like any changes. They want everything to be what 

it was when the NDP were in power when 45 per cent of them 

were sitting at the table making decisions. And the people of the 

province have said no to those policies, to that attitude. And 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support the budget, 

and I will not support the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the 2014 budget speech. And I have been 

finding it very interesting listening to the government side 

defend this budget. And really in many ways, so many ways it’s 

indefensible, and we’ll get into that over the next little bit. 

 

But I have to tell you that I have some deep concerns, and I 

know the people I represent and, as I travel around, people have 

some real concerns, the concerns that we’ve outlined and talked 

a lot about in question period about the cash cow contracts that 

are going out, the $40 million. How is that defensible? And I 

agree with the other side that $40 million is not a crumb. That is 

not a crumb. That is something pretty special, that John Black 

in Washington would think is not a crumb. In fact that’s pretty 

rich cake, isn’t it? That’s pretty rich cake. 

 

Unfortunately the people here in Saskatchewan don’t feel the 

same largesse from this government. You’re giving $40 million 

to some consultant and Japanese sensei $3,500 a day, and we’re 

getting people asking, how can I be one of those consultants? 

I’d love to get a job with this government that pays $3,500 a 

day. The member in the back is saying the same thing. How can 

I get this job? How can I get this job? So you wonder why we 

say crumbs. Because people are feeling like that. People are 

feeling like that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know this is an opportune time to thank my 

constituents. You know, I’ve had the pleasure of serving Centre 

for several years now, and they have come in and raised 

concerns and they keep me focused on what’s really important, 

what’s really important for the people of this province, the 

people that are here now but also for future generations, that we 

don’t do things that, whether it’s financial or whether it’s 

through the environment, put our futures at risk. So I want to 

take a minute and thank my constituents. 

 

I also want to take a moment and thank my constituency 

assistant, Erica Spracklin who’s doing a fantastic job. She’s 

been with me now for a while. But she really has captured the 

essence of what a constituent assistant does, and it’s so 

important that they’re there to hear the concerns, the hopes, and 

worries of our constituents. And as a constituency assistant, 

she’s done a fantastic job and I’m so glad that I’ve got her. And 

I know constituency assistants across both sides really do so 

much, but I really do feel I’m very fortunate. 

 

I want to thank also my executive and people who really talk to 

me about the issues at hand, and my own family and my wife. 

And you know, it’s not easy being an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. We’re often called on to do different 

things at different . . . And you know, these days can turn into 

long evenings and so it takes a lot of patience. And over the 

course of time, she has shown so much grace in that support so 

I also want to thank her. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that this message that this 

budget sends to everyday families is one to brace themselves. 

And the Premier sent that out early in the new year when he 

was raising flags or flying trial balloons about different types of 

taxes that we might have. I think that’s really unfortunate when 

you do that just to test the waters. 

 

But I think that that’s . . . People had got that message early on 

that this was not going to be a message for the people, that 

unfortunately there was going to be a lot of challenges in this 

budget. And I will get into that as we go forward because I 

know that people today are working harder than ever before and 

they deserve a budget that uses, that really uses the strong 

economy that we have right now to benefit them, and also into 

the long term, whether it’s cost of living and the questions 

we’ve raised in the House in terms of what that means in terms 

of housing, what does that mean in terms of jobs, what does that 

mean in terms of utilities. 

 

I mean we have a government side that would rather reflect on 

eight years ago when we were in power rather than talk about 

the here and now, take a moment to acknowledge challenges 

that people do face here in Saskatchewan. But that’s not what 

they’re really interested in. They’re interested in patting 

themselves on the back and not talking about real issues that 

people are facing. 

 

And so we would hope that and we think the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve better hospitals, smaller classrooms, a 

better cost of living, but that’s not the case here in 

Saskatchewan. In fact when we have one of the strongest, if not 

the strongest, economies in Saskatchewan, these are the kind of 

things that we’re seeing. 

 

You know, and we see a government that is investing in its pet 

projects, i.e., the lean project, that is now . . . And it’s hard to 

get a sense from this government what the overall cost is. They 

tend to want to deflect this, and they tend to . . . And they go 

strong on this. They say if you have the audacity to even 

question, to say how can we do this better, that’s a problem 

because you’re not stepping up the line to support their latest 

pet project, lean. And we have some real concerns about that. 

And it’s not just us. And we’ve heard from the nurses who talk 

about this just-in-time health care where it really should be 

about just-in-case. And I think that’s the way that we should be 

approaching this. And so we have some real, real concerns 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4893 

about that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And so what we see, and we see some of the concerns that have 

been written in the paper, and I think that . . . Now we haven’t 

heard the government on the other side talk about what was 

written in The StarPhoenix on the weekend. You know, they 

love to quote the paper when it’s going their way. When it’s 

not, it’s not in existence. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read from the editorial on 

Saturday, March 22nd, The StarPhoenix. And this is what The 

StarPhoenix opinion says, “Our seniors deserve better.” When 

Health minister . . . and I quote: 

 

When Health Minister Dustin Duncan said he was angry at 

what he called “dismaying” and “heartbreaking” 

conditions at Saskatchewan’s long-term care homes and 

quickly announced a $10 million “urgent issues action 

fund” in October, the expectation was that the March 

budget would commit to addressing the problems 

identified. 

 

However, sometime between Mr. Duncan’s reaction to the 

findings of “unhygienic, unsafe and unacceptable” 

conditions at the seniors’ homes by health region CEOs 

who toured the facilities and when the government 

presented its 2014-15 budget this week, it appears that the 

issue has been moved well down the priority list. 

 

Now we’re not saying this on the other side. This is The 

StarPhoenix. This is The StarPhoenix who’s saying, you know, 

really? What happened? What happened between the outrage 

that we’re going to get this job done to last week when 

somehow it slipped off the edge of the desk? It slipped off the 

edge of the desk. Now they will insist it’s not. But to a third 

party, it sure looks like it. It sure looks like it. 

 

And I agree with the headline. Our seniors do deserve better. 

They truly do. And so the question is, what happened? What 

happened between those times when he had that emergency 

issues report and last week when we got the budget? 

 

Now it goes on, and I quote again: 

 

Now that the budget is here, it’s evident that Mr. Duncan’s 

mitigation measures fall far short of the mark, even though 

there are some relatively small but positive steps taken to 

support seniors living in their . . . homes longer. 

 

As for the long-term plans, there’s little indication that 

measures are being contemplated to accommodate the 

influx of boomers who will begin to place greater demands 

on Saskatchewan’s aging, and in some cases decrepit, care 

facilities in the not too distant future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, if it makes sense, we are there to 

say, right on. And these people will say . . . And what happened 

in the budget speech when the government was forced to move 

to one set of books, one set of books, we acknowledge that. We 

acknowledge that. So there are some things to acknowledge. 

 

But here you have to say, now will they deny what these people 

are saying at The StarPhoenix? Will they say no, that’s not true; 

you’ve got it all wrong? And this is the question we have. We 

have the minister just before us say, it’s the best budget in the 

nation, best budget in the nation. Now really, really, how can 

you say that? How can you really say that when you’re getting 

editorials like that? A little humbleness would go a bit of a long 

way here. But what we get is arrogance and people saying, you 

guys, it’s not crumbs; it’s cake and you should be happy with it. 

Well people are saying, you know what? Really that’s not the 

case. 

 

And here I want to take a moment, and this is one that we’ve 

been talking about and I’ve been talking about for quite a while, 

and the minister and the former minister of Social Services will 

know this, when they introduced the increases in the senior 

income plan, and it’s in the record, that I thought that was a 

good thing. That was a good thing. And good on government 

when they do good things. 

 

But the question is, and this is the problem, that program has 

some significant problems, and we’ve asked about them 

correcting this. We’ve asked them to correct this problem 

because as you look at what’s happening in the budget as it is 

today . . . And they will go on about SIP [seniors’ income plan] 

and how much more money it is. And this year it’s 25 million, 

25.9 million. But do the folks over there know what it was last 

year? What was it last year? Anybody know? It was 27 million. 

 

So how can it be, when you’re increasing the payments, that it’s 

actually going down? Well this is what’s happened. This is 

what’s happening. This is what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. At its 

peak in 2009, in June of 2009, there was 18,600 members or 

people taking SIP. That’s a good thing. That’s a good thing. 

What is it today? According to the written answers we got last 

week, it’s 15,437. Three thousand fewer seniors are getting that 

program. Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why is that? So that’s 

the question before us. That’s the question before us. This is a 

program that needs to be managed right. Now they will get 

outraged. And I just want to hear what the Minister of Social 

Services has to say. If she speaks loud enough, we’ll get it on 

the record. What is it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what happens. This is what happens every 

July. This is what happens every July to the seniors. This is 

what happens every July. Do you know this, Mr. Speaker? On 

average, every . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We income test. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — She’s saying it’s income tested. I’ll ask about 

that because this is what happens every July. Almost 2,000 

seniors are thrown off. They’re thrown off, aren’t they? So this 

is what’s happening. You have 56, 66, somewhere less than 100 

seniors are falling off. They get on the program, and all of a 

sudden they’re off the program. So what’s happening is this 

program . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh this is seniors 

making too much money. This is a problem. Seniors are making 

too much money. So we see a program where you have over 

3,000 seniors since 2009 thrown off the program because 

they’re making too much money. 

 

This is really interesting to hear from the Minister of Social 



4894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Services. And we’ll have questions, I’m sure, in estimates 

where she gets to talk about, why is it that seniors who get hope 

. . . Now they will talk about how they knock on doors, they 

knock on the doors and seniors are loving this program — 

except for the day you get thrown off, the day you get thrown 

off. And we see that day every July where 2,000 seniors will be 

thrown off the program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, is this program well run? No, it isn’t. 

Something’s happening that all of . . . Why is it that we had that 

shock? Something is wrong. Something is wrong. So I don’t 

think these folks know what’s really going on. They are all up 

and they say this is the greatest program, but it’s not quite right. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also have to take a moment and talk a bit 

about this editorial which I found very interesting in The 

StarPhoenix. And I appreciate that the minister in her remarks 

yesterday talked about who she met in terms of the poverty 

costs reduction strategy, and I’m glad that she met with them. I 

don’t know. When I read her remarks, it didn’t sound like a 

commitment to actually do anything. She talked about how they 

had a catchy phrase. It had a catchy slogan. But nothing, no 

commitments to actually dealing with poverty here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is what The StarPhoenix had to write on March 15th, 

2014: “Ideology beats sound policy.” And I find that interesting 

because here is a government that really is bound by its 

ideology and not about policy that makes a lot of sense, not a 

lot of sense. So this is what they say, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

What at first glance may seem to be a couple of disparate 

news items identify a larger issue of the provincial 

government allowing ideology to impede sound public 

policy that would save taxpayers money over the long 

term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting because they’re talking 

about how they’re committed to saving money through the lean 

program, some 40 . . . and how they will do anything to save 

money except if it makes sense, except if it makes sense. Now 

I’ll continue reading. I’ll continue the quote. I quote: 

 

The first involves the government reaction to the Cost of 

Poverty campaign launched by a coalition of 

Saskatchewan community groups, which notes that 

poverty ends up costing Saskatchewan’s economy $3.8 

billion a year, including $420 million in health care alone. 

 

And I continue. I quote: 

 

In both cases, the attitude of the government seems to be 

that the other provinces can heed good advice and get 

positive results, but Saskatchewan will do its own thing 

despite evidence that says the government would avoid 

costly problems down the road by taking action now. 

 

Saskatchewan and British Columbia are now the only 

provinces without a poverty reduction strategy after 

Alberta, long the standard bearer for personal 

responsibility, recently adopting a comprehensive policy. 

Yet Social Services Minister June Draude insists that 

Saskatchewan’s growth in average weekly earnings and its 

low unemployment rate somehow point to a superior 

anti-poverty strategy in this province where a tenth of the 

population is impoverished. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, forgive us if we raise the issue of crumbs 

where you have a tenth of the province living in poverty and 

this government refuses to do anything to acknowledge it and 

then says, when 2,000 seniors a year are thrown off SIP, that’s 

just the way it goes; they’re making too much money. Mr. 

Speaker, we think, we think it’s the right thing to ask the tough 

questions. And if the government is uncomfortable by those 

questions, they have to live with that because that’s what’s 

really going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the rental housing 

supplement and the federal-provincial affordable housing 

agreement that now I understand we’re getting $9.2 million a 

year. And I thought it interesting that the Finance minister 

stressed, and he was correct in talking about how some of that 

can be used to pay for supplements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government took power, that 

supplement cost the provincial government $6 million a year. 

This year it’s going to cost the government $38.9 million, $38.9 

million. Now in many ways I think that it was a program we 

started, and that’s a good thing because it makes rental units 

more affordable. But at some point, somebody’s got to say, 

don’t you think $40 million is an awful lot of money to be 

paying out? 

 

And we’ve asked this question. We’ve asked this question to 

the minister. And we will ask again. Who actually gets the $40 

million? Is it Sask Housing? Is it Boardwalk? Is it Main Street? 

What are we doing to really make the best use of that $40 

million? We have some questions on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have some questions about child care parent 

subsidies. And I know my colleague will talk a lot about this 

one, but I have to say I’m amazed at this one. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when this government took power, that fund, the child 

care parent subsidies, was at $16 million and what was actually 

spent was $15.986 million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know how 

much they’ve allotted this year for it? $14.675 million, $1 

million less. Now I don’t know about you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but in my riding I think people could really use the subsidies for 

child care. So while this government is celebrating its 

achievements here, this is the kind of crumbs that we’re talking 

about. These are the kind of crumbs we’re talking about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will remember two years ago when 

this government announced a program called the corporation 

income tax rebate on new rental housing. And this was an 

innovative program in terms of encouraging new builds for 

apartment units. And of course I had some concerns there 

because they could be turned into rentals, but this is what they 

did. Mr. Deputy Speaker, at that time, and I’m reading from the 

budget documents of 2012-13, the budget summary, page 68. It 

talks about: “A maximum of 10,000 rental units will qualify for 

the tax rebate. Eligible units must be constructed and available 

for rent before the end of 2016.” And they had to apply by 

January 1st, 2014. 

 

Now I asked a question about how many units have come in 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4895 

under this program. How many units? Was it 10,000? Was it 

9,000, 5,000, 4,000? 317 units, 317 units. We asked where did 

they get the number of 10,000 two years ago? And we had an 

idea that that was going to be a hard mark to reach. But really, 

they have 10,000? They were talking about 10,000. That what 

was they were pitching two years ago — and 317. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So if you wonder why we talk about crumbs, that’s the reality 

that people in Saskatchewan are facing. There aren’t the 

apartments. There’s the high rent. Not everyone gets the rental 

supplement. And then the government can’t keep track of where 

the 40 million is going. It’s just going out the door. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s really interesting. I don’t know. The number 

40 million comes up several times, whether it’s rental 

supplement — that’s the number from their budget — whether 

it’s J.D. Black and Associates. They’re 40 million. 

 

But here’s another 40 million. Here’s another 40 million. And 

that’s the Linkin system, and the minister referred to it today as 

one of the things that’s going really well in Social Services. 

And this is from . . . Yes, this is a system and again, you know, 

if it makes common sense, we’re for it. And what we want to do 

is make sure we keep track and know where the kids in care are, 

what’s happening with them. But we were the last province to 

have a computerized system, I understand. 

 

Why we couldn’t have taken one from another province, or 

bought one from another province in 2008 or ’09, I don’t know. 

But this government was bent on spending money with an Irish 

software company, and here we are now. And I want to read 

from December 2nd, 2013, the Human Services Committee, and 

this is page 581. And I say, and this is my question, and I quote: 

 

So now I have kind of followed this Linkin process, and as 

I’ve changed roles in opposition, I think the total bill — 

and correct me if I’m wrong — but it was approaching $16 

million through the Linkin system? What has been the 

total cost for Linkin? 

 

Mr. Brown replies, “In terms of the implementation costs?” I 

say, “No the purchase, the implementation, the whole nine 

yards.” 

 

Mr. Acton, the deputy minister, says, and I quote, “So its total 

cost is $37.6 million. That delivers the child and family side, 

but it also is some foundational work for the income assistance 

side as well.” 

 

I say, “Now is it completely purchased and completely up and 

running, and we’re just dealing with maintenance costs now?” 

 

Well he talks about the child and family side: “We are still 

doing some work on the financial piece to issue payments, and 

of course we’re just doing some foundational work as it relates 

to the income assistance side.” 

 

So I say, “37 could grow?” Sorry, pardon me. “The 37 million 

could grow.” Mr. Acton said yes. 

 

So we’re talking about a $40 million project, $40 million 

project. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is interesting. We have a lot 

of questions about Linkin, and I was amazed that the minister 

brought that up as a positive, as a positive. And you know, this 

is again why people go, I don’t know what’s happening with 

this government; it seems to be out of touch. Forty million 

dollars for lean, $40 million on the rental supplements so 

nobody knows where it’s going, $40 million for Linkin. What’s 

the story with that? All right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a 

lot of questions with that. 

 

I want to also take a minute and talk about . . . I know I’ve been 

talking a lot about Social Services, and I may go back to that, 

but I have a lot of questions about Social Services. And people 

have been talking about the crumbs, and what’s been really 

happening with that. And actually it was good the member from 

Nutana last night talked about the cuts in Sask Housing, the 

apparent cuts in Sask Housing. We don’t know. The $9.2 

million in transfers from the federal government in their 

housing agreement, what’s really going to happen to that? Is 

there really going to be some action? 

 

But I want to talk a bit about the Minister of Labour and what 

he had to say about what’s happening with Labour Relations 

and Workplace Safety. And this is interesting because what he 

talks about . . . And I was glad to see that he was talking about 

injuries and the second-highest workplace injury rate in Canada 

and that we need to do something about it. And I agree with 

him. It’s simply unacceptable. And this is something both the 

minister and the critic agree, that we need to work on this. This 

is absolutely an issue that must be resolved. 

 

He talks about seeing a 43 per cent reduction since 2002. But he 

has talked about increasing the number of workplace 

inspections and the number of files being sent to Justice and 

we’ve increased the maximum dollar of fines. Now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this will be a question we have because we know 

when The Occupational Health and Safety Act was passed a 

few years ago and then when the employment Act was passed 

last year, that in fact one of the pieces that was not put into 

action was the part around the fines. And in fact some of us 

may remember I had questions about that just a while ago. And 

while I’m glad to see that the fines are happening — that’s a 

very good thing — we also see that the government has not 

increased the fines as it said it would. And we have some 

questions about that. When will that actually happen? And 

while corporations are being fined I think at a lower level than 

what they should be, in fact what the legislation calls for, what 

is the reasoning behind that? And so we’ll have a lot of 

questions about that. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we 

need to do much more work on that. 

 

I am looking forward to seeing the $100,000 go to continue the 

high-quality advocacy services for workers’ comp. That’s very, 

very important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, this government that’s tied to its 

ideology and not common sense, while we can talk about some 

of the positives we see in there, they can’t see that. They can’t 

see that. It’s all great or it’s not, and we have some real 

concerns about that. 

 

So as I said, you know, Mr. Speaker, we were happy to see that 

there’s now only one set of books, but the razor-thin surplus of 

$71 million over this size of budget, we’ll be interested to see if 



4896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

they can maintain that or if they can maintain that. We know, 

for example, there’s been no commitment in the budget in terms 

of the bridge in Saskatoon. And while that may be a year out, 

it’s funny that you can use a budget document to say, this is 

what we’re going to do but we have no money for it. And I 

know people in Saskatoon are wondering. So what really is the 

budget really going to be delivering for the people of 

Saskatoon? 

 

So I think though, Mr. Speaker, what was happening in the past, 

and we’re so glad the Minister of Finance got around to it . . . It 

reminds me of that saying, something is rotten in Denmark, you 

know. While these folks over there can say over and over again 

it’s a balanced budget and all of this, but we’ve never had a 

failed audit from the auditor. We’ve never had those flags. 

 

And while they would go on and go on and on and on that it 

was exactly the same as we did, we knew there were four key 

differences, four key differences, and that’s what the auditor 

highlighted. It wasn’t the same as what it was in the past. So 

something was rotten. It did not pass the sniff test, and so the 

consolidation into one set of books is a good thing. The 

question will be, as we go through this year of transition, how 

transparent and accountable they will be. I think that’s the 

challenge here and we want to make sure that it is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that the budget does call for another 

$51 million to be cut from health care. We’re really worried 

about what that really means, particularly when you’ve got the 

issue with lean and the kaizen offices and all of that. And the 

government is not being clear about the total costs. They’re 

saying its cost is with that, with the regional health authority, 

and not with us. 

 

We know that the budget reannounces 3.7 million already 

allocated to the issues with seniors’ home care. We know that 

this government continues to plow ahead with a standardized 

testing regime. We know that the public is not with the 

government on this. And for some reason this government 

continues to plow ahead, hard-headed on this, and this is really, 

really an issue. 

 

And we know our schools are overcrowded. And I was so 

disappointed to see yesterday that Pleasant Hill School was 

taken off the list that it’s been on for so many years, so many 

years. So we have a real problem with that. And we heard the 

speaker before me continue to talk about building schools. And 

you know the issue that we have with the P3s [public-private 

partnership]. We continue to raise that. People in our 

neighbourhoods, in our communities wonder about what’s 

really going to happen there. Are we going to have the Alberta 

issues that they had in terms of the community control? Are we 

just renting our schools? Who really owns these schools? And 

this is a real problem, and so we have some questions about 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to hearing more about what’s 

going to happen around housing. What are the details of that, 

the $9.2 million? Are there any other initiatives? What are they 

going to do to see more rentals being built? We are looking 

forward to hearing more about the details. And when we saw 

that that was released yesterday afternoon in some form about 

the $800,000 and how it’s going to play out, we are curious 

about what’s going to happen with human rights. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real issues here. And I think 

that while the government can be offended that we have the 

audacity to ask questions about it, we will continue to do our 

job. We will continue to do our job because that’s important. 

That’s how democracy works. And I know some folks over 

there get a little frustrated when they have to do some 

explaining and they can’t just use their slogans. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s the way that people expect us to do our work here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so when we see cuts, we see crumbs for Saskatchewan 

families and we see, and I’ve highlighted those issues, whether 

it’s 40 million for Linkin or $40 million for John Black, people 

are saying, what about us? What about our schools? What about 

our seniors? So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the 

amendment. I think that’s the only reasonable thing to do. And I 

will be voting against the main motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the east 

gallery, I am pleased to introduce to the legislature Carl 

Cherland. Many of you may know him. He has roots in Estevan 

but he has lived in Regina for many decades now. Carl, for 

quite a number of years, was the music director of the Luther 

College choir and we all enjoyed when he brought his choirs 

here to the legislature to sing at Christmastime. 

 

And he’s been retired now for a few years and well he’s always 

been really interested in politics, but he has taken a special 

interest in looking at a number of the issues that are of concern 

in Saskatchewan. That includes the P3 issue. It includes 

obviously education issues and many of the issues around how 

Saskatchewan fits into the world economy. So I ask all 

members here to welcome Carl Cherland to the legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4897 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to have the opportunity to enter 

into this debate. I think it’s the 11th budget that I’ve seen in my 

time in the legislature, four when I was in opposition and then 

seven that this government has presented. I must say the last 

seven have been much more interesting, although I was Finance 

critic for a period of time and that made it very interesting from 

a different perspective. 

 

It’s great to be here to talk about the budget. I want to begin by 

talking about some personal notes, some thank yous. I want to 

thank certainly my staff, both here in the legislature and back in 

the constituency office. I want to thank Cole and Theo and 

Amanda and Shelley and Annie and Kaitlyn and Sara. I think 

they’re the A team, and I’ll put them up against any other team 

in this legislature or any other legislature for sure. They’re a 

great team, but they’re part of a wider team. They’re part of the 

Saskatchewan Party team. And again I thank them very much 

for what they do each and every day helping me do my job, 

both in the constituency and here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I also want to thank my family. As many members have said, 

all members have said, we couldn’t do our job without the 

support of our family. My wife, Trish, she’s going through 

some changes on her own, some career changes, starting her 

own business, becoming a communications consultant, and very 

much enjoying it and looking forward to being part of the 

growing economy here in Saskatchewan and the business 

community of Saskatoon and the province. 

 

I also want to thank my kids, Carter and Paige. Carter is in 

grade 11 at St. Joe’s, a very active student, now part of the 

driving community. Last time I had a chance to speak in the 

Legislative Assembly, he was just getting his licence, and now 

he’s able to manoeuvre the streets and side streets of Saskatoon. 

And Paige, a student in grade 8 and loves life and is just full of 

energy. 

 

But I think what I reflect on the most, Mr. Speaker, now with 

the kids getting to be into their teen years, and we talk about 

their careers, we talk about what they want to do with their lives 

going forward, we can talk about what they want to do here in 

Saskatchewan and tell them that they have every opportunity to 

be whatever they want to be, and they can do it here in 

Saskatchewan. And I’m so proud to be able to have those 

discussions with them. This is indeed an exciting time, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m very fortunate to represent the constituency of Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. It’s a growing constituency, one of the largest 

population-wise in the entire province. And many, many people 

that reside in the constituency are new to our province. They’re 

very excited about being here. They come from countries across 

the world, and they’re just happy to be in Saskatchewan at this 

most exciting time. And I’m very, very fortunate to be able to 

represent them in the legislature. 

 

My only regret is that, through redistribution, I’ll be losing 

about 40 per cent of them to another constituency. But I know 

that they’ll be well taken care of by another member in this 

Legislative Assembly. It’s an exciting . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On this side. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — On this side of the House, of 

course. That goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, I know. In fact I 

hope all of Saskatoon next time around is represented by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. I know we’re working hard, 

and I know that that’ll be the goal of members on this side of 

the House. I’m not sure what the member opposite has to say 

about that. He may not agree with me, but certainly there is a 

chance, an opportunity, and a goal to see that happen. 

 

This is an exciting time to be in our province. Our province is 

thriving. Our economy is growing. Our population is growing. 

 

And the budget that the Finance minister presented on March 

19th is something that we can all be proud of. I want to take this 

opportunity to thank him for his diligence and his commitment 

and what he’s done with the province’s finances and how he 

made that presentation that we can all be proud of. So I’d ask 

members to help me in thanking the Finance minister for the 

work that he’s done. He’s always saying, he’s always saying 

that we have to live within our means, whether it’s when 

cabinet ministers come forward with our budgets earlier in the 

year or when he stands in this legislature and delivers that 

budget. We have to live within our means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a very, very different theme than we heard 

from the opposition in the last election. Five billion dollars in 

promises with no costing estimates, no idea of how they were 

going to pay for it, but that’s what they took to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why those members 

are on that side of the House because that’s not a Saskatchewan 

value. That’s not how you do things. You live within your 

means, and you present a budget in that way. That’s what we’ve 

done. And that’s why I’m so proud to be here talking in favour 

of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Being fiscally responsible is something that our government is 

very, very proud of. We continue to ensure that we live within 

our means. And we talk about it, but more importantly than 

what we say about it, it’s important to examine what people 

across the province are talking about. 

 

Steve McLellan, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce stated in a recent news 

release, “The province has put forward a budget that, while 

dealing with demands for increased expenditures due to growth 

and the cost of living, has managed overall expectations across 

the board.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Don Atchison, mayor of the city of 

Saskatoon, a man that I have a lot of respect for, a great 

visionary for my city. I think that he has done a great job as a 

mayor, and I would consider him among the top mayors in the 

country, not only in the province, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what he 

had to say about this budget: “Because of the bridge being 

announced there, I think there’s a real great step for us. They 

certainly didn’t disappoint today. They came through.” Mr. 



4898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Speaker, and that’s from the mayor of the largest city in 

Saskatchewan and someone who really knows what he’s talking 

about. 

 

Another individual that I want to quote is Amy McNeil, 

executive director of SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres] and in the Leader-Post of March 20th, 

2014. And Amy is somebody that I have a lot to do with in a 

professional capacity through her involvement with Sarcan and 

other agencies that deal with the Ministry of Environment. And 

here’s what she had to say: “We are leading the country, if not 

North America and the world, in supports for people with 

disabilities, and it’s something the Saskatchewan Party should 

be very proud of.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank her for 

that. Indeed there is a lot to be proud of in this budget. 

 

Ilene Busch-Vishniac, the U of S president, said in The 

StarPhoenix March 20th, 2014: 

 

Despite this being a tight budget year, the government has 

sent a clear message that they recognize the value of 

post-secondary education to the economic vitality of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We appreciate the continued support for the U of S. The 

increase to our budget and allocations to specific 

initiatives allows us to continue to build a stronger 

university, one that will continue to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very reassuring to hear words like that 

from the president of the University of Saskatchewan. 

Saskatoon Silver Springs is a constituency that has many, many 

students that attend the university, many faculty members that 

live within the constituency, and to have the leader of that 

university come out with this ringing endorsement of this 

budget is certainly a compliment to this government. It’s a 

compliment to the Minister of Advanced Education. And it’s 

just very, very reassuring to hear.  

 

Now I could go on and on in talking and quoting people and 

what they have said about this budget. I want to talk about the 

opportunity I had this last Friday. I attended a speech by the 

Finance minister. It was in Saskatoon, to the North Saskatoon 

Business Association. This is something of a tradition. 

 

North Saskatoon Business Association has been involved in 

public policy and advocating ideas to governments for 40 years. 

And every year, they ask the Finance minister to come and to 

talk about his or her budget, and I was very privileged to be 

able to be there. I know the Minister of Education was there as 

well. 

 

And we had an opportunity first-hand as well to hear the 

Minister of Finance talk about his budget but also to hear what 

other people had to say. There were many, many people in the 

room from across the city, from across different backgrounds, 

and they were very, very pleased with what they had to hear. He 

went from table to table and talked to the individuals, and they 

were very, very pleased with a budget that certainly lives within 

its means, is balanced. That’s something that we can all be 

proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve also had the opportunity to go and talk to 

constituents. And that’s what we all value most when we come 

to this Legislative Assembly. I had a chance to talk to the 

people of Saskatoon Silver Springs, and we had a lot to talk 

about of course because the mention of the bridge in Saskatoon 

is something that is very, very important. We all know that the 

new bridge that we have today, the south Saskatchewan bridge 

in Saskatoon has changed the way that we travel in the city and 

changed the provincial infrastructure, and we know that the 

next bridge will do that as well. 

 

But more importantly the people of Saskatoon know that this 

government will be there for them at the time that the bridge 

comes into place. We were there before. No matter what type of 

infrastructure it is, we’ve been there for the people of Saskatoon 

and Saskatchewan, and we will continue to be there going 

forward. 

 

Very specifically to my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I must chat 

about the four new schools that are going into Saskatoon Silver 

Springs: two in Willowgrove, two that were announced very 

recently for Evergreen. Again I’ve said before, it’s a growing 

area, but that’s what people come to Saskatchewan for. They 

want to be able to have their needs, whether it’s health care or 

education, taken care of. And when they move to a constituency 

like Saskatoon Silver Springs, they can be reassured that they 

have a government in place that will ensure that they have the 

finest education possible. And we look very much forward to 

seeing the new Willowgrove schools open sometime this fall, 

and then look a couple years down the road as the new schools 

in Saskatoon Evergreen come into being as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have to congratulate the Finance minister. 

And I want to give a compliment to members opposite as well, 

those that stood in the legislature here, day after day, reading 

partitions and . . . petitions, Mr. Speaker, petitions. We’ll leave 

partitions for another speech. But you know, whether it was the 

member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre or whether it was the 

Leader of the Opposition talking about wanting a new school in 

Hampton Village or if it was the member from Cumberland 

talking about a long-term care facility, this government listens. 

And we all come here to put those ideas forward. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that wasn’t always the case. My first 

few years in the legislature here, when members opposite, some 

of them that were in government, when the members in 

opposition — of which I was one — would come with those 

petitions, they would not be listened to. They would not be 

acted upon. And the words that would come from ministers on 

this side of the House in an NDP government would be, too 

bad; sorry about your luck, and things like that. 

 

You know, I advocated for a school in Arbor Creek in 

Saskatoon when I was an opposition member, and those pleas 

fell on deaf ears. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud to 

say that now we’re a government that listens to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly on both sides and provides for 

infrastructure where it is indeed necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is investing $5 billion in health 

care. We are investing in education. We are investing in 

infrastructure. We’re ensuring that the growth continues and 

that we continue to foster that growth and to take care of the 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4899 

infrastructure needs that are challenging at times but indeed are 

important to our government. 

 

I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this afternoon 

about the areas that I’m responsible for and how they’re 

impacted by this budget. The Water Security Agency for 

example is one area that I’m very proud of. I think that the 

people, the men and women that work in the Water Security 

Agency just do an excellent job. And we saw that last year. 

They were tested to the top on the flood situation that we had, 

but they came through with flying colours. 

 

And what they wanted this year, and they made their case very 

strongly, was additional funds to put into new technologies, into 

forecasting tools to be able to give them the information that 

they need to ensure that Saskatchewan residents are safe and 

that they’re able to have the funds to do that. We increased the 

budget in that regard $191,000 specifically for that technology. 

And I know it’s very much appreciated, and it’ll help them do 

their job even better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the 25-year water 

security plan that we have in place. And that’s a plan that 

extends 25 years into the future, and it certainly is an 

opportunity for us to look at the long-term value of the water 

resources that we have in our province. And we want to make 

sure that we’re able to fund that plan going forward. 

 

While this year’s not expected to be as wet as 2013 or 2011, we 

will still see above average runoff in many areas of the 

province. And our government again was there in the past and 

will be there again in the future. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the emergency flood damage 

reduction program. It’s an emergency program. It’s put in place 

when necessary. But over the last two years, we’ve had the 

opportunity to invest some $35 million through the program in 

different works around the province and have an opportunity to 

make sure that we mitigate imminent flooding and an 

opportunity to partner with municipalities and to work with 

other groups throughout the province and ensure that we can do 

the best we can to protect our province. 

 

But again, you know, we can sit on this side of the House and 

say we’re doing a good job, but what is most important is when 

the people of Saskatchewan take the opportunity to talk about it. 

I just want to read to members in the House today a letter that I 

received about the Water Security Agency. It says: 

 

. . . Council and volunteers worked long hard hours to 

mitigate the impacts of the flood in the resort village of 

B-Say-Tah and it was reassuring to not only have the 

guidance of the Saskatchewan Water Security Agency but 

also the assurance that there would be Emergency Flood 

Damage Reduction Program moneys available to help 

relieve the financial burden of the flood preparedness on 

the ratepayers of B-Say-Tah. 

 

The program was straightforward and we appreciate the 

dialogue our office was able to have with the 

Saskatchewan Water Security Agency staff. Learning from 

the 2011 . . . [and the flood programming that we had] in 

place for 2013 worked extremely well for our community 

and again we would like to thank you and the 

Saskatchewan Water Security Agency staff for their hard 

work providing the engineering, technical and financial 

assistance to the resort village of B-Say-Tah in the 

successful effort to protect our community. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only letter that I received in 

that regard, but it represents many, many letters. And we don’t 

have an opportunity very often to thank the people involved in 

our ministries and the front-line people in many other ministries 

as well. I know Government Relations and Highways and 

Agriculture and others worked very, very closely, as we wanted 

to make sure that we keep people safe and that the opportunity 

is there to manage our water resources. 

 

It’s only a year ago that we, you know, had water coming in 

from Alberta that was unprecedented before, and we had an 

opportunity to make sure that we managed it well in our 

province. And in fact an independent audit of the work that was 

done over the last couple of years said that for every dollar 

spent on flood mitigation, we saved 20 to $30 in flood damage 

costs. So I think that’s money well spent on behalf of the 

taxpayers. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to highlight 

that as part of the good work and also the funding that continues 

to flow to those agencies through this budget. 

 

In looking through this budget, it stands out that we are 

providing $394.6 million in direct provincial support to 

municipalities, an increase of $32.8 million or 9.1 per cent from 

last year. Revenue sharing, just with my city alone, just with the 

city that I represent, Saskatoon, is $45.9 million this year, an 

increase, Mr. Speaker, an increase . . . How much do you think 

the increase is? 159 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Now I know that 

that’s an incredible number. That’s even a higher percentage 

than the member from Yorkton received when he was going to 

school. I know that for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, this is something that 

municipalities are very pleased about. Debra Button, the SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] president 

stated, “The government’s investment in our communities will 

go a long way to helping us meet the demands of growth.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw it in spades. And I know all 

members on this side of the House in the last month or so had 

an opportunity to go to the SUMA convention and the SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention, and we very much looked forward to it. We look 

forward to it because we get an opportunity to meet people from 

across Saskatchewan, but we see it as a real partnership. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t always that way. I 

can remember when I was first elected to this legislature, and 

NDP cabinets and government would go to those functions, and 

they’d get kind of a rough ride over there because they weren’t 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan. And I don’t know if 

they’ve learned their lesson yet or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

I think it’s the same way. They refuse to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They get together, the nine of them. They come 

up with some ideas. And I don’t think they’re connecting with 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity to very recently, and 



4900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

I don’t get an opportunity very often, to speak about 

environmental matters in the legislature. I want to speak about 

them as much as I can. And I want to speak about our record. I 

like speaking about their record, the environmental record of the 

members opposite as well because we know that the 

environmental record between the years 1991 and 2007 wasn’t 

a very good one. In fact it was one of the worst times for an 

environmental record in the whole history of the province. 

 

But today I want to talk about what’s happening in our province 

regarding environmental technologies, something that we are 

very, very proud of. Our government invested in the Go Green 

Fund. We spent about $60 million in that fund from the years 

2008 to 2011, and today we’re reaping the benefits of those 

investments. We’re helping to build the economy, but doing so 

in an environmentally sustainable way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Basically the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions on a 

per-capita basis in the province is something we are very, very 

proud of. Waste water and energy conservation, biodiversity 

protection — Saskatchewan has amazing capacity to develop 

innovative environmental technologies, and we are doing that 

today. 

 

And I had an opportunity to see the results of this investment 

that the Saskatchewan Party government made in the Go Green 

Fund, whether it was the Aquistore carbon capture and storage 

project with the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, the 

wood pellet district heating project. Mr. Speaker, the high-level 

wind turbine storage technology development, that’s a project 

with the Saskatchewan Research Council and Cowessess First 

Nation getting together to look at how can we improve wind 

energy in Saskatchewan, how can we look at battery technology 

to ensure that we can better use that form of energy. 

 

And also solar energy, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite, 

they don’t like to hear us talk about this, but we were in favour 

of all types of energy in our province in an environmentally 

sustainable way and in an innovative way using the very latest 

technologies. 

 

Mr. Speaker. with that I just had an opportunity to talk about 

my constituency, the constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs, 

the people in Saskatoon that I’ve talked to, and those across the 

province. And I think we’re just very, very fortunate to have the 

ability to present a budget that is balanced, the budget that is 

resourceful, a budget that will indeed serve the people of 

Saskatchewan very, very well into the future. 

 

And I always look at this opportunity to stand in the legislature 

and represent the constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs as a 

real honour and a real privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So with 

that, I want to let you know and let all members know I of 

course will be supporting the budget. I won’t be supporting the 

amendment. But I again thank you for this opportunity, and I 

look forward to further discussions in the legislature. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m absolutely honoured to participate today in the budget 

debate and obviously to support our government’s 2014-15 

budget. 

 

First, like my colleagues, I’d like to start out with a series of 

thank yous to people right across Saskatoon Greystone. I want 

to say what a great privilege it is to serve as an MLA. Serving 

and learning is a humbling experience, and as they’ve allowed 

me to go into their homes and open up their hearts, I’ve had a 

chance to hear heartwarming stories and a few heartbreaking 

stories. And it’s always important for us to remember those that 

have given us the honour and the privilege to stand in this 

Chamber and do our best to reflect the views and wishes and 

dreams of our constituents. And so everyone across Saskatoon 

Greystone, I offer that. 

 

To my family, to my wife Martha, to our daughter Jacqueline, 

to my sister Leah, to her partner Barry, my nephew Scott, my 

mom and dad, and my grandmother. My grandmother Sheila 

just recently had a birthday. It was a couple weeks ago and I 

was able to give her a call and she was reflecting on the 

importance of sound public policy. She lives in another 

jurisdiction where they’ve had some turbulence as of late, and 

so she was speaking about the solid performance that she sees 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Within the constituency office, I’d like to thank Katie. Katie, 

without her actually I just couldn’t do much of anything when I 

get back. And I just want to make sure I’m thanking Katie for 

her tireless efforts. 

 

And here within the building, to Shelly and to Tessa, to Michael 

and to Kris and to Aimee. You know, Aimee has joined us and 

she plays an absolutely vital role. She comes in every morning, 

and I ask her how things are going across the province. And she 

gives me a run-down on what she’s been listening to or what 

she’s heard, and she really gives me a very unique, direct 

perspective for people right across this province. And so to 

everyone in the office a special thanks. 

 

To everyone in the ministry, I appreciate their tireless efforts on 

behalf of people right across the province and especially our 

post-secondary community. To our team, to our team, to our 

caucus led so ably and in a remarkable fashion by our Premier. 

And for his work on the budget, our Finance minister, I want to 

say what a special thanks and privilege it is to be part of this 

team. 

 

To any number of friends and stakeholders that have helped to 

ensure that I’ve had the opportunity to be here and that we 

continue to work together, I can highlight a few of them. To the 

Donlevy-Konkin family: Mary and Doug, Kathleen, David, and 

Colleen. To any number of stakeholders, to Curtis and Keith, to 

Wayne and any number of others, I want to say thank you very 

much, including to the mayor of Saskatoon who works 

tirelessly to ensure that again the views and vision for people 

right across that city are heard and understood. And we 

appreciate his tireless efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just after the budget I had a chance to drop by 

coffee row, so to speak. There are a few places I like to drop in 

throughout Saskatoon Greystone, one of the most commercially 

vibrant constituencies right across the province. I have a chance 

to share a cup of coffee, sit down, and the question came, well 

what about the budget? And I said, well the budget’s balanced. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4901 

And people looked up and said, that’s the right answer. And 

then I was able to mention that as other jurisdictions have had 

their AAA credit rating questioned, we’ve secured ours for the 

first time. And again that was well received. That’s consistent 

with the values of people in Saskatoon Greystone and right 

beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced budget. And as a result, it marks 

and measures prudent progress for our province, prudent 

progress for Saskatchewan. And I think that reflects the very 

best of the people of this province. It invests in people. It 

invests in infrastructure, and it invests in ways that can ensure 

sustainable success. It’s a budget that’s based on principles, and 

in fact will help to foster steady growth for people across this 

province. 

 

You know, increasingly that notion of growth in Saskatchewan 

is important. In fact there’s a recent book just out, Looking West 

by Loleen Berdahl. She’s a professor at the University of 

Saskatchewan, department of political studies, and Roger 

Gibbins, long-time academic and policy leader. And they’ve 

written on page 61: 

 

The emerging consensus is that the western Canadian 

provinces are an increasingly important part of the 

national economic picture. Indeed some go as so far as to 

argue that they are the most important part. 

 

[They add] In 2011, in 2012, in 2013, the Conference 

Board of Canada predicted that western Canadian cities 

would lead urban economic growth in Canada, with 

Saskatoon heading the pack. 

 

And the statistics go on. It’s important for us to recognize that 

Saskatchewan is now directly connected to our nation’s growth. 

And people see the full potential of this province as we work 

together to ensure that we’re meeting that full potential. 

 

This is a budget that’s fair to the people of Saskatchewan. In 

fact we want to make sure that we’re encouraging new 

investment, we’re encouraging more opportunity for the private 

sector to play a key lead role in the creation of new jobs. And 

we want to see that economic growth continue, as is consistent 

with our plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within the plan for growth we highlighted an 

important role, a vital role for the Ministry of Advanced 

Education in partnership with other ministries, in partnership 

with the Ministry of Education, in partnership with the Ministry 

of the Economy among others. Some key roles were identified. 

First, in ensuring an educated and skilled workforce to meet 

existing and future labour market demands. Mr. Speaker, today 

in Saskatchewan there are more than 15,800 jobs open and 

available on the SaskJobs website. There’s one indicator of the 

vibrancy of both our labour market but also our growth. 

 

Secondly, the plan for growth highlights that supporting 

students as they enrol and succeed in advanced education 

programs, with a special emphasis on our First Nations and 

Métis students. And third, there’s a goal of supporting growth 

by funding that is supporting research and innovation, 

supporting those value chains that connect directly from our 

natural resource portfolio, among the broadest natural resource 

portfolios of any Canadian province, indeed probably any North 

American jurisdiction. 

 

We can think about the Sylvia Fedoruk Centre that’s doing 

important work in key areas of nuclear innovation. We can 

think of the Global Institute for Food Security. We can think 

about the International Minerals and Innovation Institute, 

among many others that are leading the way both within and 

beyond our post-secondary system. 

 

[15:45] 

 

This budget supports these goals. And I’d like to highlight 

through example  just a few of the investments that are helping 

to make a difference (a) today for our students, and (b) 

tomorrow for their success, not simply in their studies but in 

their careers. 

 

I’m happy to report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the budget 

invests nearly — and this is an important number — $818 

million for advanced education. Nearly $818 million for 

advanced education, that’s a record in the history of 

Saskatchewan. That’s a 3.7 per cent increase over last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this includes an increase of $24 million to support 

operational increases and several other additional key 

investments across our post-secondary system. It includes a 2 

per cent increase in base operating funds for post-secondary 

institutions. This is our seventh consecutive year, our seventh 

consecutive year has increased operating funding. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know how important that is because it’s 

through this base operating commitment, this kind of increase 

that we secure (a) the expertise and excellence that is associated 

with Saskatchewan’s post-secondary community, with our 

institutions, but also we help to secure the core tenets of 

affordability and accessibility. This is vitally important, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact it stands in stark contrast when I arrived in 

Saskatchewan 20 years ago. Mr. Speaker, 20 years ago, the 

members opposite, the NDP, had cut funding at both the 

University of Saskatchewan and University of Regina by 4 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, we continue to see important growth that’s 

reflected in these budgets. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we think about the investments that 

are under way, I want to highlight that when we think about 

what’s going on in many other jurisdictions across the country 

and well beyond, we see that other provinces and other 

jurisdictions are forced into positions of freezing or cutting or 

providing minimal funding increases. In fact we can draw on 

the words of the president of the University of Regina, 

President Vianne Timmons, as she said about our operating 

funds increase, and I quote, “When you look at that relative to 

other institutions in provinces across the country, we are in a 

favourable position.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget provides as well $2.6 million, an 

increase in funds to fully implement the expansion of physician 

training seats in the province as well as an addition of five more 

nurse practitioner seats. 

 

Let me just highlight the significance of this kind of investment 

when it comes to physician training. On March 6th, The Star 



4902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Phoenix ran an article that just simply highlighted some 

important facts, titled “63 per cent of medical grads to stay in 

Saskatchewan for residencies.” The lead sentence goes as 

follows: 

 

A growing number of medical school graduates will stay 

in Saskatchewan for their residency training. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan says 53 of the 84 medical 

students graduating this June have been matched with 

residency positions in the province. 

 

It then goes on and continues: 

 

Retaining medical residents is important, because doctors 

often establish a practice where they did their postgraduate 

training. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this reflects directly why we’ve increased 

the number of seats and increased the number of residencies 

available right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to add that beyond the health sector, 

we think about some of the other types of investments that are 

helping to make a difference. Specifically we can think about 

$5 million in operating funds for the Health Sciences facility at 

the University of Saskatchewan, that is, that blend where 

training is under way and research is under way, connecting our 

academic community, our scholars, and our researchers with 

our health care community. We know how important that is. 

 

We can also think about how we’re working to reach our 

platform commitment of 690 nursing seats, again so important 

for people right across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the new D and E wings are now 

fully operational at the Health Sciences facility. We know how 

important these wings are for us to ensure that we’re able to see 

excellence, excellence at the University of Saskatchewan in 

medical research, in teaching, but most especially to ensure that 

we’re able to help provide more doctors for more people right 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to this investment, we’ve also invested 

$4.5 million in this budget to support the construction of the 

Trades and Technology Centre at Parkland Regional College in 

Yorkton where the MLA for Yorkton, joined by many others 

including the Finance minister, have really worked to roll up 

their sleeves and ensure that this project is a success. To this I 

would add $1 million to support the ongoing construction of 

Southeast Regional College’s Weyburn campus. 

 

And when we think about the University of Regina, we can 

think about almost $4.5 million in capital funding that’s moving 

forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this allows us to think about some of the 

work that’s under way right across our system when we can 

think about the importance of our regional colleges offering 

front-line skills training so that students can learn closer to 

home, and not simply learn closer to home, but then stay and 

have their careers closer to home. And we know how important 

that is right across the province. In fact when we think about the 

investment between Advanced Education and the Economy, we 

see that the investment is over $48 million for our colleges and, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that’s important to those families right 

across Saskatchewan because that connection between learning 

and earning is increasingly important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to highlight that we have a number of 

other investments that are helping to improve the lives of 

people right across the province. We can think specifically 

about post-secondary education becoming more affordable and 

more accessible because of some of the student supports that we 

put in place. In fact across government we see supports for 

students are now at $216 million in direct funding to support 

students from right across multiple ministries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we think specifically within the Ministry of 

Advanced Education, that’s $134 million in student supports. 

And we know that this kind of investment, this increase that’s a 

14 per cent increase year over year just from this ministry, 

offers some key examples of why we’re seeing some real 

success in some basic indicators like population growth. 

 

The budget includes $82 million for the graduate retention 

program that now has more than 55,000 graduates — 55,000 

graduates, these numbers are just out — 55,000 graduates from 

across the province that traditionally would have probably had a 

second look at other options and opportunities, now staying 

here within the province because of this opportunity, helping to 

contribute to our record population growth that is now more 

than 1.117 million people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that there are a number of other 

initiatives. And we’ll hear more about the launch of this coming 

up in short order, but the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 

education savings is $7.5 million of an investment to ensure that 

our children’s education again offers opportunities for increased 

affordability and accessibility. 

 

We know that there’s $32.5 million for the Student Aid Fund to 

support grants and bursaries through our student loan program; 

nearly $12 million in scholarships, including the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship which provides up to $2,000 — 500 per 

year — that now has 10,000 students participating. This 

amounts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to about a 9 per cent savings on 

average tuition fees. That’s important for us to make sure that 

we’re highlighting in any conversation regarding tuition fees: 

students, those transitioning from high school into 

post-secondary education, are eligible when it comes to the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship. 

 

And importantly we also have the Saskatchewan Innovation and 

Opportunity Scholarship. This is a $5 million scholarship. It’s 

available for those from the apprenticeship system all the way 

through to graduate school. And I thought what I’d do is just 

highlight some of the feedback we’ve received. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 4th, 2014, Felicia Towson wrote 

in from Warman. She said: 

 

Dear Scholarship Sponsor, 

 

My name is Felicia Towson and I am enrolled at the Great 

Plains College in Warman, SK. I’m taking the Education 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4903 

Assistance [program] so that I may work with children in 

the communities who have special needs. 

 

I would like to thank you for your generosity. Your 

scholarship helps students like myself to get through these 

courses financially and it is appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have one from Kaylee Bannerman at 

Parkland College: 

 

Thank you so much for awarding me with the 

Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship. 

With these funds, I plan to have even more time to focus 

on my studies with less financial burden. It is greatly 

appreciated. 

 

After this academic year is completed, I plan to continue 

my education at the University . . . and pursue my dream 

of teaching. I’m majoring in physical education and 

minoring in English language arts. As this program is very 

competitive, it is pertinent that I am able to put 100 per 

cent effort and as much time as possible into my studies. 

Thank you for giving me the opportunity to achieve my 

goals. 

 

Another from Matthew Beaudry, again from Parkland College: 

 

I would like to thank Saskatchewan Innovation and 

Opportunity Scholarship for the award. It is greatly 

appreciated. It goes to show that working hard really does 

pay off. I worked hard to become a journeyman welder 

and I look forward to my future in welding. Thank you for 

the recognition. 

 

And Kaitlyn Deck, again from Lakeland: 

 

I’m in my second year of the university transfer program 

at Lakeland College. Being a student in this small college 

has been a wonderful experience. I’ve really been enjoying 

my time as a student. I love learning, and scholarships 

such as this one help to reduce the financial stress I feel as 

a student. Thank you so much for your generosity in 

giving me the Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity 

Scholarship. 

 

Those are just a few examples of the type of feedback that 

we’re receiving from students. We know that there are burdens, 

and we don’t make light of those. But we have put in place 

some significant innovations to help support our students, to 

help make sure post-secondary education is increasingly 

affordable and accessible. And we’re going to continue to listen 

to students, listen to faculty members, listen to staff, listen to 

families so that we can continue to make progress on ensuring 

that there’s increased affordability and accessibility. 

 

But we are making some progress. Since 2008 there’s been an 

increase of 18 per cent in the number of Saskatchewan workers 

with a post-secondary certificate, diploma, or degree, an 18 per 

cent increase. And Saskatchewan continues to address the need 

for workers. Students continue to take full advantage and 

maximize the opportunity of educational opportunities right 

across our post-secondary community. 

 

We’re also seeing some positive results from investments from 

both the government, from the federal government, from the 

private sector, and across communities when it comes to 

education and skills training for our First Nations and Métis 

students. Indeed since 2008, there’s been a 25 per cent increase 

in the number of First Nations and Métis students in 

Saskatchewan who’ve obtained a post-secondary certificate, 

diploma, or degree. A 25 per cent increase. We know there’s 

more to do. 

 

In fact the number of First Nations and Métis students that have 

earned a university degree since 2008 has jumped by 40 per 

cent. Investments are making a difference. We know there’s a 

lot more to do here, but we’re able to actually measure some of 

these outcomes and measure the success of our students and 

better understand what some of the barriers are so that we can 

continue to help provide support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much to do in closing the education and 

employment gaps for our First Nations and Métis learners. 

Institutions like SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology], the University of Saskatchewan, the 

University of Regina, continue to show increased enrolment. 

The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology offers key 

programs in which employment is achieved, for example, 100 

per cent employment through their aircraft maintenance 

program. Our regional colleges are continuing to play a key 

role. And the Gabriel Dumont Institute is doing valuable work. 

 

This budget is helping to sustain that kind of momentum. 

Through the ministries of Advanced Education and the 

Economy, there’s $49 million that is invested directly. We also 

have $6 million housed within the Ministry of Education for a 

total of $55 million that will serve to support post-secondary 

education and skills training. The reference to education reflects 

directly our government’s response, our response that has 

doubled this year regarding the joint task force on education 

and employment. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, overall our government has a track record of 

investing more than $5.5 billion over the past seven years in 

post-secondary education and training as well as student 

supports — more than $5.5 billion. It’s an all-time record. In 

fact, what we see is a 61 per cent increase in funding for 

post-secondary education and our students since our first 

budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that there are a number of 

opinions about this budget. Many of them have demonstrated 

real support for that vision of prudence and that vision of 

sustaining the growth that’s under way. 

 

So I’ll begin with just a series of quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite this being a tight budget year, the government has 

sent a clear message that they recognize the value of 

post-secondary education to the economic vitality of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That comment comes from the president of the University of 

Saskatchewan, as the Minister of the Environment has already 



4904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

highlighted, Dr. Ilene Busch-Vishniac. 

 

And here’s what the president of SIAST, Dr. Larry Rosia, has 

had to say: 

 

The government’s continued commitment to providing 

students with increased access to post-secondary education 

— despite competing demands — will help ensure labour 

market development keeps pace with employer 

requirements. We see this budget as an investment in the 

province’s future. 

 

Parkland College’s president, Dr. Fay Myers, had this to say: 

 

All this is good news for students in communities in the 

Parkland region. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of other quotes 

that we can turn to. I’ll highlight just a couple. From the 

Graduate Students’ Association at the University of 

Saskatchewan, one of the vice-presidents, Steve Jimbo, has 

said: “The U of S GSA are happy with the increased allocation 

for the GRP in this year’s provincial budget. Thank you.” 

 

From Dr. Andy Potter who leads VIDO-InterVac [Vaccine and 

Infectious Disease Organization-international vaccine centre], 

the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, and InterVac 

which is now a level 3 containment facility recognized around 

the world: “Many thanks to you and your colleagues for the 

continued support of VIDO-InterVac.” 

 

A couple of examples from Twitter that help to reinforce that 

while making prudent investments, balancing the budget, we’re 

also making investments that matter to people right across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s our goal. We’re working to 

meet the challenges of our growing province by investing in 

post-secondary education in record amounts and ensuring that 

education is increasingly affordable and accessible while at the 

same time ensuring that Saskatchewan’s tradition of excellence, 

a tradition that has been more than 100 years in the making, 

continues to be a defining feature of this province. 

 

The 2014-15 budget continues our government’s strong 

commitment to our students, to their families, to our 

post-secondary institutions, and to key areas of infrastructure 

right across our community. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that 

there’s more to do in Saskatchewan, but this budget, the 

2014-15 budget, offers real support for students, their families, 

our post-secondary institutions and, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’ll 

be supporting this budget. Thank you so much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Before I enter into the discussion in support of the 2014-2015 

budget, there are some thank yous that I would like to extend to 

my family — I’d like to thank them very much for their support 

— my constituency assistant, Kelly Zazula, who is a constant 

person within my constituency office, very supportive, always 

there to ensure that the constituents’ needs are being met. 

 

And I also would like to thank my constituency association of 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They have, most of them in fact, 

have been with me since my first being elected in 2007. And so 

they are also a constant, and I’ve enjoyed their support, their 

advice, and sometimes very lively discussions. So they have 

been a real good support for my continuing work as an MLA 

for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I had the wonderful pleasure, along 

with my colleague, the MLA from Walsh Acres, we attended 

the citizenship ceremony here in the city of Regina, and we had 

130 new Canadian citizens sworn in today. 

 

And it’s very moving, very emotional, and I’m going to 

encourage each and every one of the members in the House 

here, if they have an opportunity to go and participate in one of 

the citizenship ceremonies. These are people who are coming 

here. They’re excited but they’ve also made a very important 

choice, and that is Saskatchewan. So besides being sworn in as 

Canadian citizens, they have also selected Saskatchewan as a 

province they wish to live and work and raise a family. 

 

And today I had the opportunity to speak to a gentleman who 

said him and his wife had first moved to Quebec, and they left 

Quebec and chose to come here. And he just said this is the land 

of opportunity for them. They just felt so welcomed. They felt 

that this was a province, but also a government that understood 

families, understood families’ needs, and were putting families 

first. So that was really nice to hear that the kind of work that 

we are doing as a government is being realized and understood 

by people within our community. So that was, like I said, it was 

a very emotional experience, and it’s one that solidifies in my 

mind the importance of becoming good citizens within our 

country. 

 

We also instruct them that they should become involved, that 

they should make sure they become informed, and that they 

vote, both federally, provincially, and within their cities or 

communities, and that they also volunteer and participate to 

ensure that they really understand the importance of what it is to 

be a Canadian. So like I said, today was very emotional, but 

also a very rewarding day. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just this past month I had the opportunity 

to also participate in a panel discussion for the Muslim women 

at the University of Regina. And that was very interesting, but 

also very rewarding, but also very educational for me to be able 

to participate, because again I had the opportunity to meet 

women who have chosen to leave other countries and locate 

here. And most of these young women were starting their 

families, starting their careers, and they again chose 

Saskatchewan. Why did they choose Saskatchewan? Because 

all of them believe that this is a province and a government that 

has unlimited opportunities for them. 

 

And so for us, it’s incumbent upon us to ensure that we keep 

our word and that the agreements that we’ve made with our 

citizens are being realized. And that’s one of the things. I mean, 

I can read the five points here: balanced budget, no tax 

increases, controlling spending, investments in infrastructure, 

investments in people. 

 

These five points kind of say it all, and I could sit down, but 

I’ve got a lot more to say. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4905 

One of the things the young women talked to me about was the 

importance of education, of child care. And you know, it’s not 

just young women that are immigrating from other countries. 

It’s women and families that we talk to every day that say, you 

know, this is a government that really supports us. The other 

government, the previous government, they paid lip service. But 

when the Saskatchewan Party formed government in 2007, we 

increased child care spaces by 48 per cent. Now that’s a 

government that is committed to ensuring that families have the 

opportunity, especially young couples, that they have the 

opportunity to go out and work within the community and 

create a good, safe environment for their families. 

 

Another thing that a lot of the different women organizations 

that come and talk to me, they like that we are . . . ensuring that 

we’ve got safe communities are top of our mind. And I know 

through the leadership of our Minister of Social Services, and 

Justice, they are leading the way in ensuring that we build safer 

communities for our families, for our individuals, but also for 

our seniors. 

 

I know that we’ve had some interesting questions in question 

period about seniors and the support for seniors. But in fact this 

is a government, this is a budget that in fact supports seniors. 

We don’t just talk about it. We do it. We’ve increased the 

number of long-term care facilities for our seniors in this 

province. The other members across the way in the opposition, 

they were more than . . . For them to be able to deal with the 

situation, they either closed a hospital, closed a school, or 

closed beds in senior care. 

 

This is a government that in fact has made a commitment to the 

people of Saskatchewan. It’s a growing province. We’ve got a 

growing population. But we’re prepared to step up to the plate 

and do what’s needed to ensure that our residents within this 

province feel that they have a government that’s listening to 

them. 

 

It’s not just paying lip service, which is what the opposition did. 

We, in fact, are doing what we set out to do. And when we put 

forward a budget, it’s a balanced budget. It’s not just reckless 

spending as what the opposition . . . I mean, they keep coming 

up with all sorts of either press releases or . . . Well, we don’t 

think that they’ve come up with a platform, but kind of ideas of, 

you know, they say, well why don’t you do this? And never 

once do they ever cost it out or do they ever do any forward 

planning to say, is this doable and is it needed? 

 

I must say that, in fact, we can be very proud of our Finance 

minister. Some people may think he’s a little stingy. But he’s 

not stingy. He’s very prudent to ensure that when we have a 

tightening budget but in fact it’s still a balanced budget, and 

that we’ve ensured that we’ve got controlled spending but wise 

spending. 

 

Every time I talk to people within my constituency or the city of 

Regina, one of the things they say to us is, please ensure that 

you live within your means. And that’s what this budget is. This 

budget is a . . . It sets out, how do we still provide services for 

the people of this province but we do it in a controlled manner 

but in a responsible manner and it’s within our means? 

 

And one of the difficult things is, how do you balance things 

off? Because I’m sure everyone has lots of asks. I mean, you 

just have to go out and sit down in a restaurant and have a cup 

of coffee and there’s going to be someone that is more than 

prepared to come up and have an ask. But we have to ensure 

that we have the money to be able to pay for this. 

 

This is where the infrastructure . . . I mean, we’ve got more 

highways and roads than any other province. However, what do 

we have to do? We have to ensure that we are meeting the 

needs of the province, we are meeting the needs of the people 

within this province. And so it’s very careful planning and 

projections and planning ahead to ensure that today’s needs are 

being met, but also for the future. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I’m more than pleased to 

stand in the House today and support this budget. It’s a 

balanced budget. It has no new tax increases, which is what 

again people within the city of Regina, within this province, 

within my constituency say, we would like to ensure that our 

taxes don’t keep going up. We know that maybe the revenue 

isn’t as strong as it should be for our province, but we want to 

ensure that our taxes are not increasing. And so that was the 

challenge that was set out by the Finance minister to the 

ministers across the cabinet to ensure that the budget that was 

presented was done in such a manner that there was no tax 

increases for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a budget that believes 

in steady growth, that believes in supporting the people of this 

province, but also it’s a balanced budget. And I don’t think that 

too many provinces in Canada can proudly say that they have a 

balanced budget. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 

supporting this budget. Thank you very much. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections and Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 

me to join in the debate today in support of the motion on this 

government’s budgetary policy or better known as the budget. 

 

I would also like to share some of the great things that are 

happening in the Ministry of Corrections and Policing as well 

as in my constituency, Regina Wascana Plains. I was first 

elected to the legislature in 2007 for Regina Wascana Plains. 

Having been born and raised in Regina, it is indeed a privilege 

to serve the people of this community. 

 

As an MLA, I have seen dramatic growth, not only in my 

constituency, in our economy, in our population, and our global 

reputation. I can tell you that there is excitement in the air every 

day and the belief that our potential is limitless. 

 

We know we need to . . . we must have appropriate foundations 

for ensuring that growth is sustainable. That isn’t just talking 

about the structures, Mr. Speaker, it’s talking about other areas 

such as health care, including mental health. Like implications 

of a burgeoning job market, infrastructure deficits and increased 

crime are mitigated. But, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. In 2012 

Premier Brad Wall introduced The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth and we are continuing to build on this plan. 



4906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Our plan contemplates a thoughtful approach to continued 

growth supported by appropriate resources for maintaining the 

stability of the necessary economic and social foundations. 

These foundations include safe and healthy communities, which 

my ministry is an integral part of, as well as the province’s 

recently announced child and family agenda aimed at creating 

strong, healthy families who can benefit from Saskatchewan’s 

growth. And this year’s budget supports these foundations. Our 

goal is to create safer and healthy communities by addressing 

the full spectrum of crime reduction, prevention, intervention, 

and suppression. 

 

The success of our Community Mobilization initiatives is 

internationally recognized and is based on the partnership 

between government, the community, police services, and 

others to address the causal factors of crime and victimization. 

We are investing point eight six million in the building 

partnerships to reduce crime initiative. 

 

Two additional centres of responsibilities, or better known as 

CORs, will be implemented in 2014. These CORs are made up 

of the human service professionals who collaborate on longer 

term solutions to crime reduction and victimization. Ten hubs 

have been implemented so far, and there are several other 

communities that are interested in implementing this model. 

 

The Hub, Mr. Speaker, is a multi-disciplinary group of 

front-line workers that provides immediate intervention and 

short-term solutions to those who are in need. Addressing the 

risk factors that contribute to criminal behaviour is so important 

if we want to successfully reach our goal of prevention and 

intervention. And the most prevalent risk factors affecting 

society today are mental health and addictions. 

 

Mental health, Mr. Speaker, runs the entire spectrum of health. 

It is mental health, Mr. Speaker. Mental health affects all walks 

of life, and the discussion of mental health requires an openness 

and discussion. The people facing mental challenges, Mr. 

Speaker, need supports and a society and government not 

shying away from it, looking at the issues surrounding mental 

health, finding the proper resources in order to address the 

challenging life of someone with mental health . . . 

 

I read an obituary recently that really moved me. It was a 

mother who was an alcoholic and a son who was a drug addict 

and a paranoid schizophrenic. These two individuals, and I 

quote, “represent the struggle many face just to get through a 

day. It is hard to imagine that for a large portion of the world, 

life sucks most of the time.” I’d like to continue on reading a bit 

more from the obituary, Mr. Speaker, however it’s in very small 

writing. 

 

I’ll call these individuals Bob and Sue and this obituary was 

written by this man’s son. 

 

. . . [Bob and Sue] were dished out a particularly large 

serving of suck, yet they never lost their humanity. They 

were not saints, far from it, but at their core, they were not 

mean or vindictive, they were not spiteful or hateful, they 

were not racist nor homophobic, and that is something. I 

am . . . [Bob’s] son and . . . [Sue’s] grandson. 

 

The essence of this particular obituary does highlight the life in 

very poignant terms, Mr. Speaker, the life of someone who is 

suffering from mental health and addictions. We cannot let 

individuals like this or the ones just described through the 

cracks of society. The government cannot do this alone. It takes 

partnerships like building partnerships to reduce crime, our 

human service sectors, police, and local communities working 

collaboratively to increase community safety and wellness in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’d like to highlight right at this particular time, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government is committed to ensuring those 

with mental health have the proper supports available to them. 

The mental health and addiction strategy that we are currently 

working on through the child and family committee . . . You 

know, I’m not sure when exactly that will be completed, but it 

does speak to our government’s commitment to this particular 

issue, something that isn’t talked about enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan’s growth is steady and strong. We continue to be 

among the leaders in Canada in job growth, average weekly 

earnings, manufacturing sales, retail sales, investment in new 

housing construction, and the value of building permits. With a 

record year in 2013, Saskatchewan was also the largest per 

capita exporter in Canada. We do have a lot to be proud of. And 

as Saskatchewan continues to move forward, our government 

will support growth in 2014-15 through investing in people and 

needed infrastructure, encouraging economic growth through 

sound policy and financial decisions. We are ensuring that we 

are being accountable to the taxpayers of this province by 

making every dollar count and investing in what works, not 

what we’ve always done, Mr. Speaker, taking the money and 

reinvesting in outcomes based on evidence. 

 

The other side of the House should be pleased that we are 

taking such a rational and common sense approach. Doing it 

this way, the way it’s always been done as I referred to earlier, 

is no longer a viable option. We need to explore a more 

effective and efficient way of doing business. Decisions need to 

be based on best practices with those measureable outcomes. It 

just makes sense, as the Opposition Leader is so fond of saying. 

 

Corrections and Policing’s 2014-15 budget supports 

government’s goal to create safer communities by reducing 

crime and assisting victims of crime and those who are most 

vulnerable in society. It also supports the growth plan through 

initiatives that provide a holistic approach to meeting the 

demands that Saskatchewan faces in supporting vulnerable 

people and dealing with marginalized citizens and community 

safety. Corrections and Policing’s 2014-15 budget is 413.2 

million. This is an increase of 1.4 per cent from last fiscal year, 

and this is an increase of more than 46 per cent since 2007-08 

when the budget was only 282.1 million. We are investing 

when the previous government did not. Fifteen million will be 

invested this year for a total investment of 24 million for an 

addition at the Prince Albert Provincial Correctional Centre. 

This new living unit will add 144 new bed spaces. 

 

But that’s not all we did. In 2009 we added the first new bed 

space since the late 1980s. 5.5 million was spent on a 90-bed 

dormitory at the Saskatoon Provincial Correctional Centre. At 

Pine Grove provincial correctional centre for women, 13.4 

million was invested in a 30-cell living unit that added 60 new 

bed spaces, and this opened in October of 2013. And last year 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4907 

we not only invested $1.8 million, we re-invested in existing 

facilities by converting a vacant unit at Regina’s Paul Dojack 

Youth Centre into the new White Birch female holding facility. 

Previously, the Pine Grove Correctional Centre in Prince Albert 

was the only women’s facility in the province. It opened, this 

White Birch opened in February of 2014. 

 

In our first term of government we spent $9.4 million in 

security enhancements. This year we will continue to invest in 

our facilities — 8.62 million will be directed towards 

continuing the installation and staffing of video conferencing 

technology in our custody facilities to provide offenders with 

access to the justice system. Saskatoon Correctional Centre will 

increase capacity from one video courtroom to four video 

courtrooms. Regina Correctional Centre increased capacity 

from two video courtrooms to five video courtrooms. 

 

Staffing the new White Birch female holding facility in Regina. 

Continuing work on the criminal justice information 

management system, which will replace and integrate four 

aging computer applications that are an important part of the 

operation of both the Ministry of Corrections and Policing as 

well as the Ministry of Justice. Supporting mental health 

assessments of offenders in our custody and ensuring that these 

facilities are maintained at a level that ensures the safety of the 

public, inmates, and the staff who work there. 

 

And my ministry is supporting our policing partners throughout 

the province. As of April 1, 2012, Saskatchewan and Canada 

signed a 20-year provincial police service agreement for the 

continued service of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police]. 2014-15 budget recognizes the increased costs of 

policing and includes increased funding of 3.93 million. The 

total RCMP budget is approximately 170.9 million in 2014-15. 

The RCMP is finally operating at its full officer complement. In 

our first term we fulfilled our promise to hire 120 additional 

police officers across this province. In addition, 47 new RCMP 

positions were added, 29 for the emergency backup policy. 

 

In this budget, municipal policing grants for targeted policing 

initiatives will increase to more than 14.2 million, a $5,000 

increase for each of the 125 officers that we delivered on — 100 

per cent increase from 2007-2008 — for a total of 6.78 million. 

This funding supports our specialized units of investigators, 

supported by crime analysts, who are trained in specific areas of 

criminal activity. 

 

Examples of targeted initiatives include organized and serious 

crime enforcement, enhanced community policing, missing 

persons, the Internet child exploitation unit, and enhanced 

investigative policing. 

 

Connecting the police to our communities often leads to a 

higher level of confidence and co-operation. It also fosters trust 

at a local and organizational level. Our government recognizes 

the challenges that the province is facing due to the increased 

cost of policing. That is why Saskatchewan is taking a lead role 

in the national effort to address the economics of policing. 

 

We are also continuing our work with SARM, SUMA and the 

RCMP and the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police to 

design a model that would complement existing police services 

by addressing low-risk, high-priority public safety concerns at 

the local level. The joint SUMA and SARM task force on the 

administration of justice, which determined in the year 2000 

that all residents of Saskatchewan were responsible to pay for 

policing, has been invited to reconvene and look at our current 

formula and possibly come up with alternative formulas. 

 

Government’s vision is to be the best place in Canada to live, 

work, to start a business, to get an education, to raise a family, 

and to build a life. Our government is committed to establishing 

Saskatchewan as the best place to do those things, Mr. Speaker. 

This vision is supported by a balanced budget that is forecasting 

a surplus of 71 million. This budget contains no tax increases, 

controls spending, and makes investments in infrastructure and 

people. It demonstrates the strong and steady growth of 

Saskatchewan. We are investing in what matters most to the 

people in this province: $5 billion in health care, 2.9 billion in 

infrastructure projects, 1.76 billion in education, and 664.5 

million in highways and transportation. 

 

[16:30] 

 

We are addressing the pressures of growth and creating a better 

quality of life for everyone in Saskatchewan, ensuring 

affordable housing is available; improving the quality of life for 

our seniors; assisting our partners, our local municipalities, and 

First Nations and Métis people of our province; as well as 

supporting our children, our families, and citizens with 

disabilities. We continue to support our economy through our 

strong investments in agriculture, our Crown corporations, the 

business community, mining sector, our parks, 

community-based organizations, our post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

This budget is helping us achieve this vision by sustaining 

growth and opportunities for Saskatchewan people, meeting the 

challenges of growth, securing a better quality of life for all 

people, delivering responsive and responsible government. As 

elected officials, we are accountable to our constituents. There 

are many competing issues that we must consider in our 

decision-making processes. It is always satisfying when issues 

that are important in your community, our community are 

addressed. And that’s why I’m excited about what’s going on in 

my own constituency. 

 

The work is continuing on the east Regina bypass which 

includes interchanges at both Pilot Butte and White 

City-Emerald Park area. A new elementary school in Emerald 

Park and White City, a proposal for three joint-use — for the 

city of Regina — schools, two remodels at Sacred Heart and 

Connaught. And, Mr. Speaker, those two schools aren’t in my 

constituency; however when the entire community is doing well 

and good things are happening, we all sense it and we all know 

it. 

 

I also have a lot of people to thank for their continued support 

— my family, my husband, Gary; sons, Regan and Cameron; 

my mother and my father. 

 

And I have to speak a very brief minute about my father. My 

father has advancing Alzheimer’s and the quality of his life is at 

that point in time, Mr. Speaker, where he is going to probably 

require alternative care. I still have moments and glimmers of 

conversations with my dad that connects me to him. And it used 



4908 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

to be politics, Mr. Speaker, and he doesn’t seem to want to talk 

about politics anymore. But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, he 

still recognizes me — I know I’m hard to forget — and he still 

recognizes me and I still get bear hugs. So again in speaking 

about infrastructure in our province, and speaking about health 

care, my father will be well looked after when the time comes 

that he has to go into alternative care. 

 

I want to speak briefly about my mother. She is absolutely an 

incredible woman, the rock. And her and I, we’ve had some 

pretty interesting conversations over the last period of time, 

especially in dealing with my father. And she is the ultimate 

caregiver. And you know, she never wants to ever give up the 

care of my dad. However, she is 78 years old and her time is . . . 

It’s taking its toll on her. She is the strongest woman I know, 

and I guess I come by it honestly. 

 

Jackie and Joette in my constituency office . . . Oh before I 

leave that, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about my mom and dad 

in the last election. My mom would drag my dad along from 

door to door. My dad would talk to all the young kids and pet 

all the dogs. But I’m telling you, those two, they motored. They 

did polls on their own time as they could. And I have a lot to be 

grateful for with my mom and dad. 

 

Jackie and Joette in my constituency office, and as everyone 

here today has spoken or in past days spoken about their 

constituency assistants, mine are just as wonderful and just as 

terrific. And I’m so very, very lucky to have them in my office. 

My constituency president and the association provide the 

support needed to continue on business as a Saskatchewan Party 

MLA. My constituents and of course my government 

colleagues. 

 

This is a very exciting time to be in Saskatchewan. We are 

laying the groundwork to successfully deal with the ongoing 

pressures of our growing and prosperous province. We are 

working hard to represent the people of our province in this 

legislature. We are committed to making Saskatchewan the best 

place to live, work, and raise a family. And I believe this 

government’s budgetary policy will help us achieve this 

commitment that we all have made and it will also ensure 

Saskatchewan’s steady growth. 

 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon with the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business also believes this. In CFIB’s March 19th, 

2014 news release she says, and I quote, “Overall this balanced 

budget keeps Saskatchewan moving forward.” There really isn’t 

much left to be said, is there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I along with others want to declare my 

full support for this year’s budget. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Courage, my friends. It is not too late to build 

a better world. Courage is a great strength. Thanks to people 

that help me with the courage I need to fulfill my great honour 

and privilege to represent the good people of Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to thank my wife, Danielle. She’s currently 

watching at home and, Danielle, I am so grateful to have a 

woman like you in my life. I love you very much. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re lucky, too. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Also speaking of luck, we got to welcome 

Jacob, my first son, into the world on June 19th of this past 

summer. He could be at home right now pawing at the TV 

screen as I deliver this speech, but I love you, Jacob. Also with 

my wife and son right now is my mom and dad are in Regina. 

And I’d like to thank them for all the lessons they taught me 

and all the work they put into raising me. Thank you. 

 

I need to thank the people of Eastview that gave me the nod, 

and I appreciate the support from everyone in Eastview in the 

last election. I need to thank my CAs [constituency assistant], 

Helen and Conni, for taking care of things back in Regina, or 

back in Saskatoon when I’m in Regina. Couldn’t do it without 

them. I need to thank the people of Eastview that have given 

this honour to represent them down in Regina. 

 

And I’ve, since the budget was released, had an opportunity to 

speak with a few different groups and it’s been overwhelmingly 

supportive of the direction of the government, the direction of 

the budget. We’ve held coffee parties with seniors. I like to get 

back into the different complexes in Eastview a couple times 

throughout the year. And once again, overwhelmingly support 

of the direction we have in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about courage and how that’s an 

important theme in our province, along with hard work and 

integrity. When I am talking to people of Eastview though, the 

number one concern that they have, from year in, year out with 

the budget that’s getting released, the number one question they 

ask is, is it balanced? Mr. Speaker, I can proudly say that this is 

the seventh budget that this government has brought in that is 

balanced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a far cry of how things were run in this 

province in the past governments. We can only look at the 

problems in the ’90s and the early 2000s of that government. 

That debt that they left was different than other government’s 

debt. Their debt was hidden away in crumbling infrastructure, 

Mr. Speaker — a ticking time bomb in every area of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we only have to look at long-term care facilities in 

the province. The past government of the day closed a 

long-term care centre every year of their mandate. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re in the process of opening up 13 new care facilities 

throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if you’d like to look at 

the past record, they closed 52 rural hospitals. That took 

courage, courage of a different type. 

 

In the Crowns, such as SaskPower where we have over 1 

million power poles that need replacing in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s decisions in government and past governments 

that have crippled this province in infrastructure deficits. 

 

In education, Mr. Speaker, the NDP closed over 170 schools. 

What’s worse though, they’ve also starved what was left with 

preventative maintenance, making very difficult decisions for 

this government. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4909 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Eastview is very thankful that we 

found courage in this budget to be balanced. I also heard from 

the people of Eastview, loud and clear, that they are very 

appreciative of the taxes that we’ve lowered. 

 

Speaking of tax reductions, we had the largest income tax 

reduction in Saskatchewan’s history under this government. We 

had the largest property tax reductions, also within this 

government. We’ve also had 112,000 people no longer pay any 

Saskatchewan income tax. This has been accomplished because, 

Mr. Speaker, this government values the taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, what the alternative of cutting 

taxes would be, which is raising taxes. We had, the last 

campaign, that the Leader of the Opposition wrote their 

campaign book, the tree book, and it called for jacking up 

royalties and increasing taxation on the people of 

Saskatchewan. We know that that’s a brake on the economy. 

We know that that would stall the economic growth that we’ve 

enjoyed in this province. 

 

We’re blessed to be in a province now that’s finally growing. 

We’ve just heard the recent population numbers. We’ve grown 

just over 20,000 people in the past year, which is wonderful 

news. We’re now over 1.1 million people that call 

Saskatchewan home. 

 

We know that reckless financial policy of past governments, a 

policy that the NDP proposed, would take us back, take us 

back, Mr. Speaker, to deficit budgets. They would take us back 

to the population decrease. They would take us back to a time 

when our economy was shrinking. We will not go back, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What I’ve heard from talking to different people in Eastview is 

that we need to control spending. Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty proud 

to represent the people of Eastview, the people that entrusted 

me to take their views to Regina. And one of the views that I’ve 

heard loud and clear is that we have to live within one’s means. 

I’ve got to thank our members of treasury board and our 

Finance minister for this budget, and especially on this line 

item, of the ability to bring in spending at the levels that they 

have done while still investing in important projects and the 

infrastructure and people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget, we have the . . . [inaudible] . . . for 

the people of Saskatoon, is that we have a commitment that 

we’re going to be there for the Saskatoon commuter bridge. 

We’ve also got twinning projects on Highway 16 east of 

Saskatoon, on Highways 6,7, and 39. These are important 

infrastructure pieces that this government is fulfilling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, just a couple of quotes I’d like to just 

read off, and it goes back to the views of people out there after 

the budget was released: “Funding for child care, early learning 

child care programs, care for the disabled. I think women at the 

table on both sides matter.” This is Equal Voice Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re very supportive of the work and the 

investments we’ve done with people with disabilities and early 

learning children’s programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve got another quote here: “The government’s 

investment in our communities will go a long way to helping us 

meet the demands of growth.” That’s Debra Button, the SUMA 

president. That was released March 19th, 2014. 

 

Speaking on the economy, Mr. Speaker, “Although job training 

for First Nations is one other area where I think people might be 

surprised, in general terms over the last seven years of this 

government, particularly over the last four, that has been 

focused and has been increasingly successful compared to what 

has been done in the past.” That’s Murray Mandryk, CBC radio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the investments in education, 

“We’re happy that the government put the education as a 

priority this year. We knew it was going to be a tight budget so 

we’re quite happy. We’re also happy to be working with them 

and having the conversations going forward.” That’s Janet 

Foord, the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] 

president. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, we have made those investments 

in education. It is important. Another one on education: “We 

are overjoyed by today’s announcement of the rebuild of Sacred 

Heart Community School,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

one that we may hear in this Chamber because we have 

members opposite that have railed against or railed for 

investment in Sacred Heart. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

This budget fulfills that need out there. It’ll be interesting to see 

if they vote for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve got one more on education. “Well, for the 

Regina Public School Board it was good news. We saw the 

commitment to fund a rebuild of Connaught School. That’s 

something that we requested a year ago. Seeing it in the budget, 

as a board we were very pleased with it.” That’s from the 

Regina Public School Division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the school in the member from Regina 

Lakeview, I believe — Connaught School — that you would 

think that he would have people that he represents that would be 

wanting that school replaced. You’d think that that member 

would have the courage, the courage to vote for this budget that 

would help his residents, for his people that he represents from 

Regina Lakeview. It’ll be interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, if he 

does have that courage. 

 

We have another quote here: 

 

“I think it’s the biggest announcement is that there is no 

education tax increase, no personal tax increase, no tax 

increase at all for all residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan,” said Dionne, “so I think that that’s a big, 

positive consideration considering the revenue that they’ve 

lost. And they were looking for new sources and they were 

talking at the SUMA conference about increasing 

education tax.” 

 

That’s Greg Dionne, mayor of P.A. [Prince Albert]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting. The members opposite have 

. . . I think they actually, they like to increase taxes. That’s what 

their history has shown. You can look at the different programs 

that they’ve, when they were in government, they introduced 



4910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

and put money into. It all came from increasing taxation. We 

saw the PST [provincial sales tax] increase. We saw the 

different taxation levels that the NDP would bring in. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to take a different path. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just talking about the courage that I would hope 

that the opposition members would show and vote for this 

budget, and I think of the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

And I’d like to ask that member from Saskatoon Riversdale to 

show courage and vote for this budget that has $7.7 million for 

Creative Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. She speaks passionately 

about creative industries, and I would hope the member would 

show that courage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just briefly here a couple more quotes. And this is 

speaking to the agreements that we have out there with the 

municipalities. I believe the Leader of the Opposition when he 

was . . . Or sorry, the leader from Lakeview, when he was the 

Leader of the Opposition, would want a cut from. And this is 

talking about on what he would spend his dollars on. 

 

We’re very pleased to see the number. This record-setting 

revenue sharing that is still in place with municipalities 

because that is what it really tells us, really says to us that 

we believe that to grow this province we need to inject 

money into municipalities. We need to help them grow. 

We need to make sure that they are healthy and we’re 

healthy. 

 

That’s Debra Button, the SUMA president. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview mused before 

that that is where they would find money for their projects. 

They would cut money from revenue sharing. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re not going to take that path. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve got one more from Debra: “As the president 

of SUMA, today I’m very pleased with the amount of revenue 

sharing we are still getting,” Mr. Speaker. They’re happy that 

the level of revenue sharing is at the levels that it’s at. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to work every day to earn the trust of the 

people of Saskatchewan to make sure that this government stays 

on this side of the House and that funding will stay in place 

versus if that opposition ever got a chance to form government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to talk just briefly about overall the 

budget that was crafted. It was presented in a summary budget, 

which is new for Saskatchewan. It took courage, Mr. Speaker. 

We inherited the practice of producing the summary financials 

and the general revenue financials. This was adopted by the 

NDP, and we’ve listened to the Provincial Auditor saying that 

we should really release just the summaries. We’ll have our 

operational plan, but we’re going to listen to the auditor. 

 

And this is what she had to say: 

 

Acting Provincial Auditor Judy Ferguson is pleased with 

the Government of Saskatchewan’s changes to . . . [the] 

2014-2015 budget . . . “These are critical steps in 

eliminating confusion and helping legislators and the 

public better understand the Government’s finances.” 

 

Judy Ferguson, Acting Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, that 

took courage. It took courage for that change. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s something that I can say honestly I’m very 

proud of, being a member on this side. That’s a change, a large 

change in how this government operates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another quote here I’m going to read just briefly. 

We saw countless times the member from Regina Rosemont 

would rise in his seat and comment about the credit union tax 

credits. And he was, well I won’t say spreading fear, but he was 

definitely provoking the public that there was a tax increase that 

was going to occur. So what happened on budget day? Well 

let’s read a quote from Keith Nixon, CEO of SaskCentral: 

 

Saskatchewan credit unions are truly appreciative of the 

government’s decision to maintain the current tax regime. 

It is clear the Saskatchewan government recognizes the 

contributions credit unions may have made to the 

communities of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that fearmongering that that member put out there 

is damaging. It’s damaging to the public’s perception of the 

credit unions in Saskatchewan and I encourage him to apologize 

for all the fearmongering that he did prior to the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about health care. And 

this is one of the key reasons why I got involved in politics is 

that I saw the direction of health care in Saskatchewan was in 

an embarrassing state. We had the longest wait times in Canada. 

We had wards being shut down because of lack of nurses. I’m 

proud to say we have over 1,000 new nurses, since we formed 

government, joining us in Saskatchewan. We have over 300 

more doctors. But health care is one of those services, I think, 

and especially for the seniors in Saskatoon Eastview and for 

everyone in Saskatchewan, I think it is probably the top priority 

that we can invest in. 

 

And I’m pretty proud of the investments that we’ve made in 

health care, and it’s also some of the innovation. And I’m pretty 

proud of the work that we’re doing on hot-spotting. And we 

know that 1 per cent of the population makes up roughly 21 per 

cent of the expenses of, or visits to the ERs [emergency room]. 

So we’re going to send some specific teams out there to identify 

those people and find out how we can provide better health care 

for them. And that’s an important innovation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another innovation — and I’m not surprised the NDP wouldn’t 

be supporting this — but it’s the lean initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

And in health care there has been some talk about innovation 

and efficiencies that we’re trying to find in health care. And I’d 

like, you know, I would hope that the member from Lakeview, 

Regina Lakeview, the former Health minister that introduced 

lean to Saskatchewan, I may add, Mr. Speaker . . . I know that 

he knows the benefits in finding efficiencies in health care. And 

being the father of lean, I would hope that he would have the 

courage, the courage to stand up and vote for this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, courage. It’s not too late, the member from Regina 

Lakeview, to build a better health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the efficiencies that this government is 

looking for in health care. It’s important because we know that 

it’s probably the most vital area of services that we provide as a 

provincial government. And we know that we can’t keep 

increasing that budget without looking at where we can find 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4911 

efficiencies. I’m such a huge supporter of what our Health 

minister is doing and everyone in health care in Saskatchewan 

is looking at how they provide . . . how do they provide the 

services that the people need in Saskatchewan in the most 

efficient way possible? Mr. Speaker, that’s how we’re going to 

improve health care in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw specific monies put into health care to 

address the surgical wait care list. We know that we need to 

reduce that list to even shorter. We have stated the goal that no 

one would wait more than three months to access surgical care. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know through the dedication of the health 

care providers in this province, we will get there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about courage and making a difference in 

the world, and I’ve just got a couple other requests for courage 

from the opposition. And it’s for the member from Nutana to 

show courage and vote for this budget. 

 

The member from Nutana is the critic for Agriculture, and 

you’d think that she would know that in this budget, we have 

improvements in crop insurance. We’ve also introduced the 

livestock price insurance. And if this member from Nutana 

would talk with real producers, she would be encouraged to 

vote for this budget, Mr. Speaker. But I doubt that she’s going 

to. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the courage to 

make a better world, Mr. Speaker. And there’s other moments 

that I would hope that members from the opposite would show 

courage and vote for this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have examples such as the member from 

Cumberland to show courage and vote for a long-term care 

facility in La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, this is a facility they have 

asked for, repeatedly presented petitions for. They’ve brought 

questions forward in the question period, and now that it’s in 

the budget, you’d think the member that represents the people 

that would be from that town would be voting for this budget, 

Mr. Speaker. Now we’ll find out later this week if they have 

courage. 

 

We talk about Regina Rosemont’s member. I wish that he 

would show courage, show courage and vote for a summary 

budget. This is the first time ever in Saskatchewan that we’re 

presenting a summary budget and only a summary budget, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a member that has railed hundreds of times in 

this Assembly that we should be following through. And it will 

be interesting, Mr. Speaker. Does he have the courage to come 

through with his conviction and vote for that budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked for the member from Elphinstone 

to show courage and vote for the replacement of the gym at 

Sacred Heart. This is something, once again, he’s asked for day 

in and day out, and this budget has that. Will he show the 

courage and vote for this budget? We’ll find out in a few days, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what? I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition 

finally to show some courage, show some courage and vote for 

the budget that makes Saskatchewan one of the few provinces 

with a balanced budget, if not the only province. This is a 

budget that will improve seniors’ care in the province. And he 

should show courage and vote for this budget, Mr. Speaker. He 

should recognize the leadership and the solid public policy that 

is contained in this budget, Mr. Speaker. I hope that the 

members opposite would find courage because, my friends, ’tis 

not too late to build a better world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In conclusion, I will be supporting the budget and against the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll do 

my best to talk out the clock here before our supper break. Of 

course it’s always a pleasure to stand on behalf of the people of 

Regina Dewdney and talk about the budgets, the third budget 

I’ve been able to speak on behalf of my constituents, and 

certainly looking forward to that. 

 

Of course before I do that there’s a few thank yous I’d like to 

give out, if I could, and it seems to be a tradition with all the 

members. We get to speak twice per year, some of us. And of 

course I’d like to thank my family first of all and my wife, 

Tami. She looks after four boys, myself, and our three children, 

and she certainly is a very patient person. And certainly I know 

my sons and I are very lucky to have her in our lives, and so I 

thank her very much. Certainly we all know how much family 

is important in everybody’s lives, Mr. Speaker, and I very much 

enjoy my family when I’m able to spend time with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d certainly also like to thank . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4881, 4896 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4882 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4882 

  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 4882 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatonian Honoured at Breaking the Silence Conference 

  Forbes ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 4882 

 Habitat For Humanity Key Ceremony in Moose Jaw 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4883 

 Saskatchewan Book Awards Brunch 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4883 

 Hoopla 2014 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4883 

 Rejuvenation of Moose Jaw’s Balmoral Apartments 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4883 

 National Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4884 

 Prince Albert Restaurateur Receives Legacy Award 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Home Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4886 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4886 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4887 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4887 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4889 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4889 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4892 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4897 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4900 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4904 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4905 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4908 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4911 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




