
























































Hansard: March 13, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4693 
 March 13, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure today to introduce actually two groups that are joining 
from my constituency. It’s rare that we get visitors from as far 
west as Lloydminster area but the first is the reeve of the RM 
[rural municipality] of Frenchman Butte, is Bonnie 
Mills-Midgley. She is joined by Tom Hougham, a councillor, 
and their administrator, Bryson Leganchuk. 
 
The second group, Mr. Speaker, that is joining us is from the 
RM of Wilton. From the RM of Wilton we have the 
administrator, Darren Elder. We have councillors Sharon 
Carruthers, Tim Sawarin, Ron Clark, and Rupert Tarleton. 
 
I would like all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly and thanking them for their service to the 
communities in and around Lloydminster. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a good friend of mine in your gallery, Norm 
McIntyre. Norm is from Wiseton. He also is here partaking in 
the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, has been for the last few days. He’s on council for 
the RM of King George. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, he’s a 
good friend of mine and has been a tremendous support to me 
in my political career and, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad he joined us at 
the Assembly. And I would ask all members to please give him 
a warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of education. And we 
know that education is one of the most vital services that 
government provides to its citizens, and this government has 
failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 
resources to prioritize delivery of educational excellence. The 
government has failed to deliver a real plan to close the 
Aboriginal education gap, support English as an additional 
language students, support community schools and their 
communities and students. 
 
And we know this government would rather talk about 
standardized testing than hear from teachers and parents about 
addressing real needs of today’s classrooms. And we know that 
we must build the best education system for today and for 

Saskatchewan’s future. I would like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices 
and that is developed through consultation with the 
education sector and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of residents of the province that are 
concerned about the improper reporting of our finances. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 
true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting reporting that is in line with 
the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 
accounting standards, and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 
to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 
financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 
people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 
taxpayers, and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
Yorkton and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School. The petitioners point out that the 
gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina 
is now quite literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, 
and is no longer safe for students or staff. 
 
They point out that the school and the community have raised 
this issue with the Sask Party provincial government without 
resolution since 2007. They also point out that enrolment has 
increased by 100-plus students over the past four years at 
Sacred Heart and that attendance and learning outcomes are 
steadily improving. And they point out, Mr. Speaker, that as a 
matter of basic fairness and common sense, the students of 
Sacred Heart Community School need a gym. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 



4694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina, 
from north central Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Sochi 2014 Paralympic Winter Games 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all 
Canadian athletes attending the Sochi 2014 Paralympic Games 
and in particular our athletes from Saskatchewan. 
 
Even though the geopolitical situation is complicated, the 
courage and dedication of these athletes simply can’t be 
overshadowed. The Sochi 2014 Paralympic Winter Games, 
which run from March 7th to 16th this year, are a true 
inspiration to people across our province and our country. 
Approximately 575 athletes from 45 countries are participating 
in these Paralympic Games. The games include a number of 
disciplines including para-nordic skiing, sledge hockey, 
para-alpine skiing, biathlon, para-snowboarding, and 
wheelchair curling. 
 
I’m proud to congratulate our Saskatchewan athletes, Andrea 
Bundon from Regina, Kaspar Wirz from Saskatoon, Curtis 
Hunt from Regina, Colette Bourgonje from Porcupine Plain, 
Brittany Hudak from Prince Albert, and Kurt Oatway from 
Regina. We are proud that Saskatchewan is a place where, 
regardless of abilities, athletes can reach their goals. 
 
These are difficult and trying times in the Black Sea region, but 
our paralympians have worked incredibly hard, and we’re proud 
to see they are building on the energetic accomplishments of 
our Canadian Olympic team. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

Z99 Cares Radiothon 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are few 
things as exciting as waiting for the arrival of a newborn baby. 
It is a tremendous journey filled with many joyful moments. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are occasions that unexpected 
complications arise and some babies are born needing special 
care. Moments like this are what make the Z99 Cares Radiothon 
such an important event in our community. Mr. Speaker, today 
the 27th edition of this annual event kicks off at the Cornwall 
Centre in downtown Regina. For 36 straight hours, CC, Lorie, 
and Buzz will broadcast live to raise money for the neonatal 
intensive care unit in the Rawlco centre for mother baby care at 
the Regina General Hospital. 
 
To date the radiothon has raised over $5.75 million for the 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation. This year the money raised 
will purchase Giraffe isolettes to keep babies warm and 

protected, Giraffe Warmers to maintain babies’ temperatures, 
an X-ray machine, feeding pumps, and milk warmers. 
 
The support for this event spreads far into Regina’s community, 
with several organizations making generous donations and 
hosting events and fundraisers with the proceeds going to the 
radiothon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
recognizing the outstanding efforts of the event organizers and 
volunteers, CC, Lorie, and Buzz, and the generous contributors 
within our community. Best of wishes to another successful 
event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Brain Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 
the beginning of Brain Awareness Week. In Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Brain Injury Association has also designated 
March as Brain Awareness Month. 
 
Brain Awareness Week was founded in 1997 by the Dana 
Alliance for the brain in efforts to bring together scientists, 
families, schools, and communities to raise public awareness of 
the progress and benefits of brain research. 
 
Brain Awareness Week has a particular focus on degenerative 
diseases and memory loss. For families with a loved one with 
Alzheimer’s or other illnesses such as Parkinson’s and epilepsy, 
the more light brought to these issues, the better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every March, Brain Awareness Week unites partner 
organizations worldwide as they work together to help families 
and individuals of all ages find better solutions for healthier 
brains. In Saskatchewan, efforts to raise awareness have been 
focused on brain injuries, spearheaded by the Saskatchewan 
Brain Injury Association. 
 
For people under 44 in our province, brain injuries are the 
number one killer and disabler of people. Sadly one of the only 
measures to combat this type of issue is prevention. There are 
no treatments or techniques that can cure a brain injury. We 
must all support widespread prevention and stand with the 
grassroots associations to raise awareness and show support for 
survivors and their families. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to recognize the importance 
of Brain Awareness Week so we can work together to make the 
lives of those living with brain injury and disease that much 
easier. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Rural Women’s Month 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise in the House today to recognize Rural Women’s Month. 
This month we recognize the significant contributions that rural 
women have made to Saskatchewan from past to the present. 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4695 

Rural women have always played a tremendous role in shaping, 
growing, and caring for our great province. Whether they are 
farm managers, small-business owners, or loving mothers, they 
always have been the heart of rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this month we celebrate rural women of all ages 
and from all backgrounds, including First Nations and Métis 
women. They are the volunteers in our churches, schools, and 
hospital boards, the members of our 4-H sports and clubs, 
agriculture societies, and they are leaders in our small 
communities. They continue to be resourceful, resilient, 
compassionate, and key agents of economic, political, and 
social development across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, as a 
former reeve, I have seen the tremendous impact that rural 
women can make in society and in Saskatchewan. We are so 
lucky to have these amazing and strong women in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all 
rural women for the hard work that they contribute to their 
communities, and I ask that all members join me in celebrating 
Rural Women’s Month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Convention 

 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the House today to share some of the 
highlights of the 109th annual SARM convention which took 
place in Regina this week. It’s so nice to see some of the 
delegates here today. 
 
I want to start by thanking the president of SARM, Mr. Dave 
Marit, for his positive comments about the Premier’s action on 
the grain file, which were met with a huge round of applause. 
 
At this convention there were over 1,500 delegates, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s a very, very good turnout. There was a large 
tradeshow, plenty of opportunities for stakeholders to connect 
and network with fellow colleagues as well as government 
members and ministry staff. 
 
Some of the strongest drivers of our growing economy come 
from our rural areas, be it our agricultural section or our natural 
resources sector. SARM and its many councillors, 
administrators, reeves, and mayors that comprise the association 
certainly embody the principles of the association, and they’re 
all doing their part to guide and contribute to our ever-growing 
rural economy. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in thanking SARM and our 
rural leaders for working with us to meet the challenges of 
growth in our province and for their dedication and 
commitment to building a strong Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 

King of Kielbasa 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
constituency of Martensville is one of the fastest growing areas 

not only in our province but in the entire country. With that 
growth comes new business opportunities to the communities 
that I have the privilege to represent. The majority of these 
businesses are independent and locally owned. And I’m happy 
to rise today to recognize one of the outstanding businesses in 
the city of Martensville. 
 
Several years ago, Trent Ens opened Smokehaus Meats & Deli 
in that community. People in this city know that Trent’s store is 
the go-to place for a variety of homemade products. This last 
February, Trent was named the King of Kielbasa at the 13th 
annual competition at Prairieland exhibition in Saskatoon. He 
beat out 11 others to gain this title, and I want to congratulate 
Trent and his team on his recent win. This is not the first for 
Trent. In 2009 he also gained the status of overall winner and 
was crowned king. 
 
But Trent is about more than just winning competitions. In 
2009, he sent 2,500 packages of beef and bison jerky to our 
Canadian troops serving in Afghanistan. I want to thank Trent 
for his big heart and his willingness to show his appreciation to 
our Canadian Armed Forces and also to congratulate him on 
regaining his status as king. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Cigar Lake Mine in Production 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, Cigar Lake was known for too long 
as the world’s richest undeveloped uranium deposit. Today that 
has changed with the first uranium ore production from the 
Cigar Lake mine. Up to 1,000 people worked at the site during 
construction, and the mine will employ more than 600 highly 
skilled workers primarily from northern Saskatchewan. These 
jobs are in addition to the 3,500 people uranium mines already 
employ in Saskatchewan. Almost half of those jobs are filled by 
First Nations people. 
 
Our government recognized the importance of the uranium 
industry by implementing a new, more competitive royalty 
system that accurately reflects the investments industry is 
making. Last year, industries spent over 122 million on uranium 
exploration. This is a hallmark to the competitive, investment 
climate Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 
We currently produce just over 15 per cent of the world’s 
uranium, and I look forward to watching that number continue 
to climb upward as production increases at this new mine. 
Along with the competitive business climate, we have the best 
uranium resources in the world. Cigar Lake is the world’s 
second-largest high-grade uranium deposit with grades that are 
100 times the world average. In total, Saskatchewan’s 
recoverable uranium resources are the energy equivalent to 23 
billion barrels of oil. 
 
I would like to congratulate Cameco and Areva on their ore 
production at Cigar Lake, and I look forward to many more 
years of growth of the Saskatchewan uranium industry. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



4696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In just the last two 
years, the Ministry of Health has spent $20.2 million dollars on 
John Black and Associates. Over $3.6 million has gone just to 
cover the travel costs for John Black and Associates. That’s just 
in the last two years. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Ministry of Health will spend a total of about $40 million on 
John Black and Associates. My question is for the Premier: how 
much money in total will taxpayers spend flying John Black 
and Associates around? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
investment in lean with the consultants that have been 
referenced by the Leader of the Opposition is roughly $10 
million a year over four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already saved more than that. As a result of 
the lean initiatives. Mr. Speaker, we’ve saved $35 million in the 
new blood and plasma products management system alone — 
just in that one leaned-out project, $35 million. We have saved 
millions of dollars in the design of health care facilities, 
including the new children’s hospital our government is 
building. And it’s true as well at the new hospital in Moose Jaw 
that our government is building as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But lean is not just about money. Lean is also about providing 
better quality care for Saskatchewan people. And I’m sure we’ll 
get into that in the debate. But we can point to specific results at 
the disease control lab in terms of the reduction in turnaround 
time for test results. We can talk specifically about how we’re 
now better managing the absenteeism in the workplace, Mr. 
Speaker. No wonder NDP [New Democratic Party] Manitoba is 
now moving forward with lean as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, greater efficiency is a good thing. 
But you cannot tell me that spending $40 million on having US 
[United States] consultants come to the province, Mr. Speaker, 
and tell us how to run our province is something that we cannot 
be doing ourselves. Mr. Speaker, we are the province that 
invented medicare. Surely we have the ingenuity to strengthen 
it and the ingenuity to improve it.  
 
The minister did not answer my question, which was a very 
direct question. We know that in just the last two years the 
Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, has spent $3.6 million just to 
cover the travel costs of John Black and Associates, — just the 
last two years. My question again to the Premier: how much 
money in total will taxpayers spend in flying John Black and 
Associates around? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition stands up and says, surely we can just do this 

ourselves. Then why didn’t they for 16 years? Why didn’t they 
find $1.3 million in savings in the management of vaccines? 
Why didn’t they find a way to save $35 million in blood and 
plasma inventory management? Mr. Speaker, these consultants 
are the reputed best in the world. They travel around the world 
and do this work. The total cost I’ve already stated. We’ve 
already saved more than the total cost investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s more good news. There’s more good news. 
Forty-two per cent of the appointments that were cancelled, the 
majority by the clinic, now there are zero cancelled in RQHR 
[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region]. Went from 42 per cent 
cancellation of appointments to zero as a result of us listening to 
the front-line staff, aided by the consultant, and as a result of 
the lean process being applied. Only 15 per cent of calls were 
handled by a clinician prior to that. Now 85 per cent of calls are 
handled by a clinician. Four hundred clients on the wait-list — 
this is RQHR — in ’12-13. Now there’s only 70, Mr. Speaker. I 
hope there’s more question because the list goes on. 
 
You bet we made an investment in lean. It’s delivering results. 
We’ve saved more. There’s better care. No wonder NDP 
Manitoba is now pursuing Saskatchewan lean as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard about Ron 
Caron who was told he can’t go into long-term care because his 
needs are too great and there aren’t the resources, there aren’t 
the staff available to care for his needs. 
 
Last week we heard, Mr. Speaker, how this government forced 
facilities to slash their urgent requests for desperately needed 
equipment, repairs, and staff. This government, Mr. Speaker, 
says it doesn’t have the money to fix the basics. Yet at the same 
time, they have $40 million to be spending on US consultants to 
come to Saskatchewan and tell us how to fix our health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. And the ministry in just the last two years 
has spent $3.6 million on flying John Black and Associates 
around. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many additional health care 
providers could be working in the province for the $40 million 
being paid to US consultants? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the direct answer to my hon. 
friend’s question is this. Because of decisions taken by this 
government which include, by the way, applying lean to the 
health care system, because of that the answer to his question is, 
how about 1,000 more nurses working today than there was 
before? How about 200-plus more doctors practising today in 
the province? Mr. Speaker, how about 68 per cent reduction in 
the Sask Disease Control Laboratory in terms of their 
turnaround time for test results because of lean?  
 
How about, Mr. Speaker, faster diagnostic imaging for acute 
care patients in the Prince Albert Parkland Region; in fact, 66 
per cent reduction in the time from when a diagnostic image test 
is ordered for patients to when the test is completed? Under the 
NDP, who thought everything was fine and they could find all 
these efficiencies within their own I guess plans, Mr. Speaker, 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4697 

notwithstanding that they were closing facilities and not staffing 
up, we had a 66 per cent higher period of time between those 
diagnostic image testing and the time they needed to consult 
with the physician, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got more examples. We’re going to continue with lean. 
We’ll make this investment because it is providing better care, 
and it is saving more money than the consultants will cost. No 
wonder the province of Manitoba is pursuing lean for their 
health care system there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for the $40 million that this 
government is spending on US consultants, they could have 
hired 800 more care aids. Even for just the travel costs they’re 
spending on flying John Black and Associates around, Mr. 
Speaker, they could have hired 72 more care aids. And this is 
just a drop in the bucket. It doesn’t include all of the other lean 
spending in other ministries, Mr. Speaker, on other contracts 
and through the health regions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there are good aspects to lean. But surely, 
Mr. Speaker, we can spend a few million dollars, buy the 
manual, train some people, and prevent this from becoming a 
cash cow for US consultants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how much money in total is this 
government spending on lean consultants, and why isn’t it 
putting that money into fixing the basics in health care, the 
basics in seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The Minister of the Economy is asking if 
there’s such a thing as lean for dummies. And I don’t know if 
there is or not in terms of that manual. We’re frankly open to 
every possible resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can either take the advice of the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition who believes we 
shouldn’t be pursuing lean, even though his counterparts in 
Manitoba believe that we should be doing lean because they’re 
going to do it. Or we could take the advice of Rosalee 
Longmoore when she was president of SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] and said, “A focus on patient- and 
family-centred care using best practice evidence and Lean 
principles will improve the patient experience and return 
nursing to a rewarding career,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s what Louise Frederick, a patient team member said, 
“This experience, the lean experience, is very empowering. I am 
confident patients are being listened to. This is a game changer 
for patients.” That’s a front-line worker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
health care professionals, we have doctors, we have patients 
saying, we’ve got to keep doing this. It saves money to the 
system and provides better care. Why in the world would the 
Leader of the Opposition be opposed to that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
 

Malfunction in Parks Reservation System 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Parks admitted 
earlier this week that the government has yet to identify about 
500 people who were overbilled by the campsite reservation 
system. Despite being able to charge their credit cards, the 
government doesn’t have their contact information. 
 
Back in 2012, the former minister of Parks said this about the 
new privatized system: “This new system will transform how 
we interact and do business with our customers.” Oh, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s definitely been transformative, overbilling at least 
1,500 people and not even knowing who 500 of those people 
are. 
 
To the minister: will he just admit it was a mistake to privatize 
this campsite reservation system, and will he serve notice to the 
Ontario company to cancel their contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I never said anything of 
the sort. I never once said, Mr. Speaker, in any of the scrums 
outside the media or questions answered in this House, that we 
couldn’t identify the cardholders with respect to the 
overcharging of their credit cards. I never said that once. We’ve 
contacted them, Mr. Speaker, on a proactive basis, for the last 
10 days.  
 
What we don’t have, maybe the opposition has a different view 
of this, what we don’t have is their financial information on file, 
Mr. Speaker. We need them to provide the financial information 
for us to work with the service provider and Moneris to refund 
the overcharges on their credit cards, Mr. Speaker. Those are 
the facts. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, when this government privatized 
the campsite booking system to an out-of-province company, it 
claimed to be “. . . moving Saskatchewan provincial parks into 
a leaner and more customer-focused model of service delivery.” 
The government said, “Taking a lean approach as a first step 
paved the way for a simpler, more efficient reservation system.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the lean term for accurate 
billing of customers is, but that’s not happening with this new 
system, and Saskatchewan campers are rightfully frustrated as a 
result. To the minister: will this government just admit that the 
privatized campsite reservation system is failing Saskatchewan 
campers, and will it commit today to fix the system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member 
opposite fails to mention is that in the last 10 days we’ve had 
over 26,000 reservations successfully completed on this system, 
Mr. Speaker. What the member opposite fails to recognize, 
we’ve had over 60,000 camping nights booked on our 
reservation system, Mr. Speaker, for this upcoming camping 



4698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

season. 
 
This particular company, we are in negotiations with them with 
respect to the damages that are going to be received back to the 
Government of Saskatchewan for the overcharging of those 
particular customers. This was a malfunction of an interface 
process, Mr. Speaker. I have taken full responsibility for that. 
We are going to fix that. 
 
Now let’s contrast that. Let’s go back to the days when the 
member for Athabasca was the minister responsible for Parks, 
Mr. Speaker. When the member for Athabasca was the minister 
responsible for Parks, he made an announcement on fee 
increases, Mr. Speaker. He made an announcement on fee 
increases. When did he do that, Mr. Speaker? He did it on May 
15th in 2000. The parks opened on May 18th in 2000, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not going back to those days. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — With the ides of March fast approaching, Mr. 
Speaker, I come not to praise Gerry Ritz but to condemn him 
for his failure to stand up for Canadian grain producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal Agriculture minister Gerry Ritz is in town 
today. And what did this government decide to do? They 
decided to bring forward a ridiculous motion this afternoon that 
once again pats Gerry Ritz on the back. This is unbelievable. 
All that Gerry Ritz has done lately is force the big railway 
companies to do what they were going to do anyways.  
 
To the minister: why is this government continually patting 
Gerry Ritz on the back when his solution is way too little, way 
too late? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well I’ve been accused of a lot of things 
in my relationship with Gerry Ritz, but this is the first time I’ve 
ever been accused of continually patting him on the back. But 
I’m happy about that in this instance. 
 
In this instance, the federal government is on the right track. 
They are in the process of developing emergency legislation 
that will be introduced in a couple of weeks that will force the 
railroads to actually deliver a reasonable level of service that 
will be adequate to move Saskatchewan grain crops. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that minister should read Lloyd 
Wagner’s letter in the paper yesterday. It said, “The average 
grain farmer in the West has taken a great loss.” He goes on to 
say that the price he was offered for his wheat is lower than 
what he could have made 40 years ago. 
 
A producer in an online agricultural forum says, “The $100,000 

a day fine wouldn’t cover what some farmers gave up in lost 
revenue in this year because of this mess. It kind of puts it into 
perspective, doesn’t it?” And we also know, Mr. Speaker, that 
Hunter Harrison makes over $132,000 a day. 
 
Producers are frustrated because they did their part to produce a 
bumper crop only to have this government and the federal 
government drop the ball and treat the big rail companies with 
kid gloves. To the minister: why is this government bending 
over backwards to praise Gerry Ritz instead of pressuring him 
to get the job done for producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s been our understanding for the last number of days since the 
OC [order in council] was passed last Friday that the 
$100,000-a-day fine is a placeholder. The 11,000-car 
requirement is a placeholder. These things may be quite 
different in the legislation that comes forth in a week or two. 
And we’re frankly, frankly we’re asking for more, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re asking for substantially more cars and larger fines. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be more helpful for the NDP 
to actually become engaged in support of this move and to offer 
their suggestions also to the federal government than to simply 
do what they usually do — always do, I might say — lay in the 
weeds and take cheap political shots at home. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Transfer of Pasture Land 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just on grain 
transportation that we’ve seen this government refuse to stand 
up to Gerry Ritz. They’ve done it on the community pastures 
too. 
 
In response to Ritz’s abandonment of this important program, 
the Manitoba government recently created a $1 million fund for 
the newly formed Association of Manitoba Community 
Pastures. The fund will help them purchase the trucks and 
equipment that Ritz is demanding payment for and to help them 
transition the management of the pastures. Manitoba clearly 
understands the importance of the pastures and the need for a 
strong provincial organization to manage them into the future. 
 
Instead of continuing to ignore the Saskatchewan Community 
Pasture Patrons Association, will the minister do the right thing 
and provide them with the necessary transitional funding in the 
upcoming budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, $1 million, that is 
pretty impressive. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have 61 pastures, federal PFRA [Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration] pastures, that are coming 
back to the patron control, and we’re providing $120,000 for 
each one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4699 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Support for Credit Unions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in the lead up to the 
budget, credit union members from across the province have 
been asking some questions of that government’s commitments 
as it relates to credit unions. And they’re owed some answers. If 
this government follows the federal government’s lead and 
hikes credit unions’ taxes, it’ll have a ripple effect across our 
provincial economy, and particularly so in rural communities 
where credit unions are the backbone of agricultural and the 
small-business community. They provide more than 50 per cent 
of the lending to small- and medium-sized businesses in 
Saskatchewan who are certainly drivers of our economy. 
 
To the minister: will he commit today to protect the important 
role credit unions play within Saskatchewan and clearly commit 
to not hiking their taxes in next week’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on the advice of my 
colleague beside me, no I will not release the budget six days 
early. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been a lot of contacts. I have met with 
numerous officials with the credit union system across all of 
Saskatchewan. Individual MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] have received correspondence, have received phone 
calls, and have had great discussions with credit union leaders 
all across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year everyone, including people in the credit 
union system, were surprised by the federal government’s 
immediate move to remove the credit that credit unions had, 
that exemption. Mr. Speaker, last year we made that decision 
that for the year 2013 we were going to remain and allow the 
credit unions to continue to have that exemption for that year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing, over the last four months, to 
have discussions to look at what advantage credit unions have, 
Mr. Speaker, with those exemptions. And they’re a substantial 
amount, Mr. Speaker. There are around $14 million worth of 
exemption that the credit unions now receive on an annual 
basis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Just on that matter, I hope the minister 
recognizes the different environment for credit unions, the 
different capital environment for them. And certainly credit 
unions from across Saskatchewan and their members in the 
communities they serve deserve better answers than that. 
 
We already know that this government is the first government 
in all of Saskatchewan’s history to actually fail an audit of its 
GRF [General Revenue Fund] books. In fact this is the first 
government in Canadian history to fail an audit of its GRF 
books. The auditor says, the material misstatements and errors 
in the financial statements are pervasive and that the books are 

not accurate. 
 
To the minister: has the government decided to listen to the 
auditor yet, or will it shamefully introduce a budget next week 
that will once again fail the auditor’s scrutiny? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan that the 
system that we currently follow is the exact same system that 
was introduced by the NDP in 2004, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We do two things. In 2004 the NDP government at the time 
introduced a system where we actually provide a summary 
budget, Mr. Speaker. We also have what is referred to as an 
operating chequebook side or, as we refer to it as, the General 
Revenue Fund side, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also done that just like 
the NDP did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a difference of opinion. Financial auditors 
within the Ministry of Finance disagree with what the auditor 
has said regarding co-ownership. Mr. Speaker, there’s also a 
disagreement about whether or not universities should be part of 
our General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all summaries across provinces are all different, 
Mr. Speaker. Alberta, as the member knows, just released the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and in fact they have three sets of books. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not simply a matter of 
difference within the accounting profession. The difference, Mr. 
Speaker, is the new accounting scheme created by this 
government, laid out on page 12 of the auditor’s report. And the 
independent accounting community of this province are in 
support of the auditor’s position. Those are all the big, 
private-sector firms, and it’s that minister that has a different 
opinion than the rest of the accounting community. 
 
Saskatchewan people expect the government to present books 
that they can trust. They were disturbed when they woke up to 
headlines that said “Beware the books” back in December. 
We’ve had right wing governments before in this province that 
have made a mess of our province’s finances, but we’ve never 
had a government in Saskatchewan’s history that have failed an 
audit on their GRF books. History will show that that Premier 
and that Finance minister have failed that audit, and certainly 
that’s no honour. 
 
To the minister: will he be reconciling last year’s books, the 
ones that failed the audit, so they actually reflect reality and can 
pass an audit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I indicated, the former NDP government, our current 
government, since 2004-05 produces summary financial 
statements, Mr. Speaker. Those are part of the budget process. 
We update those at mid-year, and we do that at budget time, 
Mr. Speaker. 



4700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, since 1993-94 there has been an unqualified audit 
opinion on the summaries. They continued to this very year, 
Mr. Speaker. You can look directly into the auditor’s report, 
and indeed the auditor has an unqualified opinion on the books 
of the province of Saskatchewan and says that they are accurate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on January 13th the Public 
Accounts Committee reviewed the failed audit. I put forward 
motions calling on the government to rectify the failed audit to 
ensure the province’s finances are prepared and presented in 
compliance with Canadian GAAP [generally accepted 
accounting principles] and in a manner that’s deemed 
appropriate, reliable, and trustworthy by the independent 
Provincial Auditor.  
 
Sounds to me like common sense positions, but you know what, 
Mr. Speaker? Those government members voted against those 
motions. Let me be clear. For the official opposition and the 
people of Saskatchewan, nothing short of books they can trust 
will be acceptable in next week’s provincial budget. 
 
To the minister: how can this government, the first government 
actually to fail an audit, possibly think they can simply refuse to 
listen to the auditor, fail to fix the problem, and put forward 
books that can’t be trusted once again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what we have done for the 
last seven years is continue with a balanced budget approach, 
Mr. Speaker. It is extremely important for the people of 
Saskatchewan to recognize that you have to live within your 
means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that that member talks about being 
open and honest with the people of Saskatchewan. Take a look 
at the NDP platform of the last election, Mr. Speaker, over $5 
billion worth of promises, Mr. Speaker. Five billion dollars, can 
you imagine? The member stands in this place and says, well 
you have to be honest. You have to be open. You have to accept 
his position, Mr. Speaker, about what we should do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the summary statements that are produced are 
audited by the Provincial Auditor. They’re published in the 
Public Accounts document that appears in June. And they have 
been reliable each and every year, even from the years when 
that member was part of government, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
continue to do that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the opportunity for taking part in this debate. I think 
it’s important to maybe read into the record the ridiculous 

motion that the member from Nutana mentioned here a few 
minutes ago because I find nothing ridiculous about it at all. 
The motion says, and I will read this into the record or move 
this motion at the end of my comments: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of Canada in 
passing an order in council to help address the grain 
transportation backlog and further supports the swift 
implementation of emergency legislation to address this 
issue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re showing our support for the federal 
government to help get the transportation system moving for 
our grain from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been an interesting year in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our producers have grown the biggest crop in 
the history of this province, and we commend them for that. But 
at the same time, our railroads are not matching that efficiency 
and are not moving that grain to port, and at the same time 
costing our farmers thousands and millions of dollars every day 
in this province because we can’t get our grain to port and 
actually hurting the prices of the commodities that we’re trying 
to move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a record production of crop in this 
province in 2013. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased competition for rail capacity from the oil sector, the 
potash sector, and the container movement across Western 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, our farmers and ranchers did their part by 
growing a record crop. Now we need to get it moved to port. 
 
That record crop, Mr. Speaker, was 38.4 million tonnes. It 
actually exceeded our 2020 Saskatchewan plan for growth, Mr. 
Speaker, that we had planned for and hoped for, and it’s 40 per 
cent higher than the 2012 production. And it actually is 48 per 
cent higher than the 10-year average. 
 
[10:45] 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, our producers have certainly played 
their part and done their part in growing the crop. Now we need 
to get it to market. And, Mr. Speaker, the railways certainly are 
at fault in this situation. I believe that one of the railways, 
maybe both, are blaming the cold weather and to a degree I 
guess that may be a problem. But at the other respect, Mr. 
Speaker, these railways could also put engines in the middle of 
these trains for braking. We’ve seen them do that in the past. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they could certainly be moving a lot more of 
our product than they have to this point. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Nutana calls this 
motion ridiculous, I find it amazing, Mr. Speaker. But I guess I 
shouldn’t because I can go back to the record of the NDP for 16 
years. And when they had meetings with the railways and when 
they had meetings with the federal government, in many cases 
they went for the free doughnuts and had nothing to offer of 
anything important that would help solve the problems in many 
of these situations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions there was problems with 
the transportation system that we had in this country. This 
didn’t just start this year, Mr. Speaker. This has gone on for 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4701 

probably the last 50 or 60 years. I did find it interesting, one of 
the members opposite, in a debate that our Minister of 
Agriculture had here a few days ago, had made the comment 
that, should we have the Canadian Wheat Board this problem 
wouldn’t happen. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture from Thunder 
Creek — and I know myself and I know other members on this 
side of the House that have been involved in agriculture, maybe 
haven’t been here since the Wheat Board started in the 1940s, 
although some of us are getting very close, Mr. Speaker — 
would know that we’ve had these problems when the Wheat 
Board was in place and had their monopoly on many, many 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t something new, but it’s something 
we felt that we had to put pressure on, in number one, the 
federal government to lobby them to make something happen to 
get the railways to start moving our product which they 
certainly have not been doing this year as at times they haven’t 
done in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has set up a group of ministers and the 
member for Shellbrook, Rosthern-Shellbrook — the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Minister of Highways, the Minister of 
Economy, Mr. Speaker — to work on this file, to get some 
action. And I think what we see in this motion today and what 
we get to see, the Minister of Transport federally talked at 
SARM yesterday. She talked about it. I believe Minister Ritz 
will be talking about it here today. I think it’s very important 
they come out to SARM and meet with the delegates and see 
just how important this is to those people, and that’s the 
message that our delegation has put to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another comment coming from the NDP when 
they were being very critical of what this government has done 
to help solve the problem, really, said we’ve done nothing. Well 
I take a little bit of . . . I find that really a problem, Mr. Speaker, 
because they haven’t been paying attention as they usually 
don’t, but there’s a number of things that these members have 
done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This group has lobbied on behalf of farmers in this province and 
as we see, we’re now starting to get some action. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this goes back to 2013. May of 2013, Minister of 
Highways and Agriculture officials met with CP [Canadian 
Pacific] to outline our targets for the growth for Saskatchewan 
which includes moving a crop such as we have this year. June 
2013, begin to work on a New West Partnership port capacity 
study. July 24th, 2013, Minister of Agriculture officials met 
with Mark Hemmes of Quorum. Early October, Mr. Speaker, 
Minister of Highways and deputy minister of Highways again 
met with CP in Vancouver on the grain transportation issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in October, deputy minister of Highways 
toured the Vancouver port and met with Alliance Grain 
Terminal. October 25th, Highways, Economy, and Agriculture 
met to talk about what was happening with the movement of 
commodities at port, and at the time Highways quoted CN 
[Canadian National] and CP as saying, “They have lots of 
capacity and there was no constraint at port.” Well we would 
take some umbrage with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

November 7th, 2013, Minister of Agriculture sent letters to the 
federal government, railroads, grain companies, and all other 
stakeholders regarding the record crop and the importance of 
efficient transportation system. November 2013, Mr. Speaker, 
deputy minister of Highways met with the federal deputy 
minister of Transportation to discuss grain transportation issues. 
November 21st, 2013, Ministry of Highways and Agriculture 
officials had a conference call with the federal ADM [assistant 
deputy minister] to discuss these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 25th, 2013, our Minister of 
Agriculture met with CP rail once again. December 6th, 2013, 
senior Highways, Economy, and Agriculture officials met with 
CP rail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January 20th, 2014, just not long ago here, 
Ministry of Agriculture officials met with Prairie West 
Terminal, AGT [Alliance Grain Terminal Ltd.]. January 21st, 
2014, senior Highway and Agriculture officials met with the 
Port Metro Vancouver. January 29th, FPT 
[federal-provincial-territorial] Agriculture DMs [deputy 
minister] meeting which included discussions on grain 
transportation. January 31st, 2014, conference call with Pulse 
Canada and senior ministry officials regarding Pulse Canada’s 
five-year transportation monitoring project being funded by the 
federal government. February 4th, Minister of Agriculture for 
the province met with CN again, and CP. February 12th, 2014, 
the Premier appointed our delegation that I talked about earlier 
to put pressure on the federal government and the railways and 
everyone connected with the moving of our grain to get it 
moving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
February 13, our Agriculture minister from the province and 
Highway officials held conference calls with Sask producers. 
February 13th, also the same day, a delegation met with Viterra. 
February 14th, the delegation met with the Western Grain 
Elevators Association, Viterra, Cargill, Richardson, Parrish & 
Heimbecker, and Louis Dreyfus Canada. The delegation met 
with CN rail on February 20th of 2014. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, and there’s more. But the list goes 
on of all the meetings and all the lobbying that’s gone on from 
this government, Mr. Speaker. Unlike past governments under 
the NDP, we actually were walking the talk that we were 
talking, Mr. Speaker, and now we see that we’re actually 
starting to see results of that lobbying on behalf of our ministers 
and the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on in this list of meetings and lobbying 
that our ministers and the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 
have done on our behalf and on behalf of farmers in this 
province, and I think it’s a very credible record that they have. 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, when we see the announcement 
that the federal government made last week that they were 
putting in place an OC and then legislation will follow shortly, 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen results. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as I said before when I spoke about the 
free doughnuts that the NDP used to go and lap up at all these 
meetings, and I remember Mr. Lingenfelter, when he was Ag 
minister, he’d go to these meetings and then he’d stomp out 
mad. And that was before the meeting was ever over. What kind 
of a reception did they actually think they were going to get 



4702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

from the federal government? And that doesn’t matter, Mr. 
Speaker. It was a Liberal federal government part of that time. 
And they didn’t have any more respect for the NDP in their 
lobbying than they do now when there’s a Conservative 
government in place. 
 
So I don’t think it matters who’s in place federally, and it 
certainly will never be the NDP, so they’ll never have their 
cousins in place. But should there be a Liberal government in 
the future or another Conservative majority government, we 
don’t think that that kind of lobbying works. We feel that the 
lobbying that was done on our behalf, on behalf of farmers in 
this province this time has worked very, very well. And I think 
we owe our ministers and the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook 
a lot of gratitude for what they’ve done for our farmers. And I 
think we saw that yesterday from many of the delegates at 
SARM who appreciate what has been done by members of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did a little homework on the NDP record 
because I found it interesting and almost hypocritical on the 
members’ part opposite where it was the member from Nutana 
and some of the other members that were being very critical, 
whether they were there still running the gamut for the Wheat 
Board, you know, kind of supporting the Friends of the Wheat 
Board. And let me put this in the record too, Mr. Speaker: the 
Wheat Board monopoly is gone. It’s not coming back. And you 
know, there’s about as much chance of the Wheat Board 
coming back as the NDP forming government if they don’t 
change their attitude and get a better position on different issues 
on that side of the House instead of being stuck back in the 
1940s and ’50s, where we’re now into a new millennium where 
actually it can take some new ideas and a new government to 
actually promote this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked back at some of the past Ag ministers for 
the NDP, and I start with 1991. And I think there’s members on 
this side of the House that have probably forgot some of the 
fine people that the NDP had for Ag ministers and all the great 
stuff they did for the farmers in this province. 
 
And I go back, Mr. Speaker, and I remember it well. Berny 
Wiens was the minister of Agriculture in 1991. And you know, 
what I remember him most about, Mr. Speaker, was they held a 
rally in Rosetown. It happened to be Mr. Wiens’s own riding. 
And I’d never been to a rally, and I wasn’t really that political, 
but things were really tough. And I believe there was a 
transportation issue at that time, but there was also an issue with 
the present government we had in this province that had cut the 
GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program. So I got 
with a few of my farmer friends, and off to Rosetown we went 
— right across the province, Mr. Speaker, because that was 
such a big issue that Mr. Wiens had done to farmers when he 
cancelled the GRIP program. Well, Mr. Speaker, about 3,500 
farmers show up. 
 
Man am I glad when I was Ag minister or where we have the 
Ag minister from Thunder Creek now, we haven’t had any such 
rallies yet. And I don’t see any coming in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it didn’t stop there. Then we had Darrel 
Cunningham. And I can’t really remember him that well, so I 
presume he probably didn’t cut as much as Berny Wiens did, 

but he didn’t actually do anything else either. That’s probably 
why I don’t remember him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Andy Renaud was another one that I can’t really 
find where he did much. Of course he didn’t last long. He was 
about six months. And really I can see that happening when the 
NDP were in power because of their track record with Ag 
ministers. 
 
But then, near and dear to my heart, Eric Malcolm Thomas 
Upshall, and I know this guy very well. He’s my brother-in-law. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I remember in opposition on how many 
occasions did we have to tell Mr. Upshall to take his crayons 
out, sign on the dotted line, and help our producers get 
programs in place. He has never forgiven me for that. So, Mr. 
Speaker, at Christmas and at Easter and all the times I have the 
luxury of meeting Mr. Upshall when he comes home — and 
sometimes he comes for a few days, and sometimes not very 
long — but we reminisce about the good old times when he was 
in the legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, why I’m going on with this list? It’s tied to 
transportation because all these ministers went through periods 
where transportation was an issue. So this issue didn’t just 
happen today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of Ag ministers for the NDP goes on. Then 
Dwain Lingenfelter, and I remember him very well for a 
number of issues because he was one of the guys who would 
walk out on meetings. He was also the same Ag minister that 
had a hunger strike right in this building, Mr. Speaker, in this 
legislature. Farmers were so upset with the NDP and Mr. 
Lingenfelter that that was really the record that he has. 
 
And then of course I can maybe hurry through this. My time’s 
running out. But Mr. Wartman, and I remember Mr. Wartman 
well. Because I remember on a number of occasions, where in 
question period, Mr. Wartman’s face would get very red and he 
would tell us no matter what cuts he made, whether it was rural 
service centres, what it was, it was just the right thing to do. 
Putting nursing home fees up, that was another thing, just the 
right thing to do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my time has run out here away too quick. I 
had a bunch more things to talk about, but at this point I will 
move my motion, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of Canada in 
passing an order in council to help address the grain 
transportation backlog and further supports the swift 
implementation of emergency legislation to address this 
issue. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of Canada in 
passing an order in council to help address the grain 
transportation backlog and further supports the swift 
implementation of emergency legislation to address this 
issue. 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4703 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today and enter into the debate 
on, yes, what I did call a ridiculous motion and I will continue 
to explain why this motion is completely unnecessary and 
nonsensical in many ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In and of itself, we do agree there are desperate measures that 
are needed to be taken to address the grain transportation 
backlog, so we agree with that portion of it. And we also agree 
that there is a need for emergency action on the part of the 
federal government on the issue. But there is a whole lot behind 
that, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t being addressed in this motion and 
that’s what we’re going to speak to in the next little while. 
 
One of the things I do agree with the previous speaker was that 
this is not a new story. We know that transportation of grain has 
been an issue in this province and in Western Canada ever since 
farmers broke the land back in the previous century, and that 
would include people like my grandfather, Mr. Speaker, who 
was a farmer who came here in 1909. He got his homestead 
patent and he started farming. 
 
And the first thing he found out was one of the biggest 
difficulties in being a successful entrepreneurial farmer was his 
inability to get good prices for his wheat from the grain 
companies and the fact that they were being held hostage by the 
railways in order to move their grain to market. So grain 
transportation, not a new story, Mr. Speaker, at all, and it’s one 
that has continued to plague Prairie farmers for many, many, 
many decades. 
 
[11:00] 
 
What you see, Mr. Speaker, and we see it unrolling again, back 
in the 1920s, farmers were lobbying hard and forming grain 
companies of their own in order to be able to handle the large 
monopoly that the railways represented. And we are still 
dealing with that issue, Mr. Speaker, 100 years later. And I 
think that’s just a tragedy that we cannot sort this out and that 
for too long, the powerful railway companies have really taken 
a beating, or given a beating to Prairie grain farmers. 
 
I really don’t think the immensity of this catastrophe is even 
being talked about yet. The impact of this particular backlog is 
going to be devastating and have a significant catastrophic 
effect on farmers for many, many months to come, if not years 
to come, if there’s not a way to figure out this problem. 
 
What I’m hearing, Mr. Speaker, from producers is that the 
biggest, the worst thing that could happen right now is a 
bumper crop again this year. And for us to hear farmers saying 
that, it’s something I think that people need to sit up and pay 
attention to and really take seriously. For farmers to be saying 
that a bumper crop this fall is going to be a bad thing tells you 
how bad the situation is and what a catastrophe it is. We are 
hearing producers say that because we see the failure of this 
government to take the federal government to task. We see a 
failure on the part of the federal government to take this 
situation seriously. And it’s a tragedy that members opposite do 
not see the importance of this issue. 

What we see . . . And I know the minister questioned their 
support of Minister Ritz this morning. What we have, their 
Premier, our Premier, Mr. Speaker, is giving, heaping praise on 
this current federal Minister of Agriculture for his inaction on 
the file. We see on February 28th an article of Murray Mandryk 
in the Leader-Post, and here’s a quote: 
 

Take Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall, who — 
notwithstanding his elevated status as Steven Harper’s 
replacement-in-waiting — felt the need to stroke the ego of 
Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz by uttering the nonsensical 
observation that he was doing fine work on the grain 
transportation file. 
 
Yep, you read the above correctly. In a scrum Wednesday, 
Wall praised Ritz for his work — particularly behind the 
scenes where we don’t see what’s . . . going on. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s in direct contrast to what the minister 
was saying this morning. So I wish the Premier and the minister 
would figure out which story it is that they want to pass on to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But as far as I am concerned, we heard the former speaker give 
us a long list of the meetings that the committee of . . . the trio 
of ministers are having. He read off all these dates that he met 
with certain officials. On that list we did not hear meetings with 
Minister Ritz. We did not hear about the efforts this government 
is making to convince where the power is. We know that they 
can go and meet with a lot of people. 
 
The other thing you didn’t hear on that list was meetings with 
producers. Are these people not talking to producers and 
listening to what they have to say? They’re too busy jetting 
around the country having meetings with the bigwigs and 
they’re not sitting down and talking to producers and finding 
out what’s really going on on the ground. 
 
If they did, they would hear what we’re hearing, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is, Gerry Ritz is not doing a good job; that Lisa Raitt’s 
proposal on Friday and the emergency order in council really 
does nothing little than support what the railways were planning 
to do originally. So there’s no need to heap praise. And I keep 
saying the ides of March are coming, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
not here to praise Minister Ritz or this government’s 
performance on this file. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, even a year ago in March, when the Fair 
Rail Freight Service Act was being debated in Parliament, there 
was all kinds of requests coming forward from producers, from 
shippers, from the federal opposition, saying that that bill 
simply didn’t do the trick. And this government did nothing. 
This minister, when asked in question period, responded by 
saying, well we don’t think there’s a problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to fast-forward a few months 
later, when the crop came in we had the best crop these 
producers have ever produced. We’re hoping to see more of 
them, Mr. Speaker. And that minister said there was no problem 
with the Fair Rail Freight Service Act. We know that there 
were serious concerns that were presented by a number of 
shippers and shippers’ coalitions as well as the opposition. And 
all of those amendments that were proposed, sound 



4704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

amendments that would make the performance agreements 
meaningful, were completely ignored by this federal 
government and supported by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s part of the tragedy here, is that this 
government didn’t realize a year ago what was happening in 
Ottawa. They didn’t realize that the amendment to the 
Canadian Transportation Act under the Fair Rail Freight 
Service Act was simply not going to deal with the issue. 
 
And we’ve seen the Liberals try and do it when the Justice 
Estey’s report came out in 1998. We’ve seen the failure of that 
government to even deal with the railways at that time. We 
know the railways are a seriously powerful lobby when they 
can afford to put a two-page ad in The Globe and Mail 
justifying what they call their position. We know that this is a 
difficult lobby to take on, Mr. Speaker, but we expect our 
government to support our producers and ensure that they are 
protected and that their rights are juxtaposed appropriately 
against the monopoly of the railway system here in Canada. 
 
I am glad that the minister appointed the trio of ministers and 
along with the Legislative Secretary to do the work they’re 
doing. It’s important work. And I think the meetings they are 
having are important, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt about that. 
And I think there’s a good trio or quartet, maybe, if you want to 
call it that, that are doing some good work in the area. But I 
think the focus is misguided. They are meeting with the people 
that are part of what we see as the problem. And what they 
really need to deal with is the minister himself. The cabinet of 
the Government of Canada are the only people who can change 
this and fix it. 
 
And unfortunately, as many people will say, the carry-over this 
year will probably be 23 million tonnes anyways, even with 
some drastic measures imposed upon the railways. We know 
that we want to see at least 14,000 cars per week. This 
government has indicated they’re asking for 13,000 cars per 
week. We’ll see what’s in the legislation. 
 
But I think, you know, a lot of this is an issue of this 
government not doing enough early enough and in fact back to 
last March when they should have been advocating with 
Minister Ritz and Minister Raitt on proper amendments to the 
Fair Rail Freight Service Act so that farmers wouldn’t be facing 
this situation now. The ball was dropped last year in March, and 
they’re trying desperately to pick it up now. 
 
And what we see is a number of emergency measures, 
emergency orders in council, emergency legislation, when none 
of this was necessary, Mr. Speaker, had this government, rather 
than patting Gerry Ritz on the back, actually talked to him and 
said, you are heading us for catastrophe. We know these 
bumper crops are going to be hopefully the new norm. That 
should be a positive thing for this government. And these new 
markets that we’re opening up and that producers are 
establishing should be the new norm. But with this kind of 
performance by the federal government, then we know that 
farmers are actually in a much worse state. 
 
When we hear farmers saying they’re getting less for their 
wheat now than 40 years ago, Mr. Speaker, what’s going on? 
That is completely impossible. 

An Hon. Member: — How many farmers are saying that? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And regardless of the member on the other 
side chirping over there, how many farmers are saying that, we 
know that prices are desperately low. And I don’t know how 
she could deny that. Lots of farmers are saying that they are in 
desperate straits. And for her to ridicule that and make it sound 
like it’s not an issue shows how completely unaware this 
government is about the severity and the catastrophic nature of 
this situation. And if they don’t start at least making things 
louder and speaking out for the producers in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, it is impossible to see how we’re going to move out of 
this situation, how any bumper crop is going to be properly 
moved towards port. 
 
And there’s a number of other issues, and unfortunately I too 
am out of time, but I think my colleagues will speak to that. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
this very important debate as we go on. And this is one of the 
most important debates I think that we’re facing in this 
legislature this spring. You know, as we go, farmers have 
struggled over the years. If you’ve been a farmer — and many 
of us have been around here — there’s been more I would say 
poor years than good years. And we’re finally having some 
good years, and now a transportation problem has come. 
 
I’m disappointed on the other side, as I was when we had this 
debate last week, of how they still don’t want to work with us 
and the federal government to help to move this along. I find 
that greatly disappointing. And I’ll tell you what. I heard that at 
SARM, that this shouldn’t be a political issue. This shouldn’t be 
on ideological. This shouldn’t be about the Friends of the 
Wheat Board. 
 
I know they had a meeting in Raymore trying to revive the 
Wheat Board and trying to use this as an excuse, and the NDP 
following along with that. The Wheat Board has nothing to do 
with the trouble we’re in, and if they’d have been here, we’d 
still be in the transportation problem we’re in. It’s been a 
problem that came to forefront because we grew the greatest 
crop we’ve ever had in Saskatchewan. But knowing our 
producers, I think we’re going to be growing more as we go 
along. 
 
This is a problem that we have to work into the future. And the 
feds are working with it, and our government is working with 
them. We’ve been working for the last year, year and a half on 
this knowing that . . . Even ever since we’ve been in 
government, we’ve also been discussing transportation issues. 
The pipeline was one of them. Those are things that we know 
that have to, as you move and your province grows, you have to 
deal with growth, how to move whether it be oil, whether it be 
grain, to make things run smooth. 
 
We’ve been fighting for pipelines. We had the members 
yesterday vote against a pipeline again, like vote against it. That 
would help . . . If you actually want to help, help the grain 
transportation, you have to move some of the oil off the rail 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4705 

onto there. You would think that they would be in support of 
that. And maybe they were because there was only, when the 
vote was said and done, you can look at Hansard, only three of 
them voted for it. Only three of them stayed back in the House 
to vote for it. I don’t know where the other six were. And I hope 
that they feel that by not voting, they’re actually making a 
statement on that. 
 
But those are the issues that we have to be working together. 
And I constantly hear the other side just basically attacking any 
motion we bring forward or bringing . . . trying to work as we 
work with the federal government. This is a debate that’s 
happening in Ottawa right now. And you know, I don’t hear 
much about the federal NDP on this. I don’t even much about 
the federal Liberals on this. 
 
You know, same thing, that they’re kind of, if I believe some of 
the stuff I’ve heard coming from both of the opposition parties 
in Ottawa, it’s more about the Wheat Board again, talking about 
how, well if the Wheat Board were here, we wouldn’t have this 
problem, trying to use that argument to bring that forward. Like 
my colleague from Saltcoats said, it’s done, and the farmers are 
happy with it. They realize that without the Wheat Board, they 
are growing. And also that the prices have been good for the 
number of years that the Wheat Board’s been gone. Right now 
this isn’t a price issue; this is a transportation issue. The price is 
still high at the coast. It’s the base that’s spreading that the 
companies are passing back. 
 
But if this problem keeps going on, we’re going to be losing 
customers. One of them is Japan has already raised issues with 
us. We have a reliable reputation and we cannot afford to lose 
that in the world market because it is a very competitive market 
out there throughout the world. They will go to other markets. 
They would sooner come to us but if we keep having a constant 
transportation problem, they will start looking at other places. 
 
The price is still not bad on the coast. It’s a base issue and that’s 
being caused by the transportation. And that’s why we support 
the federal government and what they’re trying to do. And we 
know that there has to be penalties. And we know that there has 
to be service agreements. This can’t be run like it was before. 
There has to be where they, between agreements between the 
grain companies and the rail companies, there has to be a 
commitment of so much tonnage being moved. They have to 
have the power, the units to haul them. They have to have the 
cars. We need them, services agreements. 
 
And our government has been working with that for the last 
year and a half. I can read the list that the member had went 
down when we started this again, you know, when we first, the 
Minister of Highways first met with rail companies. And we’ve 
had meetings with them. And I think this is the way to go, the 
way the federal government is going, that we’re going to have 
to put legislations in, and orders. And there is going to have to 
be a minimum tonnage hauled. There will have to be service 
agreements as we move forward with this. That’s why we’re 
bringing this motion forward, showing that we support the 
federal government. And I still express my disappointment that 
the NDP on the other side wouldn’t be wanting to work with 
this. 
 
And just listening to the member opposite, I believe she’s going 

to vote against the motion. I hope not. It would be nice to send a 
unified front as this government keeps talking with the federal 
government, to keep working with them. And also just to show 
the producers that this legislature is united in this problem, that 
the opposition isn’t just trying to get some headlines on it. 
Because this is way, way, way too important as we’re moving 
into seeding. 
 
You know, the grain is still at least — depends who you talk to 
and where you talk to — but anywhere from two to three 
months back with contracts being filled as now the weather is 
. . . This is the first time we’ve had some nice weather in a long 
time. But all of a sudden the fields are soft. Like right now, 
they’re actually getting soft. And so now producers are either 
having to either try to load in the middle of the night when the 
ground is still frozen or just load early in the morning and not 
being able to get that extra one or two loads in the afternoon 
because . . . if you’re hauling from grain bags or even your yard 
in that. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The RMs will be looking at putting bans on. If this weather 
persists, the bans will be coming on very, very fast, so then 
that’s going to slow it down. So that’s why we need to keep 
supporting the federal government in this and keep . . . And we 
have been. We’ve been pushing them, but they are moving 
forward. 
 
And I am impressed with what the federal government is trying 
to do because they know that they’re going to have to, you 
know, pass emergency legislation. And we want to send a 
message as a province that we’re behind them, that our 
ministers, Minister of Agriculture, that all our ministers are 
behind them in whatever the federal government has to do to 
get the grain moving and to keep the grain moving through the 
summer because we’re going to grow another great crop this 
year. 
 
I know the farmers. I know the member opposite said, well 
farmers . . . I don’t know what farmer told her that he says, oh, 
he doesn’t want a bumper crop. Because I don’t know which 
. . . I’ve never met one yet that says he wouldn’t like to have a 
bumper crop. What they’re worried about is the long-range plan 
to move that. 
 
And when I was at SARM yesterday talking to a lot of farmers, 
I mean yes, it is an issue. That’s the first thing you talk about. 
You used to talk about weather when you went out, you know, 
in the coffee shop or at SARM, the opening conversation. Now 
it was about grain transportation. I must have had 50 
conversations yesterday at SARM about it. It’s on everybody’s 
mind. But they understand that we’re trying to work with the 
. . . We’re working with the federal government. And it’s going 
to be an issue, and this . . . [inaudible] . . . most important issue 
that we’re dealing with. And they understand that. 
 
I got lots of good comments just saying, just keep on them. 
Keep on the railroads. Keep on the grain companies. We need 
these agreements. We need these penalties if they’re not going 
to move this. 
 
But we need to know each month how much grain we’re going 



4706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

to be able to move because that allows a producer to know how 
he can contract. Because there’s nothing worse than going to 
the elevator, and the price is good, and the company telling you 
that well, we can’t . . . we’re not contracting right now. Right 
now they’re not contracting peas. There’s nothing worse to the 
producer. You go in there, and being said, well you know, we’d 
like to buy them, but we can’t move them for three months, so 
we’re not offering you a contract. And as we go into seeding, 
you know, there’s going to be some cash crunches going on out 
there. And we need to have this money moving back to the 
farmers, and we need this grain to be moved. 
 
But I was very impressed with the comments that I got at 
SARM for this government and the ministers and the Premier 
saying that we’re making this a priority, that we need to make 
this a long-range plan to move grain. And I didn’t hear much 
praise being said about the opposition because they’ve told me, 
I’ve told them more than once — even from one or two, if I 
would say, maybe the few supporters they’ve got in my 
constituency — they shouldn’t be making this a political issue 
about the Wheat Board or anything. They should be just behind 
you in any way we can help together to get this grain moving. 
So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion brought 
forward by the member for Saltcoats wholeheartedly. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter this debate on a critical issue for our province at this point 
in time. We wish we would have been able to enter into debate 
on this weeks or months ago. And I wish we would have seen 
some action from this government in years past, months ago in 
preparation for the challenge that we’re facing right now. 
 
Maybe I’ll just touch on one issue here that’s rather interesting 
and I think pretty telling. This issue was so important to 
members opposite and the federal Conservatives that when 
producers held a meeting just this past Sunday in Raymore, 
Saskatchewan, a day-long meeting in fact — you might be 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, because this apparently is an important 
issue to the member that was just speaking or to the member 
from Last Mountain or to the Premier or to the Agriculture 
minister — but do you know how many of them showed up? 
Because there’s 48 members, Mr. Speaker, many from rural 
Saskatchewan, many that represent farm families and farm 
businesses across this province. Do you know how many 
showed up, Mr. Speaker, to that meeting in Raymore? Not a 
one. Not the member from Weyburn, not the member from Arm 
River-Watrous, not the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, not the Agriculture minister, not the 
Premier. 
 
They didn’t care enough to show up to a meeting to listen to 
producers that came out because of the grain transportation 
crisis. Now this is pretty telling, and it’s consistent with the 
actions and behaviour of this government on this grain 
transportation crisis, because they’ve been non-existent from 
the get-go in bringing forward real solutions that address the 
grain transportation crisis. It’s also noteworthy that their kissing 
cousins, the federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, were also not 
at the meeting. 
 

So it’s awfully strange for other federal parties to be 
represented, for our federal party, the NDP to be there, for the 
Agriculture critic from Nutana to be there at the meeting. I 
attended the meeting all day there. Many of the . . . Many, many 
municipal leaders were at that meeting that are now at SARM 
here this week, were also at that meeting, many producers from 
across the province. 
 
And this simply represents what we’ve seen from this 
government all the way through. What we’ve seen from that 
government, what we saw with the announcement from the 
federal government is simply too little too late, and it’s far too 
weak. The circumstance that we’re dealing with right now was 
entirely foreseeable, and that’s the sad reality. 
 
When that government, along with the federal government, 
intervened to dismantle the Wheat Board without a vote of 
producers, there was one voice or a voice that should have been 
listened to. Setting aside the marketing debate — because at the 
end of the day that marketing decision should have been up to 
producers, not this Premier, not the Prime Minister, not me; it 
should have been up to producers — but the one thing I heard 
from producers across this province, setting aside the marketing 
decision, was that what was being dismantled as well was a 
transportation logistics system and clout with rail companies. 
And it was heard from folks on either side of that debate that 
this government and the federal government better be doing 
something to ensure that a logistics system for transportation 
would be in place and some clout would be there for producers. 
Those guys dismantled that system and replaced it with nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Fast forward. That’s a couple years ago. Last year when there 
was opportunities to make improvements to the fair freight rail 
amendment Act federally, that government failed to provide any 
support for amendments that would have actually been 
meaningful for producers. And the federal government actually 
voted against amendments that were put forward that would 
have ensured service level agreements — the one we now hear 
late coming from the Premier — service level agreements that 
would have been actually enforceable from a legal perspective 
and would have allowed producers to actually receive some 
compensation directly back to them. So as I say, this is an 
entirely foreseeable challenge and crisis that we’ve come 
around to, with no actions from that Premier, no actions from 
the federal government to address the challenges that are in 
place. 
 
Not to mention that it was an exciting summer last year. I recall 
we started out with a really wet spring. And sort of in through 
August, we were celebrating Roughrider victories, which we all 
were, and we were touting this record crop that was coming, 
being produced. So producers clearly did their work last 
summer. They did everything they needed to do to produce a 
record crop — something that government was willing to 
celebrate, that we were all proud of — but that government 
again not recognizing that they had a responsibility and that 
they failed to act to ensure that the grain transportation system 
was there to make sure that producers could get that record crop 
to port, get that record crop to market to make sure that they 
could get paid. 
 
Now the reality is that producers have not been paid in many 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4707 

cases all across this province. They have grain sitting in bins 
that they’re wondering when it’s ever going to be able to be 
moved, whether they’re ever going to be able to get paid for it. 
They have grain bags all across Saskatchewan that are right 
now having all sorts of damage that are being caused to them, 
and also a big question of how to prepare for the next growing 
season. We have piles of grain across this province that in fact 
are rotting with producers not getting paid for that record crop 
and their hard work. Of course all of this is highly unfortunate. 
 
We know as well that this . . . It wasn’t a secret that the big rail 
companies have been making massive cuts over the past couple 
of years. In fact in 2012, CP engaged in one of . . . Of course 
the two big rail companies, one of those companies, CP, 
actually cut 4,500 workers, 11,000 railcars, and over 400 
locomotives. And that wasn’t enough of a wake-up call for that 
Premier to realize, or the federal government, that they were 
going to have a challenge on their hands when it came to 
capacity. 
 
Now we’ve been calling for actions on this for a long time, Mr. 
Speaker. We were out listening to producers that were saying 
that, as the transportation network and system that was in place 
was being dismantled, that something needed to be put in place. 
That government failed to listen and rejected that call from 
producers. 
 
As we’ve got into the winter of this year, with this record crop 
going to waste in many cases, with producers with bills and 
loans due, with that record crop rotting in many circumstances, 
and with commodity prices collapsing, Mr. Speaker, because of 
the inaction of this government, the federal government, and the 
poor performance of the rail companies, producers are now 
getting a terrible price for their product. 
 
And I know just a couple of weeks ago, wheat was selling for 
4.80 here or producers were receiving 4.80 here on the prairies, 
and at port they were receiving well over $10 for that crop basis 
that had grown to a massive amount. So the matter of fact is 
that out of this crisis many shippers, many transporters have 
been making big dollars out of this, but our producers have 
taken a big hit, a $5 billion hit, without any compensation. 
 
We’ve been calling for — as I say in January it was dismissed 
by that Agriculture minister and that Premier who were late to 
the scene — calling for performance standards to be established 
that could be legislated and to ensure that reparations and 
compensation would go directly back to producers who are 
taking the hit. Mr. Speaker, that Agriculture minister brushed 
that off, said that the rail companies would sort it out, treated 
the big rail companies with kid gloves when he needed to utilize 
a little bit of muscle on behalf of Saskatchewan producers. 
 
They also rejected our call for open access to be considered or 
joint running rights to get just a bit of competition on this rail 
system that right now is a duopoly monopoly, no market at all, 
and make sure that our shortline rail companies and other 
companies can be part of the solution. 
 
We called for immediate opening up of the CTA [Canada 
Transportation Act] to make sure that actions could be taken 
then to address the crisis that was unfolding and a reality for 
Saskatchewan producers. But this government was certainly 

dismissive of the concerns of producers and not aware of the 
realities that were going on, or they simply didn’t care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The announcement that we saw just a week and a bit ago and 
the fawning over the announcement from the Agriculture 
minister and the Premier was weak. It was weak by a provincial 
government that should recognize that $5 billion in farm 
incomes is something that’s big, that recognizes that our 
producers who have done the hard work deserve to get paid. It 
was weak for not addressing the real numbers needed for rail 
cars to get that grain to market. 
 
We believe that the penalties that were put forward along . . . 
what we’re hearing from producers, the penalty that could be up 
to $100,000. Sounds like a big number for some, Mr. Speaker, 
but that’s walking-around money for the railroads. That’s 
walking-around money for Hunter Harrison, Mr. Speaker. And 
those dollars, Mr. Speaker, don’t flow back to producers. 
They’re going to be collected by government. That’s wrong, 
Mr. Speaker, and doesn’t address the issue. 
 
We have a crisis on our hands. We need immediate actions to 
address the crisis. We need short-term actions to do just that, 
and we need structural change that’s going to serve the 
long-term interests, not just for producers but for the 
Saskatchewan economy. And it’s past time that that government 
stopped tripping over itself to fawn over the federal 
government, that they start standing up for producers, that they 
stop treating the rail companies with kid gloves and that they 
start pushing some real solutions that are going to work for 
producers across this province like mandating some fleet size 
and rolling stock, like mandating the locomotives that have 
been cut across this province and ensuring, as I say, that 
producers are the ones that receive the dollars back because, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re the ones that have taken the hit. And 
they’re the ones, Mr. Speaker, that are bearing the 
consequences. 
 
So we will continue to support, call for strong leadership, real 
actions, legislation that makes a difference, not scrapping things 
like revenue caps that provide a bit of protection for producers 
but real solutions for the Saskatchewan economy and producers 
in this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me 
great pleasure to wade into this debate on the motion put 
forward by my good friend and the member from Saltcoats 
commending the federal government for taking action on this. 
 
This is something, Mr. Speaker, that is going to really help out 
our producers here in Western Canada, and we desperately need 
that help. And there is one thing that, you know, we do do. On 
this side of the government, when we go to Ottawa, we don’t go 
down there in a adversarial position. We’re not like the former 
premier when Premier Calvert walked out on the Prime 
Minister. Mr. Speaker, this government believes in working 
together in conjunction with the federal government.  
 
Now I guess I can kind of see why maybe, maybe that side 



4708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

would be against it because they’re probably playing up to their 
federal cousins. Because they don’t want, and I don’t think they 
want to see this go forward. I don’t think they want to see the 
producers make money over here. Like I mean, definitely 
yesterday, they voted against the Gateway pipeline. Like this is 
good for Western Canada. It’s good for all of Canada. 
 
[11:30] 
 
They don’t want to see us move forward. They want to be stuck 
in in the past like they always have been. They want to stick 
with their federal cousins who seems to think that anything that 
works good in Western Canada has to be bad for the rest of 
Canada. You know, going so far as calling it the Dutch disease. 
Mr. Speaker, we want to work with the federal government to 
make things good, not just for our producers but make it good 
for all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I think that not being 
adversarial is probably the way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Nutana who said we 
are not meeting with the producers. Excuse me. Let’s just take a 
look at all the people that come from a rural background on that 
side of the House. And let’s take a look at the people that come 
from a rural background on this side of the House, of which 
many of us are producers. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost a 
little bit of a joke when the member from Rosemont sits there 
and says about none of us going to the meeting in Raymore. Mr. 
Speaker, that meeting was a meeting with the Friends of the 
Wheat Board. And there is no Wheat Board anymore, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no Wheat Board. Give up on that end of it, 
and thankfully it’s gone. 
 
And I’ll give you a little story about the Wheat Board. If you 
figure the Wheat Board was so good, I’m old enough to 
remember when oats were under the Wheat Board. And you 
want to know something? We never made any money on oats 
until the Wheat Board gave it up. Mr. Speaker, I also remember 
when — well it was called rapeseed at that time — used to be 
under the Wheat Board. Of course up in my area, northeastern 
Saskatchewan, we grow a lot of rape, canola. And you know 
something? That used to be controlled by the Wheat Board and 
we couldn’t deliver it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so happy that the Wheat Board is finally 
gone. But, Mr. Speaker, for them to sit there and call this 
motion ridiculous is absolutely, it’s ridiculous. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Nutana called it ridiculous. That is a 
great motion. And we believe we should give accolades where 
they are deserved and for working with the federal government 
to move this forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s another little thing that was brought 
forward. And it was brought forward by our Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, where he said we should maybe be moving some grain 
south also. And I think that we can work on this aspect of it 
also.  
 
A very good example in Arborfield, Linear Grain which is on a 
shortline — I’m very fortunate; I have two shortlines within the 
Carrot River Valley constituency — and Linear Grain has been 
trying to move oats south and couldn’t move it south because of 
some of the problems with the railways. They had contracts 
signed, and they’re just a small company, and they said they 

actually lost up to a million dollars because they could not 
move that grain south. So our Premier definitely was right when 
he said we should be looking at north-south movement of grain 
also. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the things that we have 
done and partnered with, with the federal government . . . You 
know, one of the things that we need are the mandatory service 
levels and reciprocal penalties for grain shippers and railways if 
they don’t fulfill their commitments. And that’s a very good, a 
very good thing because, let’s face it, as one of the people said 
one time, that the grain companies aren’t exactly wearing a 
white hat in this either. They have to work along with this also. 
 
We do want to see, we do want to see it raised to 13,000 cars 
per week instead of 11,000. And I think we can work with the 
government on these things because we don’t go in there just 
saying, you’re doing everything wrong. That’s it, we’re leaving. 
No sir. We work with the federal government and that’s why, 
like I said, this motion actually gives accolades where it should 
be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, the NDP sits back and talks about the 
various different things that they were doing for rural 
Saskatchewan. I got news for you, the NDP forgot about rural 
Saskatchewan a long time ago in what they call Roy’s revenge. 
Because he did not, he did not want to see rural Saskatchewan 
move forward.  
 
This government, this government has helped out in the rail 
transportation in rural Saskatchewan. Because of our help with 
the shortline railways, of which I have said I have two of them 
in our constituency alone, you know, we can have these 
shortline railways and it saves money on our, you know, 
degradation of our highways. And the minister, Ministry of 
Highways for a number of years has been putting in money into 
our shortline railways and helping our shortline railways move 
the product. Now the whole catch is they still have to move it 
out to a CN or a CP line. And that’s where a good part of the 
bottleneck has been. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the shortline railway sustainable 
program was created to address the recapitalization challenges 
faced by existing shortlines. Funding for the program was 
provided by the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, and it 
was actually increased to $900,000, Mr. Speaker, to help these 
shortline railways move this product. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways still continues to 
work very closely with the 13 existing shortline railways, and 
we’re hoping to see more come along in the near future. This 
government, this government will stand behind our shortline 
railways, and we will stand behind our farmers all the way to 
the bank. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is far different, far different than what 
the NDP ever did for rural Saskatchewan. Oh like I mean, 
they’ve always been against rural Saskatchewan, let’s face it. 
You know, they went back . . . You can go right back. There’s 
all sorts of things in that . . . You know, when they closed down 
all the agriculture offices. And they said, oh we’re for the 
farmers, but we’re going to go and close down 31 agricultural 
offices. Yes, that was a great help, wasn’t it, Mr. Speaker? 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4709 

You know, they eliminated the GRIP, ended up in court. They 
ended up winning, but they eliminated the GRIP, a signed 
contract. And they just said, oh, no, we don’t believe in doing 
that. Even though it’s a signed contract, they ripped it up. Yes, 
just a great job from the NDP protecting our farmers. And they 
sit there and now claim, oh you know, we’re not doing the job 
to protect our farmers. 
 
We have had meetings. And I just don’t have enough time to 
talk about all the meetings that we have had all the way through 
when we saw this crisis coming. We’ve had meetings and we 
want to, like I said, work with the federal government to move 
this forward to alleviate this traffic jam that we have on the 
railways. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess since I’m basically out of time, I’m 
going to say, I certainly support this motion that was put 
forward by my good seatmate here. And I hope, I hope that that 
side will vote along with this motion also because it shows 
we’re supporting our farmers. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise to speak to this particular motion. I think this fall will be 
the 111th crop that our family members will have taken off of 
the farm where my mother grew up. My father’s family in the 
farm there, they were a few years later, so I think it’s probably 
going to be the 103rd or 104th crop that was taken. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s been quite interesting 
in listening to this debate, and I have a great deal of respect for 
my fellow Viking legislator over there, the former minister of 
Agriculture, because I know that he also has these broad roots, 
broad base across the province. And what I think all of us are 
hearing in this province this year is that how could this happen? 
How could this happen that we have the best crop by a huge 
margin that we’ve ever had and then all of a sudden we can’t 
get this crop to the market? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about grain. We’re talking 
about grain being transported. But more importantly we’re 
talking about food. This is food for the world. We end up . . . 
Part of the rationale for many of our ancestors settling in this 
part of the world was that we were going to help feed the world. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when there are technical problems or issues 
that arise that make it very difficult for that food to go to the 
world market, then I think there’s, you know, a fundamental 
question about the farmers getting paid for it, but more 
importantly there’s a fundamental question about our 
responsibility, our role as legislators in Saskatchewan, and I 
would say our friends in Parliament in Ottawa, about making 
sure that that food is available for the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this motion today has some positive aspects 
to it in the sense that it’s addressing the fact that the federal 
government is taking some steps now, a little bit late, about the 
order in council they’ve put forward. We all agree that the teeth 
in that order in council are somewhat softened or somewhat not 
the way they should be. And we also think that going ahead 
with emergency legislation makes sense. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the motion today we don’t have the 
suggestions that come from the Government of Saskatchewan 
about what should be in the emergency legislation. And that 
would be a much better debate in this House if we could all talk 
about, well what are the things that make sense to put in federal 
legislation that are going to deal with our transportation 
situation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the promise or the plan put forward 
by the Government of Canada when the Prairies were settled 
was a way to have a subsidized rate of transportation to get 
products to the market because everybody knew that we were a 
long ways away from people who needed food. And that was 
originally the Crow rate based on a whole number of issues in 
the late 19th century. And it stood there for many, many years, 
but it also ended up having a number of challenges as it related 
to how the railway companies were operated. But, Mr. Speaker, 
that whole concept of how do we make sure that there’s a fair 
way of transporting the goods from Saskatchewan to the 
markets of the world has been a situation where we need to 
work and deal with how this works. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the transportation modes that we have 
in Canada have come down to basically two major corporations 
on the transportation side on rail, we also know that our grain 
transportation has been bought by an international company that 
specializes in bulk transport of goods. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 
whole issue of how grain then competes with all of the other 
items that are transported by grain companies becomes also an 
issue for us. And so one of the tasks of the Saskatchewan 
government, and I know it was one of our tasks when I was on 
the government side, was to try to figure out what control, what 
kind of mechanisms that we can put into place to protect 
Saskatchewan people from international markets, and also then 
make sure that we can work in that market in a way that has the 
best methods of getting our products to the world. 
 
Now clearly we’re a trading province. We’re a trading country, 
and we sell bulk products. One of the bulk products is grain. 
And unfortunately, we’re in a situation where others are able to 
take advantage of our good product and sell it on the world 
market, and take a big chunk of the profit from that grain. And 
that’s what this issue is about. 
 
It’s about farmers saying, well I know if I could get my product 
over to Vancouver, or if I could get it to Montreal or to 
Portland, that I could get this kind of a price for it. But I don’t 
have control or access on some of that. And all we’re talking 
about with this motion, which is part of what I think the 
member from Saltcoats is talking about, is that we want to have 
fair rules that treat our farmers properly. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And so I agree with his sentiment in bringing forth this kind of 
thing. But the question is, how do we get to those fair rules? 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we will end up having something 
come forward from the Minister of Agriculture or the Premier 
which will set out the kinds of things that we, as Saskatchewan 
farmers, as Saskatchewan people, as Saskatchewan legislators, 
want to see in the federal emergency legislation because we all 
know that these national railways are beyond the legislative 
competence of this body. And that’s another factor that 



4710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

becomes even more difficult. 
 
Now some of the members over there don’t recognize this joint 
effort, or this joint responsibility, that all members of this 
House have in dealing with these kinds of issues which are of 
national and international importance. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would suggest to the former minister of Agriculture that maybe 
he would sit down with our present minister of Agriculture and 
the Premier and say, let’s figure out what we think should be in 
the federal legislation. And we would be happy on this side of 
the House to talk to them about that and make some suggestions 
about that. But I think it’s important that we have a clear 
message for the national government about how these changes 
should be made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s about being fair to our producers here. 
It’s about being fair to our province. Because if we can’t sell 
our product, we can’t get revenues that then allow us to fund 
our health system, our education system, or our road system. 
And it’s also about being fair to businesses that are involved in 
the transportation area or the grain handling or the world 
marketing of products from this place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these kinds of questions aren’t in this 
motion. We’re not sure where they are. We think that there 
should be much more public discussion about that. And I 
encourage the former minister of Agriculture to make that point 
in his caucus to the Premier and to the Minister of Agriculture 
so that we can have a common Saskatchewan position that will 
protect all of our producers. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The 65 minutes for debate has 
expired. Questions? I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we’re hearing 
from producers and farm groups, the Western Canadian Wheat 
Growers and others, that the actions of government have been 
far too little, far too late, that they’re simply too weak. 
 
There’s been important meetings across the province that we’ve 
been attending, that producers have been holding. I know the 
Ag critic was out to Assiniboia this last weekend as this crisis is 
impacting producers right now. There was a meeting in 
Raymore. I was there along with the Ag critic and federal 
members as well of the NDP. Who wasn’t there, who was 
notably absent, is every single one of the members on that side 
of the Assembly, including the MLA for the area and those 
within the direct area and certainly the Agriculture minister. 
Not a single federal Conservative either. 
 
My question to the member from Carrot River: how did he or 
none of his colleagues have the decency to show up and deal 
directly with producers and RM leaders who are being impacted 
by the grain transportation crisis? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
meeting was a Friends of the Wheat Board meeting. The Wheat 
Board is gone. We never got an invite to it, Mr. Speaker. The 
Wheat Board is gone. I know that that government, or when 

they were government, they want to live in the old days. They 
want to go back to the ’40s. This is a government that believes 
in growth and moving forward, Mr. Speaker. And we believe 
that we can operate better when we can make individual choices 
of how to sell our grain without running it through a monopoly 
of the Wheat Board. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The grain crisis 
experienced by producers across the province has been top 
priority for this government. We have taken action and worked 
with our stakeholders on this file, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
encouraged grain companies and railways to negotiate level of 
service agreements. Both agreed to consider reciprocal 
penalties, and we asked the federal government to oversee the 
negotiations. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: will your caucus 
support us in asking the federal government to include 
mandatory service level agreements and reciprocal penalties for 
grain shippers and railways? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I find it hard to believe that the member would 
ask a question like that. We have been calling since last March 
for changes to the Fair Rail Freight Service Act, and this 
minister and this government looked like a deer in the 
headlights when asked questions about it. It’s very clear that if 
those changes were made then, the same changes that they’re 
calling for now, if they were made last March, this entire 
catastrophe could have been avoided. But instead, Mr. Speaker, 
they sat on their thumbs. They looked confused and dazed when 
we asked the question. They were twiddling their thumbs and 
they did absolutely nothing when that bill was introduced in the 
House of Commons. And at second reading, when proper 
amendments were put forward by the federal NDP and by grain 
shippers, this government and the federal government did 
absolutely nothing to deal with it. It’s a ridiculous question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the former 
minister of Agriculture, the member from Saltcoats. Will that 
member sit down with the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier and develop a plan and a proposal for the kinds of 
conditions and clauses that Saskatchewan wants in the federal 
legislation? And then will he share that with us on this side of 
the House so that we can be supportive of that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member for the question. You know, Mr. Speaker, earlier on 
today the member from Nutana called my motion ridiculous. 
I’ve had my speeches in this legislature called a lot of things but 
I think that’s the first time ridiculous. I take that as somewhat of 
a compliment. 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4711 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to offend the members opposite when we 
ask anything of them to support the federal government. We’re 
not asking for her to have a group hug with the federal Minister 
of Agriculture, although there’s something about that picture I 
would like to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also for the member of Lakeview, one of the 
things that we won’t be doing to support things like this, as he 
was going to do when he talked about the film tax credit, was 
take money out of agriculture and take money out of 
municipalities. That won’t be happening under our watch, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m glad to see the NDP engaged in an issue affecting rural 
Saskatchewan. If only if it was a more common occurrence. Mr. 
Speaker, when the members opposite were in government we 
saw thousands of miles of rail track abandoned in Saskatchewan 
and the NDP did absolutely nothing. In fact, they were so busy 
cutting and slashing provincial programs and services for 
producers and off-loading costs onto RMs, they probably didn’t 
have time to even notice. To the member from Nutana: when 
your party was in government, why did you completely ignore 
farmers and do nothing when the railways abandoned thousands 
of miles of branch lines? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to answer this question because it seems to me it was the 
member’s federal cousins who were the ones that were busy 
doing the dismantling and nothing was done by the 
Conservatives to stop that process, followed by the Liberals in 
the ’90s. So this was a federal issue that actually would 
devastate much of what happened. 
 
My question though is, why are these backbenchers presenting 
prepared questions now at this point in time when a year ago, 
when they should have been active and should have been doing 
stuff with the federal government and actively promoting the 
issues of producers here in Saskatchewan, they sat on their 
thumbs and twiddled their fingers? I’m not sure how they did it 
both at the same time, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you that there was 
no action on the part of this government to help farmers at the 
critical point last year when it should have happened. And now 
it’s too late. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the member from Saltcoats because I know, I know that 
the member from Saltcoats does like to turn a nice phrase on a 
number of issues, but the very specific question that’s being 
dealt with in this debate is a serious matter. It’s a serious matter 
about food being produced by our farmers that is supposed to 
go to the world. And we want to hear from that member, from 
the Minister of Agriculture, and from the Premier what it is that 
they’re going to set forward on behalf of our producers as it 

relates to the federal legislation. So the member from Saltcoats, 
please answer that question and don’t dance around all those 
other things. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know 
this is more fun than I’ve had for a long time. I’m not sure what 
got under the skin of the member for Lakeview. Now was it my 
comments about him finding funding for the film tax credit 
from ag and municipal, or is it us asking them just to support 
the federal government in making the railroads improve their 
quality of hauling grain for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a track record of this side of the 
aisle as they do for the last 16 years and, you know, that’s 
probably why we have 49 seats on this side, or 48 and Speaker, 
and they have nine on that side, and none of them, Mr. Speaker, 
none of them are from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday we heard how 
the members opposite oppose the idea of the Northern Gateway 
pipeline. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 2013 was a record year for exports. 
Saskatchewan is now Canada’s largest exporter per capita. One 
of the reasons we have experienced such a backlog in rail 
transportation is due to the transportation of oil rather than 
grain. Mr. Deputy Speaker, upwards of 20 per cent of our oil 
now leaves the province on rail. Pipelines such as the Northern 
Gateway would help to ease the strain experienced by the rail 
industry. To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: if your 
members are genuine in their new-found love of agriculture, 
why did your party choose ideology over a common sense 
solution like the Northern Gateway pipeline which can be seen 
as a measure to free up rail transportation for our farmers? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I find 
it really cute that the backbenchers get a chance to get up with 
their cute little prepared speeches and kind of trot out some trite 
old rhetoric that doesn’t make any sense at all. What we are 
talking about here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what the Premier is 
saying. 
 
We have Murray Mandryk on February 28th asking this 
question, and this is directly contrary to what the Minister of 
Agriculture said today. He said: 
 

So why would Wall — who clearly had a choice of 
following mom’s advice by saying nothing at all when he 
should have really had nothing nice to say about Ritz — 
then go out of his way to praise Ritz’s inadequate work on 
the grain transportation file? 

 
That’s the question that’s at stake here, Mr. Speaker, in this 
debate today. We can pass all the motions we want, but until we 



4712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

see real action on the part of this government to criticize that 
federal minister, when we want to see the Minister of 
Agriculture go head-to-head with him and tell him what 
producers really need, what producers are asking for, and what 
producers need to get out of the crisis, that’s when we are going 
to see a solution to this issue. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Why won’t that government ensure that 
penalties go back to producers who have taken the hit? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter the discussion, or actually I will be moving 
The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, Bill No. 606, at the 
end of my speech. And it really is my pleasure to have this 
opportunity. This is my first private member’s bill, and it’s also 
a private member’s bill that the government should take on. 
This is critically important to people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to tell you a little bit about why this bill is important 
to me and the lens though which I see it. My parents, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are both 81. My dad celebrated his birthday 
last weekend. But they are still in their own home, in the home 
in which I grew up, two blocks from my house right now, and 
going strong. And I am knocking on wood here. But they 
continue to have a huge garden. Actually my dad continues to 
take over the boulevard and even more garden than they used to 
have. They still have a big greenhouse. I’m far from offering 
care for them. They, in fact, are huge care providers for me. 
Grandpa Rusty walks down the street every week or every day 
to pick up Ophelia from school. And my mom is always . . . I 
always go home with a care package — muffins, soups, all 
kinds of things. So my parents are still, at 81, going strong and 
continue to be huge care providers for me. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So we’re blessed that they’re still very healthy. And I’m also 
lucky that I come from a very big family. I’m the youngest of 
seven children, and five of us are all still in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So when the time comes, when my parents 
might some day need some support to stay in their home, we’re 
all nearby and have got a great family and we’re willing to pull 
together. 
 
But when we talk about long-term care and personal care, it’s 
through the lens of my parents that I see it. I see them talk about 
some of their friends. And I know that the care, that if my 
parents were ever to move into long-term or a personal care 

home, the care that I would want for them is care that includes 
dignity, respect, safety, all those kind of things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And those are things that I don’t just want for my own 
parents. Those are things that I want for all seniors and all 
people living in long-term and personal care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Dignity, respect, and safety, and this is what Bill No. 606, The 
Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act is all about. This is about 
my parents. This is about their friends. This is about people who 
live in Saskatoon Riversdale who I meet on a regular basis. This 
is about people in Saskatchewan having a high quality of life as 
they age, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The reality is, we’ve heard many concerns over the last year 
about the quality of care, and quality of seniors’ care in our 
province, especially how seniors’ care is actually getting worse 
under this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s not me 
saying that. That’s been many people who have come before the 
legislature, or come to the legislature to express their concerns. 
I’m thinking last year actually close to this time last year, 
there’s a story from May 2nd, 2013 when Lynne Seabourne 
brought her concerns forward. And I’d like to quote from a 
Leader-Post article of again, May 2nd, 2013. Lynne Seabourne 
is talking about her husband who’s living in Extendicare Sunset 
Nursing Home in south Regina. And she had this to say: 
 

For many years, it was a warm welcoming home, and the 
situation has deteriorated there to the point to where I felt I 
had to take a stand for all the residents and the caregivers 
and nurses who are so important to us. 

 
And she went on to say, and this is her being paraphrased, that 
things have become progressively worse over the past three 
years. She says that she’s noticed a significant rise in the stress 
level among care aids. She says that that is a very real concern. 
 
And Lynne isn’t the only one who’s talked about how care in 
this province has deteriorated in seniors’ residences over recent 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s mostly . . . We’ve had 
residents. We’ve had families. We continue to have front-line 
workers. All point to a lack of staffing, short-staffing as being 
the root cause of this problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The reality is our parents, our grandparents are being left to go 
to the bathroom in their pants on occasions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, people who don’t wear incontinent products. These are 
people who could . . . If they could get to the bathroom by 
themselves, they would. But they can’t because they need 
assistance, and there isn’t always staff to get them there. 
Caregivers don’t have time to help them to the bathroom. 
They’re not being given the time to eat meals. They’re not 
being given the time to eat meals, or help with eating those 
meals. And in many cases they’re not even getting a bath per 
week, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I had a letter last week from a woman whose mother is in 
long-term care and shared her experience around her mother 
who has to wear incontinent products and has diabetes and 
some other risk factors. And cleanliness is really very important 
because of some — it is always — but under some of these 
conditions it becomes even more important. And her mother 
just a few weeks ago was told that they were short-staffed. She 
had to miss her weekly bath, so the bath was being bumped to 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4713 

the next week. 
 
I know again, thinking about this through the lens of my own 
mother, my mother is a daily bather. She doesn’t bath just for 
cleanliness. She had seven kids. Bathing was her one refuge to 
escape from I think the seven of us for a few brief minutes to 
relax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s a big part of what my 
mother enjoys doing. She takes a book and disappears for a few 
minutes. And so I recognize that perhaps daily baths are not 
possible in long-term and personal care homes, but not even 
getting a bath a week is just not acceptable. And I think about 
my mother, who if she was in a place where she wasn’t getting 
a weekly bath, that would have a huge impact on her quality of 
life. 
 
Despite so many problems in seniors’ care, this government 
continues to refuse to listen to residents, their families, and 
front-line staff. You can’t fix a problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
unless you recognize there is a problem and try to understand 
what that problem is. 
 
So about this time last year when the opposition started raising 
serious concerns we were hearing in seniors’ care, initially the 
government and the minister said, oh there’s nothing to see 
here, no crisis in seniors’ care here. And as the stories continued 
to emerge, the minister agreed to a CEO [chief executive 
officer] tour, which doesn’t solve the problem. It simply 
reaffirms that in fact there were many, many problems in 
seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. So the minister finally agrees to do 
this CEO tour which verifies exactly what we’d been saying all 
along. But the reality is, what people are saying is the problem, 
again, residents, families, and front-line staff continue to assert 
that it is a staffing issue, a lack of staffing. And the government 
had come up with an urgent action fund which did not address 
those key concerns, Mr. Speaker, and that has to stop. In order 
to be able to fix a problem, address a problem, you have to 
recognize there is a problem, and see what that problem is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government has scrapped the minimum care standards in 
the special care home regulations a few years back, 2011 I 
believe. They used to require a minimum of two hours per day 
of nursing and personal care for residents. But this government 
quietly got rid of that minimum care standard. I can tell you 
they weren’t issuing a news release about cutting of those 
standards, Mr. Speaker, that they do so often with things that 
they do. There was no fanfare around cutting of minimum care 
standards. 
 
Instead of cutting those minimum care standards, the 
government should have strengthened and improved that 
standard. But instead this government chose to scrap it. The 
government’s excuse for doing away with minimum quality of 
care standards is that it didn’t want to limit the care that is 
provided to seniors. But that doesn’t make any sense, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Minimum care standards act as a floor, the 
bare minimum. That’s the bottom. A minimum wage, when we 
think about a minimum wage, that doesn’t serve as a maximum 
wage. Of course we want people to make more than the 
minimum wage. That would be a good thing. 
 
The government’s other excuse for doing away with minimum 
quality of care standards is that it wanted to deliver more 

personalized care instead. And nobody can argue with 
personalized care, Mr. Speaker. But that doesn’t make any 
sense either. There should be personalized care for everyone, 
but in no way does having personalized care preclude the need 
for basic guarantees. Being offered a meal in a timely fashion, 
being supported to eat that meal, being taken to the washroom 
when you need to use the washroom, Mr. Speaker, those are not 
extras. Mr. Deputy Speaker, those should be assumed that for 
those people we love who are in long-term or personal care; 
those should be things that people get on a regular daily basis. 
A regular bath, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the government again, 
using bizarre logic, got rid of the minimum care standards. And 
what that means is across this province we have seniors’ care 
that is incredibly uneven and inadequate. There are disparities 
in the level of care all across the province. So the reality is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I know we here in the opposition believe it 
shouldn’t matter where you live, what community you call 
home, that you still deserve good quality care, and it shouldn’t 
be limited by your home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is not fair. 
 
We just saw last week in the 250 pages of urgent requests 
submitted by the health regions that the level of care is very 
different depending on where you live. The urgent request 
document shows if you’re a senior in the Heartland Health 
Region you get about three hours less care per week than if 
you’re a senior in the Qu’Appelle Health Region. So again, is it 
fair that a senior in the Heartland Health Region gets less care 
than a senior in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region? I’d ask the 
minister if he thinks that that is fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
know that I certainly don’t and I know that my parents wouldn’t 
think that that’s fair. And I know many others who wouldn’t 
think that that is fair either. 
 
It is not acceptable for the standard of seniors’ care to be so 
incredibly uneven and so inadequate. And again that’s what 
we’re talking about, is inadequacy of care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And not that we don’t have staff who do the best that they 
possibly can. I continue to hear from residents and families high 
praise for staff who are doing the best they can but are stretched 
incredibly thin, beyond capacity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it’s 
not a matter of staff not doing the very best that they can in 
providing the best care that they can give. But it’s a matter of 
them not having the time to be able to provide it because there 
aren’t enough of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about one of the stories that emerged 
last year. There were many, many stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but Carrie Klassen, I think to her credit . . . It’s not always easy 
coming forward with stories of your experience or things that 
you’re seeing, and Carrie Klassen I think has been hugely 
instrumental in helping put a face on what’s going wrong with 
seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we talk about the lack of quality care, again it’s not 
about staffing and their . . . It’s not about the staff not 
delivering. It’s about their inability to deliver because there 
aren’t enough of them. Carrie Klassen last year, early April last 
year, Carrie Klassen, whose own mother has been in care at 
Sunset care home, but she spends a great deal of time with her 
mother, about five to six hours a day, Carrie actually left her job 
to be able to help support her mother because of the things that 
she saw in long-term care. She felt she needed to be there for 
her mother. Carrie has said that she’s experienced woefully 



4714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

inadequate . . . She’s not experienced. She’s watched woefully 
inadequate care leading to “chaotic situations where one staff 
member is left to look after as many as 19 residents at a time.” I 
don’t know about you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you think 
about wanting, you become a special care aid or an LPN 
[licensed practical nurse] or a registered nurse or anybody in a 
caring profession. You want to do the very best that you can. 
And I can’t even imagine what that’s like to be so taxed that 
there is one of you and 19 people to whom you have to deliver 
the very best services possible, and you know . . . on a daily 
basis, you know you’re letting people down. 
 
Carrie Klassen pointed out that the core-level staffing at 100 per 
cent staff, not even when people were sick, but 100 per cent 
staffing level, they were still short-staffed. That was still not 
enough staff, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And Carrie had talked about 
occasions where there can be one care aid . . . Actually I’d like 
to read the quote. So Carrie Klassen, on NewsTalk 980 on April 
9th, 2013, had this to say. She said: 
 

It’s heartbreaking. There can be one care aid and she’s 
helping someone on the toilet and then there are bells 
going off and nobody’s there to get them and they’re like, 
where is everybody? We need help. 

 
That is not quality care for our seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
people who deserve better than they are getting. So that’s one of 
the reasons why the NDP chose to introduce this legislation, 
Bill No. 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act. 
 
And this will require, this will establish a residents-in-care bill 
of rights, as the name says, and requires the government to 
regulate province-wide minimum care standards, minimum care 
standards across the province so there are no disparities whether 
you’re in the Heartland Health Region or the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A legislated bill of rights is a step that the government’s own 
law reform commission, this government’s own law reform 
commission said would help address the problem in seniors’ 
care. The law reform commission’s final report, Civil Rights In 
Saskatchewan Long-term Care Facilities, said this: 
 

Responses to the Consultation Paper overwhelmingly 
supported a mandatory residents’ bill of rights for all 
long-term care homes. Only one response suggested that a 
bill of rights may not be necessary, as other avenues, such 
as regional or provincial policy guidelines, may give 
residents the same protection and respect. The Commission 
believes that the accessibility of a residents’ bill of rights is 
a benefit over the already existing avenues. 

 
And that can be found on page 9 of that report, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 
I’d like to point out something else the Law Reform 
Commission has to say about this. 
 

A resident’s bill of rights can be given legal recognition in 
several ways. The most straightforward is the approach 
adopted in Ontario and British Columbia: legislating a 

uniform bill of rights applicable to all long-term care 
facilities. Manitoba, however, requires each long-term care 
home to develop a bill of rights in consultation with its 
residents, and sets out a minimum standard. 

 
And that’s on page 10. It goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

The Commission prefers the Manitoba approach because it 
actively engages the facilities and the residents in 
designing protections for civil rights. Engaging these 
parties will assist in furthering the education function of 
the bill of rights. This approach also has the benefit of 
addressing several concerns expressed in response to the 
Consultation Paper. A minimum core content of rights 
prescribed by law ensures a baseline of equal civil rights in 
long-term care homes while, at the same time, allowing 
individual homes a role to play in enunciating these rights. 
For example, this would allow each facility to set its own 
visiting hours to conform to a legislated guideline stating 
that residents must be allowed to receive visitors at 
reasonable hours, instead of simply imposing exact hours 
upon facilities through legislation. 
 

And that’s on page 10, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So one of the very clear recommendations from this 
government’s own Law Reform Commission is this, 
“Legislation should set out a minimum standard for a residents’ 
bill of rights, with each long-term care home drafting its own 
document.” And that’s on page 10 as well of the Law Reform 
Commission’s report. 
 
Another one of the very clear recommendations from this 
government’s own Law Reform Commission, this 
government’s Law Reform Commission is this: “Each 
long-term care home should be required to prominently post its 
residents’ bill of rights.” Page 11. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, faced with repeated stories that 
continue to this day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, faced with this 
government’s refusal to listen to the concerns, to really hear 
what the problems are and act, faced with this government’s 
decision to actually scrap minimum care standards and faced 
with the recommendations of this government’s own Law 
Reform Commission, we decided to introduce our own bill — 
this bill, Bill No. 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act 
that guarantees respect, dignity, and safety for seniors in 
Saskatchewan homes. 
 
Going back to the beginning of my speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I know that that’s what I want for my mom and dad in 
their own home now. And if they ever have to move into 
long-term care — and I’m again knocking on wood; I like to 
think we’ll be able to keep them in their home for a very long 
time — but that is exactly what I would want for my parents 
and would want for your parents and for every other senior in 
this province, is respect, dignity, and safety for seniors in 
Saskatchewan care homes. 
 
Under this bill, Bill 606, each care home would be required to 
have a residents-in-care bill of rights created in consultation 
with residents and their families. And that piece is hugely 
important, Mr. Deputy Speaker: in consultation with residents 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4715 

and their families. This legislation specifies what that bill of 
rights must contain at a minimum, again, at a minimum. It must 
speak to care plans that: 
 

are specific to each resident [so that’s personalized care]; 
 
are based on each resident’s abilities, physical, social and 
emotional needs, as well as cultural and spiritual 
preferences. 

 
It must speak to care plans that: 
 

comply with the minimum quality of care standards 
established by the government [this provincial 
government] through regulations; and  
 
are based on input from the resident, their family or their 
supporter. 
 

So again, that piece is very important, having that input from 
the residents, their family, or if they don’t have family, their 
supporter. 
 
All of these components of this bill are crucial, but I think it’s 
worth highlighting the clause regarding minimum — again, 
minimum — quality of care standards. This bill would require 
the provincial government to establish regulations respecting a 
minimum quality of care standards.  
 
This bill of rights must also speak to: 
 

the right of residents to be treated with courtesy and 
respect and in a way that promotes their dignity and 
individuality; 
 
[It must specify] the right of residents to be sheltered, fed, 
dressed, groomed and cared for in a manner that is 
consistent with their needs; 
 
[It must specify] the right of residents or their supporters 
to have the right to give or refuse consent to treatment, 
including medication, in accordance with the law;  
 
[And it must specify] the right of residents, subject to 
safety requirements and the privacy rights of other 
residents, to be encouraged to exercise their freedom of 
choice whenever possible, including freedom to do the 
following: 

 
exercise their choice of religion, culture and language; 
 
communicate with, and have contact with and visits to 
and from friends, family and others in private if desired; 
 
choose their recreational activities; 
 
choose the personal items that each resident may keep in 
their rooms, when space permits; 
 
select the clothing to be worn each day. 

 
These are things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think those of us 
who don’t have someone in long-term or personal care or are 

living on our own for that . . . just living on our own, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we all take for granted, that when you 
wake up in the morning you get to choose your own clothes, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
And that may sound like a small item, but I know that I’ve 
spoken to people who’ve talked about having a loved one in 
long-term care. And one particular person I’m thinking about 
was telling me about his grandmother who really cared about 
her personal appearance and would be so heartbroken on days 
where he would come to visit her, and his grandmother would 
be so distressed that she was dressed in things that don’t match 
or that she didn’t feel were comfortable for her. 
 
So that being able to dress and choose what you want to wear in 
the morning is important, and it matters. Why would we expect 
that our seniors have any less than we have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? My six-year-old is allowed to choose her own clothes. 
Sometimes it’s interesting what she chooses, but why would I 
expect that my six-year-old has more rights than my 
81-year-old mother if she was in care to choose some of those 
things? 
 
When it comes to recreational activities, I know that we don’t 
all like the same thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I confess I’m 
not musically inclined. I’m not a singalong kind of gal. And I 
think if I were in long-term or personal care, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that that wouldn’t be my recreational activity of 
choice. I, despite having played the piano for eight years, that 
was not one of my gifts. I admit it. And I don’t think anybody 
on the opposite side of the House wants to hear me sing despite 
heckling that. 
 
But the opportunity to choose your own recreational activities 
. . . Some of the things that I’d like to do would be yoga 
perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or I like games. I think about the 
things that I like for myself and the opportunity to choose those 
things for myself as a woman who is 43 years old and living on 
my own versus someone who is 81 and living in a care home 
and not having that opportunity. 
 
These things matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why should we 
expect that those that we love who are living in long-term care 
and personal care homes have any less, have anything less of a 
quality of life than we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So this bill must specify, I’ll get back to Bill 606 more 
specifically here. This bill must specify: 
 

the right of residents to be afforded reasonable privacy 
when being treated and cared for;  
 
[It must specify] the right of residents to be provided with 
a safe and clean environment.  
 

Again, why would we want any less for our seniors than we 
would want for ourself? And it must specify: 
 

the right of residents or their supporters to transparency 
and accountability, including the right to all of the 
following: 
 

to have ready access to copies of all laws, rules and 



4716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2014 

policies affecting a service provided to the resident; 
 
to have ready access to a copy of the most recent routine 
inspection record of the facility; 
 
to be informed in advance of all charges, fees and other 
amounts that the resident must pay for accommodation 
and services received through the facility; 
 
to be informed of how to make a complaint to an 
authority outside the facility; 
 
to have his or her family or supporter informed of the 
matters described in this clause. 

 
These, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the basic elements that must be 
in each bill of rights. But again as this government’s own Law 
Reform Commission recommended, the actual drafting of each 
bill of rights is left up to the care facility in consultation with 
residents and their supporters. This is very important for a few 
reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is the preferable approach 
because it actively engages the facilities and the residents in 
designing protections for civil rights, and engaging these parties 
also assists in furthering the education function of the bill of 
rights. So the education piece is very important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Every senior living in a care home deserves at a minimum to be 
offered regular meals, regular baths, and a minimum amount of 
one-on-one care. They deserve to have a caregiver help them to 
and from the bathroom in a timely manner. They deserve to 
know that when they ring a call bell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
there is someone there who will answer it. There will be help 
coming when you need it. And that is not the case right now, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reality is, what this government is 
doing right now is not working. 
 
Passing this bill will be an important step to fixing our broken 
seniors’ care system. The Minister of Health has so far said he 
is satisfied that the program guidelines for special care homes 
has a section about residents’ rights and responsibilities, and 
that personal care home regulations already spell out residents’ 
rights as well. 
 
But that isn’t good enough. What we see and what we’ve heard 
from families, from residents themselves, and from health care 
providers, that is not working. The reality is, the stories, Lynne 
Seaborne, Carrie Klassen, a number of other stories . . . Even in 
this last week since we’ve tabled this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’ve been telephoned by special care aids, by licensed practical 
nurses, by families who continue to identify problems that 
they’re experiencing now, despite this government’s action 
fund that they’ve put in place in October. 
 
Things are not getting better. This is a real problem. And the 
problem is a lack of staffing. That is the root, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You can’t fix a problem if you don’t recognize what 
the root is. You can try to band-aid over it as much as you want, 
but that problem still exists underneath. And you will continue 
to have horrible stories, absolutely horrifying — not just 
horrible — horrifying stories that emerge. 
 
I’d like to tell you about some of what emerged out of the CEO 

tour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again it all ties to a lack of 
staffing. At Stensrud Lodge in Saskatoon, “They can hear 
people crying for help in the evening because of staffing 
shortages. That’s 1 to 25 care aid ratio on evenings.” 
 
We have, at Spruce Manor Special Care Home in Martensville: 
“Think that their care their loved one is getting is very good, 
however there isn’t enough because staff are too busy.” This 
one again, this jumps out for me. My mother had comments 
about this, again, when she heard about people waiting for the 
washroom, continent people, people who don’t need a continent 
product having to go to the bathroom in their pants. My mom 
was horrified by that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
At Parkridge Centre . . . Pardon me, at Oliver Lodge there: “My 
husband was taught when he was a child not to pee his pants, 
and now they are telling him to just go in his pants. He tries to 
go to the bathroom by himself. They tell him he is at risk of 
falling.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on and on. If you’ve taken 
a look at the CEO report, it all boils down to a lack of staff. 
 
We have actually Maura Davies, the CEO of the largest health 
region in Saskatchewan, identifying . . . After the urgent action 
fund was released, Maura Davies, the CEO of the largest health 
region in Saskatchewan had this to say in October of 2013: “It 
won’t ultimately address the larger issue of adequate staffing 
and the condition of some of our facilities.” So the reality is, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a staffing issue. 
 
There’s more from the CEO tour that emerged. Saskatoon 
Extendicare, “Don’t always get help when they need it and have 
to wait to get up.” “Sometimes they need to get up at 6:30 a.m. 
even though breakfast isn’t until 8 a.m.” I don’t know about 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when I wake up, I’m a breakfast 
person. How do you start your day? You need some fuel in the 
body. You get going. Can you imagine being woken up . . . So 
maybe you’re not even ready to get up in the first place, but 
having to wait to be fed a meal because there’s no staff to be 
able to help you . . . We’ve heard ratios on night shifts of 1 to 
19, 1 to 30. How can one person be expected to tend to the 
needs of 30 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker? How is that 
acceptable? 
 
[12:30] 
 
This is a staffing issue. This is a staffing issue, and this 
government refuses to accept that. And by putting in basic 
minimum care standards, we can ensure that we are at least 
staffing our facilities properly. The Law Reform Commission 
said Saskatchewan would benefit from a legislated residents’ 
bill of rights. It says, “A legislated bill of rights has official 
status that emphasizes the importance of the document and 
encourages compliance.” 
 
The current situation for seniors in care is far from adequate. 
The government’s approach is not working, and its guidelines 
are either not good enough or they’re not being followed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. A law is much more significant than a 
regulation or a guideline. We have a law, regulation, guideline. 
Law sends a much stronger message. And we do know how 
quickly this government waters down regulations and 
guidelines, so we want the rights of residents in care to be 
codified in law. 



March 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4717 

Our proposed legislation goes further than the government’s 
current guidelines. For example our proposed legislation 
requires care plans to comply with minimum quality of care 
standards which the government would have to set out in 
regulations, not in guidelines, not in guidelines. And it requires 
that the bill of rights be posted in prominent locations and easily 
acceptable to residents and staff. It is more specific in the 
enumeration of rights, including the right of seniors to choose 
their recreational activities and to select their clothing to be 
worn every day, whereas the government’s guidelines are very 
broad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It also spells out specific rights of 
residents or their supporters to transparency and accountability, 
including how to make a complaint to an authority outside the 
facility. 
 
So I do hope this government will agree to work with us to pass 
this bill. I know that people in Saskatchewan . . . I’ve had very 
positive feedback this last week, and this is the right thing to do 
to ensure that we have a base level of care for all our seniors in 
long-term and personal care homes across Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 606, The 
Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved that Bill No. 606, The Residents-in-care 
Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to just say a couple of words in support of my colleague, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and Bill No. 606, The 
Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act. Just to say off the top, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that this is an issue that certainly in my family 
we’ve been following very closely and with a great amount of 
interest. And I know that the experience we have in the McCall 
household is not unlike that which has shot through the 
province in terms of the way that people are having these 
concerns come forward to make sure that their loved ones are 
getting the care that they need in the way that they need it. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, of a letter that was to the editor in the 
Leader-Post this week from a constituent of mine, Mr. Don 
Gunderson. And the point that he made very succinctly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that individualized care plans need not 
conflict with minimum care standards. They’re not mutually 
exclusive. And you know, he’s a pretty astute guy, but I don’t 
think you have to be as astute as Don Gunderson is, and as I 
know him to be in terms of his interest in public affairs and in 
terms of how he comes to this realization in terms of the 
experience his family has had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to know 
that minimum standards need not conflict or need not impede 
individualized care plans. 
 
And I guess that’s where we arrive with Bill No. 606 in terms 
of trying to bring into law that minimum standard of care, 
something that, I might add, Mr. Speaker, was recommended to 
this government by their very own Law Reform Commission 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I very much support this bill. I hope that the 

government can see past their own sort of narrow way of 
pursuing their own agenda to possibly see things that they can 
support in this legislation for the betterment of those residents 
in care and the difference that I think it could make to their lives 
and to the well-being of themselves and to their families. With 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are other matters 
that require attention from members in the House and, with that 
I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 606. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:36.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4693 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4693 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4693 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4693 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4693 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sochi 2014 Paralympic Winter Games 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4694 
 Z99 Cares Radiothon 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4694 
 Brain Awareness Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4964 
 Rural Women’s Month 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4694 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Convention 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4695 
 King of Kielbasa 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4695 
 Cigar Lake Mine in Production 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4695 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4696 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4696 
 Malfunction in Parks Reservation System 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4697 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4697 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 
 Transfer of Pasture Land 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 
 Support for Credit Unions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 
 Reporting of Provincial Finances 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Grain Transportation 
  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4700, 4710 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4703, 4710 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4704 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4706, 4710 
  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4707, 4710 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4709, 4710 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4710 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4711 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4711 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4712 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


