
























































Hansard: March 10, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 10, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4601 
 March 10, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Well I thought I was going to get time to find 
my list of people. Okay, I would like to introduce to the 
Assembly guests that we have in the gallery for Commonwealth 
Day. 
 
We have with us Ms. Mavis Ashbourne Palmer from Jamaica; 
Mrs. Renu Kapoor from India; Ms. Muna Deciman from Sierra 
Leone; Mr. Mike Luti from Uganda; Dr. Michael Jackson, 
president of the Royal Commonwealth Society; Mr. Derek 
Nicholls and Mr. Keith Inches, both from the Commonwealth 
Society. I’d ask all members to welcome them to their 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s a pleasure to join in the introduction of the 
special guests that are here today in your gallery, particularly 
one that was left out there. I see Ms. Rani Bilku that’s up there 
today as well. I’d like to say hello to Rani and to each of these 
guests here today, a good friend as well in Ms. Muna Deciman 
that’s here today. 
 
And I also want to welcome a couple familiar faces up in the 
east gallery here today; those would be my mom and dad. Nice 
to have you here today. That’s Craik and Faye Wotherspoon. I 
ask all members of this Assembly to, well, welcome all of our 
guests to their Assembly here today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I rise 
today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen; and that as 
a result of this decision to privatize health care laundry, six 
non-profit, public health care laundry facilities will be closed 
within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, Moose 
Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon; and that the 
privatization of health care laundry will mean the loss of over 
300 good-paying jobs, devastating local economies and 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse a misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in 
the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse our vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 
from Raymore, Wolseley, Montmartre, Sintaluta, Kelliher, 
Southey, Semans, and Glenavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents in 
support of safety and rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic from 
Dewdney Avenue. Residents are upset by the unacceptable 
delay by that government and in addressing the unsafe 
circumstance that was created by that government. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 
that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north 
central Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has been 
closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or staff. 
 
They point out that any school needs a gym as a place for the 
school and the community to gather together to engage in 
cultural and educational activities and to promote physical 
activity, which is good for the mind, body, and spirits of the 
students. They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart has 



4602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 
literacy leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 
successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 
out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 
north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 
whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 
enrolment has increased by 100 students-plus over the last four 
years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 
improving. And as a matter of basic fairness and common 
sense, they point out that Sacred Heart Community School 
needs a gym. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon 
and Regina. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Brain Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
advise members of the Legislative Assembly that this week is 
Brain Awareness Week in Canada. This week is a worldwide 
public awareness effort to promote the progress, future, and 
benefits of brain research. Locally, the Saskatchewan 
Neuroscience Network, the universities of Regina and 
Saskatchewan, the acquired brain injury partnership project, and 
other agencies are hosting public education events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one in three Canadians will be affected by a 
brain-related disease, disorder, or injury at some point in their 
lives. The consequences of a brain injury can be physically, 
emotionally, and socially devastating. Our government is 
committed to building a vibrant neuroscience research sector so 
that we have the knowledge we need to help people living with 
brain injuries. The Ministry of Health granted nearly $5.6 
million to the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation in 
2013-14 to support health research, including neuroscience 
research. 
 
In addition SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
provided over $5.2 million to the acquired brain injury 
partnership project which is managed by the Ministry of Health. 
This project provides coordinated services for people with 
acquired brain injuries and their families. 
 
I’d like to encourage Saskatchewan people to participate in 
Brain Awareness Week, Mr. Speaker, to learn about 
neuroscience discoveries and the importance of keeping the 
brain safe and healthy. We appreciate the work of those who 
promote brain awareness and support neuroscience research. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Reginan Wins Paragon Award of Distinction 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to recognize 
and congratulate Regina businessman and champion of 
Regina’s downtown, Mr. Harold Hague. The Regina District 
Chamber of Commerce recently announced that Mr. Hague will 
receive the Paragon Award of Distinction at their upcoming 
ceremonies. 
 
Mr. Hague, 93, is only the fourth person to get the award. 
Harold Hague was among the Canadian Forces in the landing at 
Normandy on D-Day and has been a community leader, lo these 
70 years on. 
 
Harold Hague has worked faithfully in preserving our 
community’s military history through the Royal Canadian 
Legion, branch no. 001, and Regina’s Remembrance Day 
services to name a couple of instances of that work. 
 
Mr. Hague was the long-time manager of Loggie’s Shoes, and 
regrettably, after 106 years in business, the store will be soon 
closing its doors for good. 
 
Harold’s son, Kelly Hague, has carried the family venture 
forward and, as you might expect, Kelly has given a 
tremendous amount of time and effort to not just the business 
but to the broader community as well. But good things do 
sometimes come to an end, Mr. Speaker, and we are thankful 
for the overall contributions of the Hagues and the remarkable 
downtown independent business, Loggies Shoes. 
 
There is no question that Harold Hague has made his mark in 
our community. His contributions to the downtown business 
association initially came through his membership in the Junior 
Chamber of Commerce. He was also instrumental in founding 
Regina’s Market Square, forerunner of today’s Regina 
Downtown Business Improvement District. 
 
Harold Hague’s history and long-time service to Regina’s 
business community is well deserving of this honour of the 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce’s Paragon Award of 
Distinction. Please join me in congratulating Mr. Harold Hague. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to inform members today that we are celebrating 
another Habitat for Humanity success story. Today, keys were 
presented to another Habitat for Humanity family, Dawn 
Billingsley and her two sons Kieran and Connor, to help them 
achieve their dream of security, stability, and a more promising 
future through housing. 
 
We’re pleased that Habitat, News Talk 980 CJME, 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, Mosaic Potash 
Corporation, the city of Regina, and countless volunteers joined 
hands to help build the Penny Project house on Wascana Street. 
We are proud to have contributed $50,000 to help build this 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4603 

home in Regina and, most importantly, help another family 
build their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this home is especially unique because it’s the 
first Habitat for Humanity home constructed in partnership with 
NewsTalk 980 CJME. NewsTalk worked with Habitat hosting a 
radiothon and collecting millions of pennies, raising a total of 
$100,000 to build the home. 
 
Like Habitat and its partners, we are also working hard to meet 
Saskatchewan’s housing needs. Our government has committed 
a total of $7.1 million to Habitat for Humanity across the 
province since March of 2009, and I’m sure that we all agree 
it’s money well invested. This is what the Saskatchewan plan 
for growth is all about: keep our province growing; improve our 
quality of life; and continue to make Saskatchewan the best 
place to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Heritage Language Day 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on the weekend I learned how to 
say thank you in 14 different languages, but don’t ask me to do 
it by heart. I haven’t been able to memorize them all. 
 
But I do want to say thank you to dedicated teachers and 
students from the Saskatoon multilingual schools who put 
together a wonderful choral concert on Saturday afternoon. 
Fourteen children’s choirs from 14 of Saskatoon’s multilingual 
schools performed as part of their annual Heritage Language 
Day celebration sponsored by the Saskatchewan Organization 
for Heritage Languages and the Saskatchewan Intercultural 
Association.  
 
The children were very proud to sing in the language of their 
families, and many were dressed in traditional costume as well. 
It was a very colourful and musical expression of culture and 
language. We heard a traditional Islamic song that was over 
1,400 years old, a song that the Ansar sang to the prophet 
Muhammad upon his arrival at Yathrib. We also heard a 
Sinhalese song about a rabbit that gets in trouble for not 
listening to adults’ advice. 
 
International Mother Language Day is officially February 21st. 
The date represents the day in 1952 when students, 
demonstrating for recognition of their language, Bangla, as one 
of the two national languages of the then Pakistan, were shot 
and killed by police in Dhaka, the capital of what is now 
Bangladesh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, languages are the most powerful instruments of 
preserving and developing our tangible and intangible heritage. 
I call on members to applaud the efforts of all who work 
towards awareness, tolerance, and diversity by promoting their 
mother language. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

200th Anniversary of Celebrated Ukrainian’s Birth 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, March 9th marked the 

200th anniversary of the birth of Taras Shevchenko, painter, 
poet, and father of the modern Ukrainian language. This date 
has always been an important one for Ukrainians in celebrating 
Shevchenko’s contributions to the Ukrainian nation and to the 
richness of global human achievement. 
 
In our province and around the world, the Ukrainian community 
is marking this very special anniversary. Born a slave into 
serfdom, Shevchenko overcame tremendous challenges of being 
an orphan in a backwards political system. He not only became 
literate but became one of the most celebrated international 
artists of his day. He faced repeated arrest for his political 
beliefs promoting equality, freedom, and the love of his native 
Ukraine. As a result of his persecution, he lived only 47 years. 
However his artistic works and political ideals burn ever 
brighter in the 21st century. 
 
The testament to Shevchenko’s influence is even more real, 
given recent events in Ukraine. Those demonstrating for 
freedom, prosperity, and the rule of law regularly invoke his 
ideals and face attacks for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the first killed on the Maidan, Serhiy 
Negoyan, quoted Shevchenko on film shortly before his death. 
To encourage the Ukrainian people, let us join with Mr. 
Negoyan by quoting Shevchenko: “Truth is behind you. 
Strength is behind you, and liberty sacred.” 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Spring Sparkle and Shine Salute 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I 
along with the member from Moose Jaw North had the pleasure 
of attending the first annual Business Women of Moose Jaw’s 
Spring Sparkle and Shine Salute to southern Saskatchewan 
PRISM [perseverance, role model, influential, successful, 
mentor] Awards. The Business Women of Moose Jaw work to 
provide support and networking opportunities to help 
entrepreneurial women succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event was a complete success, selling a total of 
260 tickets this year. The PRISM awards stand for 
perseverance, role model, influential, successful, and mentor. 
On Saturday, six awards were given out to notable 
Saskatchewan women. The award categories were Community 
Leadership and Enhancement; Leadership and Management; 
Science, Technology and Environment; Sports, Culture and 
Recreation; Lifetime Achievement; and Young Woman of 
Promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, International Women’s Day was this 
past weekend, and I was very proud to have the Sparkle and 
Shine event in my city. The proceeds from this event, which 
also included a live and silent auction with food and 
entertainment by Stadacona Soul, went to the Moose Jaw 
Transition House which works hard to end violence against 
women. 



4604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating the Business Women of Moose Jaw on this 
successful event and support them in their cause to recognize 
the outstanding women of southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

National Volleyball Championship 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this weekend was 
the National Volleyball Championship of the Canadian 
Collegiate Athletic Association were held in Moose Jaw. The 
event featured eight top college teams from British Columbia to 
Quebec. 
 
Briercrest College and Seminary in Caronport hosted the 
tournament with the competition taking place in Moose Jaw at 
the YaraCentre. Mr. Speaker, YaraCentre has proven to be a 
valuable and versatile addition to our community, the National 
Volleyball Championships being the largest event to be held in 
the facility thus far. 
 
The Briercrest College Clippers were the hometown favourites, 
winning their quarter final match on Thursday evening against 
the Douglas College Royals of New Westminster. They won the 
next game against the Mohawk College Mountaineers from 
Hamilton, sending them into the championship final against 
Red Deer College. Mr. Speaker, the match was set. Over 1,600 
fans filled the stands with cheers and applause, but in the end, 
the Red Deer College was on their game and defeated Briercrest 
Clippers in three sets. 
 
It was a great competition, and I extend congratulations to the 
Briercrest College and Seminary for the planning and 
organizing of this national event and the gracious hospitality for 
the teams and visitors alike. And congratulations to Coach 
Nigel Mullan, the players, families, and fans of the Briercrest 
College Clippers for a successful season and a tremendous 
showing in the National Volleyball Championships. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Fire Prevention on First Nations 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Four Saskatchewan 
children have died in house fires on First Nations reserves in 
just the last six months: Iesha Rabbitskin, Solomon Ballantyne, 
Josiah Ballantyne, and Denasia Sewap. It’s heartbreaking, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m sure all of our thoughts go out to these 
families experiencing such a huge loss. 
 
Fire damage is twice as bad on First Nations compared to 
off-reserve communities, and that’s shocking enough, but 
what’s absolutely outrageous is that First Nations are 10 times 
more likely to die in a fire. 
 
I wrote to the Prime Minister last week because it’s time for the 
federal government to stop neglecting its responsibility to 
ensure proper fire prevention measures are in place, and that 

they also have the capability to properly fight fires and save 
lives. My question is for the Premier: if he hasn’t raised this 
issue already with the Prime Minister, will he agree to send a 
letter to the Prime Minister today calling for action from the 
federal government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, the recent tragedy that the member refers to, the loss 
of life, is indeed a tragedy. Our sympathy goes out to the family 
and the community there. Those sorts of tragedies should never 
occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statistics that the member also cited are also 
troubling. As he’s aware from his question, that the on-reserve 
service provision is the responsibility and jurisdiction of the 
federal government, but certainly our government’s extremely 
troubled by this as well. Our emergency services people have 
also responded. They’re assisting the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] in the investigation on the most recent one, 
Mr. Speaker. We look forward to the results of that 
investigation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be having a meeting with the minister 
responsible in the next couple of weeks, I believe. That’s one of 
the items on the agenda we’ll be attempting to address. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Environmental Protection 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The seriousness of 
the situation, Mr. Speaker, calls on the Premier to apply 
pressure to the Prime Minister on this, and we’ll be watching 
this in the coming days and weeks, hoping that that stronger 
pressure does come forward from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question about the Premier’s recent 
trip to the States. Last week the Premier answered a question 
about pricing carbon. He then issued a lengthy retraction of his 
comments, saying he was only speaking hypothetically in 
response to a hypothetical question. But it’s confusing, Mr. 
Speaker, because his own government announced back in 2009 
that it would bring in carbon compliance payments. They said 
they would price carbon for large emitters and the money would 
go into the Saskatchewan Technology Fund to finance 
investments in low-emitting technologies. The government said 
that program would be in place by 2011. It’s still not in place, 
but last spring the Environment minister said that the carbon 
pricing plan is still on its way. But the Premier’s quick 
retraction of his comments about carbon pricing have cast doubt 
on that. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. And this is a 
real question, not one of the tricky, hypothetical questions, a 
real question: is he backing away from his 2009 plan to bring in 
carbon compliance payments? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4605 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
hypothetical question referenced by the Leader of the 
Opposition was around the oil and gas regs. They’ve yet to be 
introduced for the country. The question went something like, if 
the United States were to bring in a nation-wide carbon tax — 
something that’s very unlikely to happen — and if Canada were 
to harmonize it, what would it look like. That was the nature of 
the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two things, these two issues, one a 
nation-wide carbon tax and the levy that we’ve already 
committed to as a result of our greenhouse gas legislation, are 
indeed two different things, Mr. Speaker. And I talked to the 
Minister of the Environment this morning and, Mr. Speaker, as 
soon as the oil and gas regs are available to us, in other words 
as soon as they’ve been passed by the federal government, we’ll 
be able to react then in kind by developing the levy system 
we’ve referenced here, the Technology Fund. This is 
significantly different than a carbon tax that all of the country 
would have to face — it would I think knee-cap the economy 
— that the members’ cousins in Ottawa have been promoting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, their commitment, this 
government’s commitment to the Technology Fund, Mr. 
Speaker, is questionable when given the huge length of time it 
has taken from originally introducing the concept to now 
continuing with the stalling. 
 
Whenever the Premier goes to the US [United States], he talks 
about the environment but it causes confusion for one reason or 
another, but especially because he always talks about giving our 
trading partners environmental elbow room. But his walk 
doesn’t match his talk. 
 
So let’s talk about this government’s record on the 
environment: slow walking the Technology Fund and carbon 
compliance payments; watering down SaskPower’s 
conservation target; cutting environmental protection, 
environmental assessment, and climate change programs; 
saying it’s a fallacy that we can increase our reliance on 
renewable power; slashing our province’s emissions targets; 
and actually presiding over a significant increase in emissions. 
Mr. Speaker, that is not an environmental record to be proud of. 
 
So my question for the Premier: how exactly does that record 
amount to providing our trading partners with environmental 
elbow room? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — There is so much that is wrong with the 
preamble and the question, Mr. Speaker. Let’s start at the 
beginning. The Leader of the Opposition is advocating, I guess, 
he’s urging our government to implement the levy system 
before we have the oil and gas regs from the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s another indication that members 
opposite are not quite ready for prime time, Mr. Speaker. How 
in the world would you develop the levy for high emitters in the 
province in the most responsible way possible if you only have 
the coal regulations from our federal government and not the oil 
and gas regulations, Mr. Speaker? That is of fundamental 

importance. 
 
And again I would point to the member’s question with respect 
to our record on the issue of greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no other jurisdiction that we’re aware of in the world, 
either a national jurisdiction or a sub-national jurisdiction, that 
has invested more per capita in the issue of CO2 mitigation and 
the sustainable production of energy than this government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, with the only world-class clean 
coal project, $1.35 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members opposite are wondering, why aren’t there any more 
programs? Why don’t we have any of those vehicles that were 
available to government to monitor the air quality without 
anyone to operate them? I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. 
Because this side of the House believes in action; that side 
believes in words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta has had a carbon 
compliance program in place for years. And if the Premier may 
not like my assessment of the situation, he should speak with 
the member from Martensville who promised that the carbon 
compliance program would be in place by 2011. So these are 
the dates set by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has a bit of a pattern here. He goes 
down to the US. He goes down, talks about the environment, 
then comes home and introduces a budget that slashes 
everything with the words green or climate change. So on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re hoping that this 
government, that this Premier, won’t repeat that pattern in the 
upcoming budget. 
 
We want him to stop cutting environmental programs, We want 
him to institute a serious conservation and renewables mandate 
for SaskPower. We want him to actually implement the 
Technology Fund. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is resource 
producing and, Mr. Speaker, we’re a trade-dependent province 
so it’s vital that we’re smart and diligent when it comes to 
environmental regulation and environmental protection. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he promise today to break his 
pattern of cutting environmental programs in the budget and can 
we expect real action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, does the Leader of the 
Opposition believe that $1.35 billion invested in the world’s 
largest clean coal project at Boundary dam 3 represents, 
constitutes action on the issue that he’s raising? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

School Construction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an article in 
today’s Journal of Commerce online that’s entitled “Concerns 
raised about P3 approach for Saskatchewan schools.” The 
article quotes the executive director of Merit Contractors 
Association as saying, “We would caution them against using 



4606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

bundling as a standard practice because of the long-range 
effects it could have on the province’s construction industry.” 
 
Merit Contractors says the bundling approach will have a very 
negative effect on our province’s construction industry, 
something we’ve heard from contractors across our province — 
something, though, that that government continues to ignore as 
they stubbornly plow ahead. So my question to the Education 
minister: is he listening to these concerns and does he share 
these concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s review 
some of the facts across Canada, Mr. Speaker. There are 206 P3 
[public-private partnership] projects under way across Canada. 
One hundred and ten of them have been operationalized, Mr. 
Speaker; 46 of them are under construction. Some of those are 
now in Saskatchewan, in the city of Saskatoon, also in the city 
of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to get a grasp from the opposition. 
Are they against P3s? Because we’ve got one going in Swift 
Current on a long-term care facility. They haven’t asked a 
question on that. Are they against P3s or is it simply the 
bundling of schools that’s got them in a knot, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I was expecting these questions a little bit earlier because that 
member opposite is fresh off the CUPE [Canadian Union of 
Public Employees] convention last week, so he’s got his 
speaking points, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad he waited till this week. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
if that minister, the Minister of Highways — question was to 
the Minister of Education — knows who Merit Contractors are, 
but certainly that’s not CUPE, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Merit Contractors also has this to say about the misguided P3 
plan from that government: 
 

There are no local Saskatchewan-based contractors that 
have the capacity to do a project of this size, and these are 
the contractors who have built many of the province’s 
schools to date. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that government’s plan will mean that 
Saskatchewan contractors will be shut out while large, 
out-of-province companies will benefit. It just doesn’t make 
sense to Saskatchewan people. 
 
We called for an economic analysis to be conducted in our P3 
accountability legislation to understand the full cost of shutting 
out the Saskatchewan construction industry, but of course that 
government voted against that, rejected that legislation. 
 
To the Education minister: why won’t this government listen to 
the concerns of Saskatchewan businesses that don’t want to be 
shut out of the building of our province’s schools? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, again as with the 
previous questions with the Leader of the Opposition, many 
facts have to be corrected. Saskatchewan companies are not 
going to be shut out of constructing these schools. Absolutely 
not, Mr. Speaker. In fact what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is in 
for example the long-term care facility that’s going forward in 
Swift Current, many of the . . . almost all of the work that is 
being done on that facility will be done with companies from 
Saskatchewan. We expect that to be the case also with schools, 
Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of the work will be done 
with companies from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it is awfully interesting and really quite refreshing over the 
last seven or eight years, six or seven years, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government has been in power, that companies from 
outside the province are looking at Saskatchewan as a growing 
province and want a piece of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pretty remarkable from the Highways 
guy over there to be touting the benefits of shutting out 
Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Everybody agrees that we need new schools. The problem is, is 
it’s that government’s plan that’s the problem. We’ve heard 
concerns from parents, teachers, school boards, auditors, the 
taxpayers federation about the implications of that 
government’s private P3 rent-a-school scheme. And we’ve 
heard concerns from the Saskatchewan construction industry, 
Merit Contractors, about the negative implications of a bundling 
process that will shut out local builders here in Saskatchewan, 
who have done a great job of building our schools for decades. 
 
To the minister: what will it take for the government to stop 
plowing ahead with its plan that will ship economic benefits far 
outside our province and result in the province renting costly 
private schools for decades to come? 
 
The Speaker: — Well I recognize it’s Monday. And obviously 
the members had a good weekend; they’re full of vim and 
vigour. But I would appreciate it if either side of the House 
could actually hear the questions and the responses. I recognize 
the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you for that recognition. I’m 
not the Highways guy, I guess, Mr. Speaker, to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at Alberta’s experience with 
bundling . . . So it isn’t the fact, I think we’re pretty clear now, 
the opposition is not against P3s. They’re simply against 
bundling. I think we’ve got that down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, if it is a bundling issue that they’re upset 
about, let’s look at the one jurisdiction that has bundled schools, 
Mr. Speaker — Alberta. Now perhaps they would not be in 
favour of the way Alberta has done it, even though in their first 
bundle they saved $97 million compared to traditional build. In 
their second phase they saved $105 million compared to 
traditional build, and in their third phase, $43 million, Mr. 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4607 

Speaker. They’re against that, Mr. Speaker. They’d like to see 
the schools built traditionally, the way they did. The only 
difference was, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government 
they closed a school a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

University Costs and Support 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan 
students already pay the second-highest tuition in the entire 
country, according to Statistics Canada. Of course the Premier 
disputed that in the fall, telling reporters that Statistics Canada 
was wrong. But you can’t argue with the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we know that tuition is going to go up yet again. 
Students at the University of Saskatchewan learned this 
morning that life is going to get even more expensive for them 
because tuition will jump on average another 4.5 per cent. That 
means that students will be paying hundreds of dollars more 
every single year just for their tuition. 
 
To the minister: when he talked about a tuition management 
system, is that what he meant, that students would be forced to 
pay big tuition increases every year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, whenever we speak about students, we think about 
affordability and accessibility. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made 
some real inroads there. Mr. Speaker, that includes $4.6 billion 
invested in post-secondary education since we’ve had the 
privilege of forming government. Mr. Speaker, specifically for 
the University of Saskatchewan, a foundation for that represents 
core increases on operating funding. What we’ve seen is an 
increase of 59 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s $333 million this 
year. That’s helping to ensure that we’re working with the 
university to help ensure affordability and accessibility. 
 
We also do some other things, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put in place 
the graduate retention program which, Mr. Speaker, this year 
has 48,000 graduates participating in and benefiting from, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve also put in place the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship which this year, Mr. Speaker, is seeing 10,000 
students benefiting in their transition between high school and 
post-secondary education. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also put in 
place the Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity 
Scholarship, millions of dollars to support and ensure that 
students have increased affordability and accessibility to 
post-secondary education. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget that back in 2007 
the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs, at the time the Sask 
Party’s Finance critic, said that tuition should be reduced. He 
said, “National average at the very least, that should be our 
goal.” But the average tuition for an undergrad Arts and Science 
student at the University of Saskatchewan has gone up by about 
27 per cent under this government. That’s a 27 per cent increase 
in just the last five years, despite the fact that this government 

has had record revenues. And what it means for students is 
about $1,200 a year more for arts and sciences and $1,500 more 
for business every single year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what happened to this 
government’s promise to reduce tuition costs to Saskatchewan 
students so they won’t have to be paying more than the national 
average? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Saskatchewan is the best funded medical doctoral university in 
the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as track records, I’d like to highlight that 
under the NDP [New Democratic Party] reign, Mr. Speaker, the 
University of Saskatchewan increased by 175 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, 175 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, increasingly there are some stories that we 
can turn to, in fact not from the too distant past, Mr. Speaker, in 
fact in 2000, Mr. Speaker. And I quote from The StarPhoenix 
from November 14th, 2000, Mr. Speaker, and the quote is this: 
 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba universities, along with the 
University of Sherbrooke, Quebec, have trailed other 
major universities because of low provincial funding. In 
fact Maclean’s put the University of Saskatchewan at 15 
out of 15, the lowest possible. Why? Because of provincial 
funding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, much has changed — the best funded medical 
doctoral university in the country, Mr. Speaker. We know 
there’s more work to do, but we’re working hard on behalf of 
students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Interesting to know, Mr. Speaker, he’s not 
talking about the whole story with the College of Medicine. 
 
We know that this government has spent well over $54,000 on a 
spin and PR [public relations] campaign about its record in 
post-secondary education. But those ads don’t match the reality 
for students or their families. Under this government, students 
are paying more and getting less. This government has created a 
massive funding crunch at our universities which continue to 
force layoffs of staff, cancellation of programs and services, and 
sell-offs of nearly everything that’s not nailed down, including 
the research sheep at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister: why should students continually be paying 
more and getting less under this government’s watch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Saskatchewan has a track record when it comes to agricultural 
research that is second to none, Mr. Speaker. And so belittling 
that, Mr. Speaker, misses some key points, including, Mr. 



4608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

Speaker, 1,100 new beds in new residences, Mr. Speaker, the 
first time since the mid-1970s that any new beds were built, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact our track record for student residences and the 
support that goes with them is up by 4,000 per cent across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we had the opportunity to form government, 
the Western College of Veterinary Medicine was tarped, Mr. 
Speaker, because the members opposite walked away from it. 
Mr. Speaker, we put in new operating funds to InterVac 
[international vaccine centre], VIDO [Vaccine and Infectious 
Disease Organization]. We made sure that there were increased 
funds for the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. Mr. Speaker, 
regarding the College of Medicine, increased funding has gone 
up by 93 per cent because the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
was more interested in moving around a few rocks during a 
photo op, Mr. Speaker, than making sure that we’re moving 
forward in building the buildings. They’re built today, and 
we’re making sure the College of Medicine is moving . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that farmers are doing 
their best to try and market their bumper crop, but they need 
this government’s help to stand up against the powerful railway 
monopoly. At a meeting yesterday with producers, when asked 
if they had contracts that hadn’t been met, at least two-thirds of 
them raised their hands. And that’s why producers are saying 
Gerry Ritz remains the do-nothing Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the feds’ Friday announcement is far too little and 
far too late. The so-called response won’t force the railway 
companies to do anything that they aren’t already planning to 
do this spring. And this is made worse, Mr. Speaker, by the pats 
on the back this government continues to give their federal 
cousins for essentially calling for the sun to rise in the morning. 
Why is this government defending a federal action that farmers 
themselves call too little, too late and is effectively 
meaningless? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This order in 
council that will be followed by emergency federal legislation 
that will be tabled on March 24th not only deals with the 
backlog of grain in this particular crop year, Mr. Speaker, but 
more importantly it will assure that this situation cannot happen 
again. Instead of putting out brush fires like the NDP always 
did when they were in government, and they encourage us to 
do, we have been involved in supporting the federal 
government with this long-term solution to the ever-recurring 
issues of poor and slow grain transportation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This issue has cropped up a dozen times in my farming career 
alone, and it’ll continue until . . . Well it’ll be stopped by this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. This will put service level agreements 
in place that will mean that this will not occur again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier 
have admitted that the province wanted to see the government 
order more cars on the rail than they did in that order. In fact 
they said themselves the province needs to see 13,000 cars and 
not the 11,000 status quo mandated by the federal OC [order in 
council]. In reality we need a minimum of 14,000 cars for 
several months to get this mess cleaned up and get next year’s 
crop moving too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spring is just around the corner and some farmers 
are now worried about wet and rotting grain. And the spring 
melt and the road bans are going to cause havoc at the precise 
moment the rail companies finally call on farmers to bring their 
grain to the elevator. Clearly the federal government, supported 
by the Sask Party, are not doing enough to actually help 
producers with the crisis. Why on earth would this government 
not push for right penalties and right solutions that farmers 
need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After working 
on this file since last May, we were very instrumental in 
bringing this matter to its conclusion that the federal 
government has announced now. And certainly we will have 
input into the legislation that’s going to be introduced on March 
24th, I believe, and we’ve been assured that by the federal 
government. And one of the things we’re going to be asking for 
is to raise the minimum number of car deliveries to 13,000 a 
week, in the legislation. 
 
This OC is a placeholder until that legislation is in place, and 
the number of 11,000 was chosen for whatever reason, but 
11,000 is more than we’ve been able to accomplish in 
December, January, February, and the first 10 days of March. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s threat to 
enforce the existing $100,000-a-day penalty could be 
considered chump change from the personal salary of CP’s 
[Canadian Pacific] CEO [chief executive officer], Hunter 
Harrison. It’s laughable. What is also ridiculous is this minister 
told a radio program this morning that “This was basically what 
we’ve been asking for.” Really? 
 
The government is imposing a penalty on the railways that 
would go into government coffers and not to producers. It’s not 
the government, Mr. Speaker, that’s hurting; it’s our farmers. 
Farmers are losing billions of dollars from their bumper crops 
as this catastrophe continues to unfold. Since the minister said 
he’s being consulted about this promised emergency legislation 
and what it will look like, will he commit today to push for 
penalties from the railways to go directly to the farmers and not 
to the government coffers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — We will be pushing for the penalties to 
be directed into the industry, whether it be into research or in 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4609 

some other fashion. But you know, $100,000 a day, chump 
change, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. 
 
I did a little math. Since the last time the railways have 
achieved 11,000 cars a day, they would have each been fined 
well over $10 million, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that’s chump 
change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the Leader of the Opposition 
hasn’t asked one single question on this subject, the most 
important, I would say, economic issue in the province at this 
time. I wonder why the member doesn’t do an impersonation of 
him. 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — I would ask all members to please rise for a 
message from Her Majesty the Queen, Elizabeth II, Queen of 
Canada and head of the Commonwealth: 
 

In July this year the opening of the 20th Commonwealth 
Games will be marked by the arrival in Glasgow of the 
baton that started its journey from Buckingham Palace five 
months ago. 
 
Many of us are following closely the news of the baton 
relay as it passes through the 70 countries and territories 
whose teams will gather for the games. The images bring 
vividly to life what we mean by the Commonwealth 
family. It is wonderful to see the warmth, shared 
endeavour, and goodwill as the baton is passed through the 
hands of many thousands of people. 
 
Affinities of history and inheritance from the past are 
strong. Yet we are bound together by a sense that the 
Commonwealth is a powerful influence of good for the 
future. People of all ages from different cultures are 
weaving an ever-growing network of links which connect 
us in our diversity and our common purpose. It is this 
unity that is expressed in this year’s theme, Team 
Commonwealth. 
 
While national teams will be concentrating on the 
competition in August, Team Commonwealth will have a 
longer focus, working together to achieve a more enduring 
success. 
 
Experiences in this life differ widely throughout the 
Commonwealth, and we each make contributions from 
sometimes very different viewpoints. But we are 
committed to the same goals. Together we offer each other 
encouragement and draw strengths from this mutual 
support. 
 
The understanding that we belong together and are able, 
through teamwork, to achieve far more than we could do 
alone has always been at the heart of our approach. For all 
of us, this is now captured in the Commonwealth Charter, 
which sets out the values and principles which guide and 
motivate us.  
 
This year, more children and young people are 

participating in Commonwealth Day celebrations. 
Advances in technology enable us to reach a greater 
number of young people in schools online, using the 
Commonwealth Class initiative, and through events in 
local communities where the Commonwealth flag is being 
raised. 
 
I am delighted that in this year, the year of Team 
Commonwealth, we will be working to build a brighter, 
united future in which every one of us can play a part and 
share in its rewards. 
 
Queen Elizabeth II 
 

You may be seated. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Chairs of Former Speakers 
 
The Speaker: — You may have noted in the Chamber some 
new furniture. These chairs are chairs of former Speakers of the 
Saskatchewan legislature. This chair was the chair of Speaker 
Archibald Beaton Gillis. This Speaker’s chair dates from the 
Territorial period — specifically the last years, 1903 to 1905 — 
prior to the establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The chair to my right, in the corner, is a Speaker’s chair used by 
several Speakers in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
The time frame during which this chair was used is unverified. 
The wood carvings, Saskatchewan and 1912 in Roman 
numerals, suggest it dates from 1912. 
 
The chair to my left, in the corner, is a Speaker’s chair that was 
selected and used by Speaker Walter George Robinson, Speaker 
from 1925 to 1929. 
 
The Speaker: — Orders of the day. I recognize the Minister of 
Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to return to ministerial statements. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to return to 
ministerial statements. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Launch of Redesigned SaskTenders Website 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you 
pointed out during question period, it was a little bit raucous in 
here after QP [question period] and I missed your call; my 
apologies to the House. 
 
Anyway, I am pleased to announce today the launch of the 
redesigned SaskTenders website. Operated through the Ministry 
of Central Services, the SaskTenders site helps to procure 
billions of dollars in goods and services annually. It is a central 



4610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

storage for all government and Crown tenders in addition to 
tender opportunities for the municipal, academic, school, and 
health sectors. This site helps us meet our obligations under the 
New West Partnership and other trade agreements, allowing for 
open and fair tendering. 
 
Benefits of the new site include more intuitive site navigation, 
enhanced competition display, improved search functionality, 
and an easy to create and maintain email notification process. In 
addition to the new features, this site has a new and simplified 
web address, www.sasktenders.ca. The old gov.sk.ca web 
address will be directed to the new site. 
 
Since the province joined the New West Partnership, 
SaskTenders is designated to be the primary gateway for public 
sector tender notices in Saskatchewan. This site was enhanced 
to ensure it can meet current needs and future growth and make 
it easier for businesses to access public sector procurement 
opportunities. 
 
With more than 15,000 users and up to 200 open competitions 
at any given time, the SaskTenders site is the best vehicle to 
access public tender opportunities in Saskatchewan. We are 
pleased to provide this enhanced procurement tool that supports 
the provincial economy and drives business opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, just a 
quick response on behalf of the official opposition in terms of 
the ministerial statement. 
 
I’ve had a quick look at the redesigned SaskTenders website, 
and what the minister says would seem to bear out on the face 
of it. It looks good. It seems to have improved functionality, but 
the proof as they say, Mr. Speaker, in the pudding is in the 
eating. And when it comes to websites in this government, well 
we’ve seen misadventures coming at us out of Ontario. We 
have seen misadventures coming out of Tennessee. 
 
So we’ve got a number of questions about, you know, who’s 
providing the service. Is it entirely within house at Central 
Services in terms of who are the vendors that have been utilized 
in the provision of this, and whether or not this provides good 
service over the long haul here, Mr. Speaker — all things that 
we’ll be watching very closely in terms of the operation of this 
site. 
 
So we’ll be staying tuned, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll see how this 
newly relaunched SaskTenders website works out. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 127 — The 
Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
this afternoon and enter into this debate on Bill No. 127, An Act 
to amend The Mental Health Services Act and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Health Information Protection 
Act. And I think this is a very important, timely one. And of 
course we’re very anxious to see much more work, much more 
leadership around the issues of mental health in this province. 
And we know that there is some work being done now in terms 
of consultation about the bigger picture. We are disappointed of 
course that it’s taking so long for that to actually come to a head 
because obviously this needs attention as we speak. 
 
And we’ll go through this, but it is an important one, and of 
course it’s important that we modernize the language and we 
modernize how the province responds and how the health 
regions respond and treat mental illness. It’s an important thing 
to do. And of course the common sense parts we will support, 
but we have many questions, and of course those questions will 
come in due time. But I know many of our members will want 
to speak to this. 
 
But I do want to get some points on the record because this is a 
pretty important area, as I said. The quality of mental health is 
one that is important to all of us, each and every one of us. We 
used to just generally focus on physical health, and now we’re 
seeing more than ever the quality of mental health is so 
important. And it’s one that we need to take seriously as we set 
our standards in a province like Saskatchewan, where we expect 
and demand the best health care service in Canada. In fact we 
have no reason to believe we can’t have the best in the world. 
 
But unfortunately what that means is that we have to be vigilant 
about making sure our legislation reflects those aspirations and 
we do it in a timely manner, and that we don’t get caught in 
budgetary cycles or electoral cycles and that in fact delays and 
delays and delays while we know . . . [inaudible] . . . either 
family members or ourselves who deal with mental health 
illnesses. And so while it’s important to see this in front of us 
today, I think that we will have a lot to say about the whole area 
of mental health in the days and weeks and months ahead 
because it’s very, very important.  
 
So from what I understand, this shifts the power from the 
ministry to the regional health authorities, such as giving 
licences to approved homes, allowing resident psychiatrists who 
are already MDs [Doctor of Medicine] the ability to admit 
patients. and that can help improve the system. And the 
modernization of language: we can go from mental health 
centres instead of an in-patient facility. But at the end of the 
day, it’s going to be about resources, isn’t it? And that’s what 
we’ve got to see next week in the budget. What kind of 
resources will there be in place for supporting those with mental 
illnesses so mental health can improve in Saskatchewan? So 
that will be what we’re looking for. 
 
And while it’s important to have this bill before us, it’s 
important that we have a strong mental health strategy in 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4611 

Saskatchewan. And we’re concerned and we’re hearing concern 
from families about the lack of immediate steps in that area, and 
we can go on at length. And I know that every family, I would 
think . . . I know our family and I know other families who have 
members who are suffering from mental illness and the 
challenges that brings. And it ranges from the ability or the 
inability to work, the inability to have strong relationships, 
caring relationships, and even to suicides. And that’s an 
uncomfortable topic that we often find it difficult to talk about, 
but we need to be able to address the elephant in the room. And 
quite often it’s about mental health. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And so today I am delighted to stand to say that we are very 
committed to seeing a strong mental health strategy in this 
province. And I think it’s critically important that we have that. 
I think right from youth right to seniors and of course every age 
group has its own challenges, you know, whether you’re talking 
about youth and, you know, the dynamics of friendships and 
group relationships, the ability of forming relationships, and 
also just coming to terms and understanding who we all are — 
those are very, very important challenges. 
 
And so this is something that I think is an important topic, a 
very important topic. And I think that we are really keen to hear 
more from this government about its mental health strategy, and 
we are very keen to see that it is supported with resources and 
personnel and legislation that will really make Saskatchewan 
the province that we dream it can be, the one that is healthy and 
safe and supportive. 
 
And so while I do have some specific things about this, I just 
want to make sure that we also recognize — and we talked a 
little bit about the consultation aspect of this — that I hope that 
this part did come out of some strong consultations with the 
stakeholders and with the public. We’ve not heard that 
necessarily, and I’ll review the minister’s comments here, but 
particularly with this that we have . . . that we do include the 
patients. 
 
And I know this government has gone on at length and it’s 
talked about its Patient First Review from a few years ago. I’ve 
not heard the minister talk about how that they’ve connected 
with the clients in this particular legislation. We’ll hear more 
when their strategy is announced in the months ahead. But I 
think that, I know for example in my own riding, we have 
Crocus Co-op, a very supportive centre that works with people 
who are facing mental health challenges. And it does such 
fantastic, fantastic work. But I think this is one that I’m 
wondering if they were consulted with, this area here. 
 
But I just want to take a minute to talk about how important 
proper consultation is. And I think that we’ve seen over and 
over again the lack of proper consultation from this 
government, whether it be the clients, whether it be interested 
stakeholders, or whether it be the families, whether it be 
professionals. I’d be very curious to know. 
 
And I have not seen the comments from the speaker about 
whether or not the Privacy Commissioner was consulted. And 
that is one that gravely concerns me because often he has very 
insightful comments about how do we ensure people’s privacy 

is protected and yet services are provided in a timely and 
effective way? And that’s really the crux of the issue before us 
when we talk about privacy in health care. 
 
People need services immediately, but at the same time that 
there is this issue of privacy. And we’ve seen it at length. In fact 
we’ve seen concerns as simple as the issue around faxes, and 
regional health authorities or their agencies or private health 
care providers inappropriately using fax numbers that they 
aren’t sure whether it’s an accurate number to be faxing to. 
We’ve heard these stories in the media. For example, people’s 
health records being faxed to schools when the schools are even 
saying, don’t send us any more of this information. And for 
some reason their numbers still seem to be the numbers that 
these providers tend to use. And we’ve seen a situation a few 
years ago where health records were dumped into a dumpster in 
south Regina, and yet very little came of that. 
 
So I speak of that because I am watching very carefully and I 
am very interested in this government’s work around privacy. 
And whether it’s health care, whether it’s in labour, whether it’s 
employment, whether it’s in education, whether it’s in 
government services, we have a lot of work to do ahead of us in 
making sure our privacy standards are the best in Canada, the 
best in Canada. 
 
And that does not mean that we’re closing the books 
completely. It means that people know how to keep records 
private. The right people need to know the information, not 
anybody else, but it’s done in a very timely and effective way. 
And simple things like fax phone numbers are treated with a 
respect, and they’re checked and kept current and not just dealt 
with in the old way of saying, well, it’s just some information 
and people can live through it. No, that’s not, that’s absolutely, 
that’s absolutely not good enough. 
 
So I have not seen him reference the work of the Privacy 
Commissioner. I have not seen him reference the work of 
clients. I’ve not seen him reference the work of families, and 
maybe that’ll come up in committee, but I think that it’s very 
important that we actually have that information. And that’s 
why you often think that the second reading speeches of 
ministers could be much fuller. Now we’re not saying that they 
should be 20 minutes or 30 minutes or an hour longer. We 
would have maybe some problems with that because that 
doesn’t give us enough time to talk about the bills at the time 
that we would like to talk because we have concerns. But just a 
few more minutes about some of the details we think are 
important, like who are they consulting with. Who are they 
consulting with? 
 
I find it kind of ironic actually. Sometimes the folks opposite 
will make a big deal of who they’ve consulted with, and they 
will really get out there and really get out there and say, this is 
the list of who we’ve consulted with. Well somewhere in 
between is the right way of doing it. We don’t need the names 
of 120 organizations during a second reading speech, but gee, 
maybe one or two or five. And have you talked to the Privacy 
Commissioner when we’re talking about a bill like this; I think 
that’s important to know. 
 
So I want to take a minute and just review the minister’s 
comment because it’s always insightful to think about what he 



4612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

has said. And he talks about this. And this was a bill that was 
just introduced just before Christmas. In fact it was only a week 
ago, in fact exactly a week ago, that the minister stood with his 
second reading speech. And he talks about: 
 

The intent of the amendments are to improve timely access 
to mental health services for vulnerable people, support 
integration of . . . health [services] and addictions services 
and information . . . [services], and resolve governance 
and administration issues affecting the ministry and health 
regions. 

 
And of course that’s a very laudable goal and one that I think is 
important for us to support. 
 
So the intent is to provide timely access to mental health 
services for vulnerable people, and that’s huge. That’s huge. 
And we know that it’s critical that in this . . . And so I hope that 
this legislation in fact enables them to provide better services, 
and that’s what we’re looking for. And it’s not just words on a 
page or paragraphs in legislation, but actual access to mental 
health services for vulnerable people and the integration of 
mental health and addiction services and information sharing. 
 
And clearly, as we’ve come to appreciate, the intensity of 
addiction services and addictions in our population is huge. And 
we often think of course of substance abuse, but we know of 
course gambling is a huge one particularly that’s emerged in the 
last 10, 20 years and the impact it’s had on families. This is a 
whole range of addiction services and that’s very, very 
important. 
 
So it’ll be interesting to see how this legislation, how they plan 
to support this legislation with resources to make that come to 
life so that people can have the services and it will be integrated 
and it will be there for them. So I understand and appreciate the 
governance and administration issues, and of course that’s the 
changeover from the regional health, from a provincial model to 
a regional health authority model in many regards. And so 
this’ll be very, very important. 
 
He talks specifically about, the Act will repeal: 
 

. . . those sections of the Act dealing with confidentiality 
and release of information and substituting The Health 
Information Protection Act, allowing for better 
collaboration among areas of health services and other 
ministries while still protecting personal health 
information. 

 
And so that’s really key. That’s really important that we hear 
that piece. 
 
But again, what was the Privacy Commissioner’s input on this? 
Is it a better idea? Is it not a good idea? We know for example, 
and I can speak from my own experience, when we’ve raised 
issues around the Workers’ Compensation Board legislation 
that was recently introduced and passed a year ago, the Privacy 
Commissioner had concerns. They weren’t really paid attention 
to. They were ignored. The same with the employment Act. He 
had concerns about that. He was not listened to. And that’s 
unfortunate because, as an officer of the legislature and 
someone who specializes in this area, we are at our own risk 

when we produce legislation where we don’t have the proper 
information. 
 
I do want to say, you know, there was one example where this 
government did withdraw legislation on the advice of the 
Privacy Commissioner. That was when we were dealing with a 
few years ago the idea of super licences or super IDs 
[identification]. And it was at the last minute. The legislation 
was in front of us. And it was like a day like today where we 
were having second reading debates, and the government of the 
day realized it had gone too far, that the legislation had gone too 
far. 
 
This is one that we’ll be asking . . . Well unfortunately I guess 
we’ll be asking the Acting Privacy Commissioner because there 
is no permanent head right now. We’re going to be busy at 
work finding one, and I hope we find one as good as the last. 
But we need to find out what do they think about this. This is 
very, very important for us. 
 
So it also talks about reducing the criteria for community 
treatment orders, which will allow for involuntary treatment in 
the community and increasing the period of time, the time 
period of CTOs, the community treatment order, to reduce 
barriers to treatment for very vulnerable clients. Hugely 
important, and I know there’s many sides to this. We know 
families who are saddened by the tragedies of what happens 
when appropriate treatment is not available, cannot be available 
because of restrictions on legislation. So we hope this really 
works to resolve that issue and actually can make it better so 
that people can get help, that people can get the kind of care that 
they need. 
 
It would be really interesting to know, again here is the 
consultation piece, who has the ministry talked to about the 
family groups, the clients? Because again, we can gain a lot 
from the perspective of clients in terms of what works, what 
doesn’t work. How can we make the process flow, especially 
when we’re trying to reduce the barriers? What is it that’s not 
making things work? 
 
But I do want to say that again this is where consultation is so 
important because this is a very sensitive, very sensitive area 
where we want to protect rights, and that’s a very important 
issue, but at the same time we don’t want to be hamstrung by 
rights that really aren’t helpful to either the patient or the client 
or the family. Somewhere in between we have to find the 
middle ground that’s respectful and that there’s dignity but, at 
the same time, help can be there in a very quick and effective 
manner. So this is very, very important. 
 
It talks about transferring the responsibility for licensing mental 
health approved homes from the ministry to the regional health 
authorities to align more closely to the day-to-day practice of 
using the facility design regulations under The Regional Health 
Services Act instead of The Mental Health Services Act to 
designate facilities. 
 
So that will be interesting, and again this is where we’ll need 
the expertise of the folks from the ministry to help us 
understand what that may look like. But it’s interesting: from 
moving the responsibility for licensing of approved homes from 
the ministry to the local health authority, what does that mean 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4613 

in terms of . . . How far does that responsibility go because we 
know at the end of the day we have . . . And we may end up 
with questions here in the House about certain health authorities 
that are not living up to that kind of standard and may be 
inconsistent across the province. And there’s various reasons 
for that inconsistency, and sometimes it’s just related to 
resources and it’s related to the ability to have the appropriate 
staffing and people who can make those kind of decisions in an 
appropriate way. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We’ve seen the inconsistency with long-term care homes. 
We’ve had those questions come up in the House here. That’s 
right across the map and yet the minister will hide behind that it 
says on the front page, they have standards. They have 
minimum standards, but we know that when it comes to the 
actual nuts and bolts there are no minimum standards. And 
they’re letting themselves off the hook by saying, well we’re 
doing this on an individual needs basis. And we understand 
that. You know from my background as a teacher, that’s the 
best kind of teaching you can do, be it based on an educational 
. . . [inaudible] . . . individual standard. 
 
But at the end of the day, you need to make sure there are some 
basic minimum standards right across the province. We have a 
province. There is a reason for a province. There is a reason for 
responsibility for health care is at the provincial level so that it 
can be done. And everyone knows that their tax dollars, the 
public money, is done for the common good for all of us, no 
matter where you live in this province, and so that there is some 
consistency across the province and there is some 
accountability. And this is the place for that accountability, in 
this legislature. 
 
So I do get concerned when I do see . . . And it may be a really 
appropriate way of putting responsibility at the local level. But 
is this downloading responsibility so nobody will be 
accountable for, or there’s no process for being accountable for 
the standards of licensing? And what does it mean when it goes 
off the rails? And it doesn’t matter whether it’s in a small town 
or large cities, there is a place where people can get an answer. 
And this is the place. And I tell you that we’ll be watching very 
carefully about what this really, really means. So we have some 
concerns about that, and hopefully it’s the right thing. 
 
And again it gets back to the consulting. Who asked for this 
change? Was it the regional health authorities who asked for 
this change? Was it the parent groups or the family groups 
where the clients is saying, you know, the provincial people 
don’t quite understand what’s happening in our town, so we 
think the licensing should be done at a local level? I really need 
to . . . We’ll be asking a lot of questions around that. 
 
Transferring the power to appoint regional directors of mental 
health and chief psychiatrists from the ministry to regional 
health authorities to align with day-to-day practice, again, it 
goes along with the licensing of the homes. Again the 
accountability aspect of it, this may be more effective. There 
may be savings. But it would be interesting to know what 
caused this change to come. Who asked for it? Why did they 
ask for it? What kind of an analysis of this? 
 

I mean there are reasons why we have provincial authorities. 
And so we’re concerned if there’s a weakening of provincial 
responsibility or downloading the responsibilities onto 
organizations that may not have the capacity, who may not have 
the capacity to understand the, you know, the ability to appoint 
regional directors of mental health and chief psychiatrists. That 
might be just better left at the provincial level. We have 
questions about that. It may be the best way. 
 
But again if it’s downloading responsibilities . . . And I know 
this government is very interested in the whole concept of lean. 
And I’m not sure if I see the need when, you know, you have I 
assume only one regional director of mental health for each 
region, for each health authority, and chief psychiatrist. So 
you’re only . . . For each region, there’s two people. 
 
And so you need to have a capacity to supervise these folks, to 
hold them accountable, and a process for them also to be able to 
get together. And I hope we’re not creating silos across the 
province, that Regina will do one thing and Saskatoon will do 
another thing and Moose Jaw will do yet another thing. So how 
will this be handled? And how will this be a good thing? 
 
I understand though the connection to the local area. It’s 
hugely, hugely important. But I do have a problem with 
creating silos and that the expectation across the province is that 
there will be some consistency of care, some consistency of 
service delivery. And if that’s not the case because we’ve 
broken down that provincial responsibility, how will we 
guarantee that? How will we guarantee that while at the same 
time keeping to the lean process? Now I don’t know all the 
terms of lean, but I can’t see how this can be as effective in 
some ways because you’re creating many layers of bureaucracy. 
 
So as I go through this, and I think that the minister does say 
and he points out that we are aware and the Assembly is aware 
that they’re developing an inter-ministerial mental health and 
addictions action plan. He doesn’t give a date for that. We don’t 
know whether that will be before the end of this term. It’s 
getting close, as we’re into the second half. And clearly it won’t 
be in this year’s budget, so it would be in the last year’s budget. 
And who knows whether it will actually make that. 
 
That’s disappointing. That’s disappointing. We could have had 
an interim report. We could have had this report. You know, as 
I said the other day, I was talking about the lobbyist bill and 
how they took that on right away. Well I would have thought 
the mental health and addictions crisis that we’re facing here in 
Saskatchewan was much more of an urgent nature than this bill 
here. But we do . . . If it’s making good sense and we’ll have 
the time to talk about that in committee, then we’ll definitely, 
definitely have those questions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the current Act as 27 years old, 
and we have to keep up with modern practice. And I will take a 
minute here. And I just have this, and maybe this is a little 
bugaboo, but I do . . . It’s one that drives me to the wall on this 
because here we have the word Sunday. Somehow I thought 
this government had got rid of the word Sunday because when 
we talked about The Saskatchewan Employment Act, the 
minister was bound and determined that we cannot talk about 
the word Sunday. There was no way we were going to see that 
word again because, as he was saying, he was anticipating that 



4614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

there would be constitutional challenges and that there would be 
problems. Well here when I look at the interpretation, it talks 
about “‘business day’ means a day other than a Saturday, 
Sunday or holiday.” I don’t know. That sounds like a definition 
that’s at least 27 years old. 
 
And I have some questions, and we’ll ask the minister: how did 
the Minister of Health get to use Sunday in a bill, where his 
counterpart in Labour says you can’t do that — you can’t do 
that? Sounds like we’ve got the makings of a weekend here, 
you know. 
 
And I have to say that I was really surprised but pleasantly 
surprised that we are retaining some of this. This is just a 
recognition of what practice is in business — that you actually 
have a business day, and you have a business week, and it is 
usually not Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday. Now I find it even 
passing strange that he feels quite adequate to say holiday, not a 
public holiday or a statutory holiday. You know, I’ll have to 
look back in my notes from the employment Act. I don’t know 
if they call them holidays anymore. But here we see this line, 
and I think we’ll have to ask a little bit more about this. 
 
It shows again the inconsistency of this government when it 
comes to drafting legislation. In Health they recognize the 
weekend, and they recognize that work will happen most likely 
during the five days, Monday to Friday, whereas for some 
reason, the Minister of Labour could not seem to come to a 
point where he could appreciate that schools work on a business 
week. Most of government works on a business week. Most of 
the workplace works on a work week, and there is such a thing 
as a weekend. 
 
And so here you have here, in this legislation . . . And I don’t 
know by highlighting this whether the government will now go 
back and take this out because clearly . . . Now I don’t know 
what sections this is relevant to or what it’s relevant to, but I 
find it interesting when they’re talking about improving access 
to health care, particularly mental health care, that they talk 
about the week, the business week. So I just find this interesting 
when I glance through some of their things here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have a lot of work ahead of us, 
and I just again want to say how important this piece of 
legislation is and how important that we take the time to 
examine it fully and completely. As I’ve said, it’s important to 
update and modernize the language in it. 
 
It’s important to get that balance of privacy. Again we’ll be 
asking the minister, in terms of consultations, who did he 
consult with in terms of privacy? Did he avail himself of the 
officer, the privacy officer, and what were those comments? We 
haven’t seen them. And particularly in this type of issue we 
know the Ministry of Health does not have a strong record. As 
I’ve said, whether it’s the fax phone number fiasco that we’ve 
seen or whether it was the dumpster fiasco that made the front 
page of the Leader-Post a few years ago, not a strong track 
record when it comes to privacy. And so did they consult with 
the Privacy Commissioner on this, and what did he have to say 
at the time, or what does the office have to say? 
 
Important, though, important that we get the right balance 
between rights and services here because we know that it’s a 

delicate balance, and we know families are constantly hopeful 
that their loved ones will get the services they can get as 
quickly as they possibly can, as quickly as they possibly can. 
But we need to do it in a respectful and a dignified way. It’s so 
critical that that’s the case, that it’s not . . . people’s rights are 
not trampled. I’m hoping that this is not the case here. I think 
that’s really, really important. 
 
We also want to ask those questions about downloading. When 
you download services, are you providing the capacity to 
deliver those services? Whether it’s licensing or appointing 
chief psychiatrists or regional folks, it’s very important that we 
get it done in the best way possible and that in fact you have 
better services, that you have better services, and the people 
who are in those positions have the resources that they really 
need to deliver their obligations. Again, as we’ve said over and 
over again, and from our perspective, it’s important to have a 
provincial bar, a provincial standard of care that we know that 
we won’t see an inconsistent level of care throughout the 
province that’s based largely because of inconsistent resources 
or priorities. It’s important that, especially when we come to 
mental health, that we do that the right way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’ll be members who want to be 
speaking about other topics here today, but I do want to 
especially underline — there are so many important parts to this 
I could emphasize — but we are anxiously awaiting the mental 
health and additions strategy from this government. We hope to 
see it soon. We hope that it’s not delayed. And we actually hope 
that it can be put into place before the end of the term. We are 
concerned about I think the time it’s taking to do that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment at 
this point now of Bill No. 127, An Act to amend The Mental 
Health Services Act and to make a consequential amendment to 
The Health Information Protection Act. I do so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 128 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 128 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 128, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act and to repeal The Public 
Service Essential Services Act. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this 
is the next chapter in a long history of bungling of labour 
legislation that we have from this government. When they were 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4615 

elected in 2007, they had some ideological perspectives around 
labour that they allowed to overwhelm their common sense 
perspective on how labour issues had been dealt with in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill today is one 
more attempt to tear off the band-aid from the wound and put a 
new band-aid on to see if they can get it fixed. 
 
And the reason that I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
legislation that’s being mentioned here in this Act as it relates to 
The Public Service Essential Services Act is legislation that’s 
presently before the Supreme Court of Canada. And people in 
Saskatchewan know that this case will be argued in the 
Supreme Court in May of 2014, just a few months from now, 
and that the whole issue of how the original legislation was 
brought forward in the province has been subject to substantial 
discussion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Justice Dennis Ball wrote a very 
detailed and thoughtful decision around the constitutionality of 
The Public Service Essential Services Act, and that’s the 
legislation that in this particular Act is being abolished. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the ideological-driven 
Premier and cabinet did in 2007 and 2008, much to the 
consternation of many people who were supporters on the right 
of some of the things that they were doing, was what they did 
was allow for some of the questions around what rights are 
guaranteed by the Constitution of Canada should be protected. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of those questions relates to the right to 
strike. Now that’s not specifically mentioned in our constitution 
in Canada. But as a result of this case, which will be heard in in 
May 2014, the opportunity is there for the Supreme Court of 
Canada to adopt Mr. Justice Dennis Ball’s perspective on the 
original legislation and enhance rights for workers right across 
the country. 
 
Now I think this particular legislation today is an attempt by a 
new Minister of Labour to try to blunt the effect of their 
bungling in 2008 and see if they can’t slip away from some of 
the perspectives that they took at that time. Unfortunately I’m 
not sure that it’s possible to undo what they’ve done. And how 
did they get themselves into this kind of bind? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, most new governments have some ideas about things 
they want to do, but unfortunately this government did not talk 
to either employers or workers and allowed for an ideologically 
written bill to be presented in the legislature. As we all 
remember, there were many discussions during the time that 
that bill was being looked at. And I think that if you go back 
and look at the records, we may end up having some of the 
longest, most incomprehensible sentences in the history of the 
English language that were the responses of the minister of the 
day to the very pointed questions from some of our members on 
this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, a lot of that bafflegab is on 
the record. It’s what the courts have looked at and used as 
they’ve evaluated the constitutionality of that legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we have Bill 128. It has a whole new 
section, a whole rewriting of The Public Service Essential 
Services Act, and it’s being placed in The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act. 
 
Now we know that last year The Saskatchewan Employment Act 
was passed with a placeholder for something to deal with The 

Public Service Essential Services Act, and that Act in and of 
itself was not very helpful for the people of the province. What 
it did was raise many, many questions about issues that all the 
people of Saskatchewan thought were resolved for sometimes a 
hundred years. So we have now at this stage again a move by 
this Premier and this government to destabilize the ability of 
workers and employers to resolve their own issues through a 
bargaining process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we have that kind of a record of the 
government over the last five years of this destabilization, then 
we end up having to say, well what is it that they’re trying to do 
in this legislation that may create some other problems? 
Unfortunately it’s not very easy to tell until we get the decision 
from the Supreme Court of Canada, which probably won’t 
happen till later in the fall. 
 
Now I’m assuming and I’m hoping that both the Minister of 
Justice and the Minister of Labour will be advising the Premier 
that they should not have this legislation go into effect before 
we see what comments the justices of the Supreme Court have 
about this whole area of Saskatchewan labour law. And the 
reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that this law may actually 
further complicate what’s happening in Saskatchewan if various 
parts of the original law are held unconstitutional because of the 
way the legislation was passed in 2008. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s possible or probably is more likely that a 
reasonable government would have waited to introduce this 
legislation until we had the advice of the Supreme Court of 
Canada. But that’s not necessarily how this government works. 
They don’t always listen even to some of their own supporters 
when they do things, as evidenced today in question period 
when we talk about the Merit Contractors who are clearly 
people who support this legislation, who are now taking on the 
minister of the P3s and privatization and saying, hey, this is 
about Saskatchewan contractors and about Saskatchewan work; 
let’s do it in a reasonable fashion. 
 
So we have that same kind of an issue arising in this legislation 
because when you looked at Saskatchewan’s labour relations 
over the decades — and we’ve had scholars both on the right 
and on the left and the centre take a look at the systems that 
were available — I think it was quite clear that even though 
Saskatchewan didn’t have some very specific essential services 
legislation, they did have mechanisms that dealt with these 
issues that arose during strike situations. And in actual fact, the 
numbers of incidents that arose and actually the number of days 
of work that were lost were probably at the low end compared 
to some of the other more defined systems, which is what the 
government is now trying to put in place. 
 
So the question becomes, why did the government move on 
this? Why did they go ahead without listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan, both on the management side and on the worker 
side? I’m not sure it’s clear. I think when the historians go back 
and look, they will say that the Premier had a particular 
ideological perspective that he wanted to bring forward and set 
out in the province, and he did it to the detriment of labour 
relations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there are some commentators who have looked at this 
particular legislation we’re dealing with today and are saying 



4616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

well this is a more reasonable Minister of Labour stepping back 
and trying to correct some of the excesses of the previous 
legislation. I guess putting the best construction on everything, 
that’s maybe what people would like to believe. But what we 
also know is that the Minister of Labour has the same 
perspective about changing the balance between workers and 
employers in Saskatchewan, and that perspective comes 
through even in these changes that are here because it doesn’t 
go and directly deal with some of the specific issues that have 
been raised by both workers and employers. 
 
So how do we deal with this particular legislation? I think an 
appropriate thing to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be to table 
this legislation until we receive the advice of the Supreme Court 
of Canada as it relates to the previous legislation. The reason I 
say that is we could then look at some of the comments and 
some of the constitutional issues that were raised in that 
particular case and make sure that we get the right balance. I 
think what will happen, Mr. Speaker, is, if we proceed with this 
legislation, we’re going to end up with another bill in the fall 
that tries to fix what the problem is with this legislation in light 
of what the Supreme Court says. And once again, we’ll be 
pulling off a bandage on a sore and tearing apart the healing 
that’s going on and putting a new one on. So we will have had 
then five years or six years of basically uncertainty about what 
the law is and also concern about how people who are 
bargaining in Saskatchewan should operate. 
 
Now there’s always a time for new ideas and new approaches to 
be introduced into legislation in any area of endeavour within 
the community. The difficulty we have here is that the trigger 
and the initial push did not listen to most of the people who 
work in the province. And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s a great 
suspicion about this government, about this Premier, about this 
Minister of Labour when they come forward with what they say 
is, oh, the panacea or the fix or the final cure or the healing of 
all the issues. 
 
And so we have a bill that attempts to set out some new ways of 
resolving some of the issues, but we don’t have a clear 
perspective that this is going to be constitutional either, that it’s 
going to be a valid law. And so, Mr. Speaker, there are, I think, 
a number of ways that the government could proceed. But I 
think the most appropriate one would be for the Minister of 
Labour to basically say that we’re going to leave this bill on the 
order paper or drop it now and reintroduce it after the Supreme 
Court of Canada has dealt with the issues that are here. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now when you end up with a track record like the Sask Party 
government has or like the Premier has as it relates to labour 
law, it’s quite difficult to return to something that’s more 
reasonable. And I think that when the Premier tries to do that, 
there’s a lot of concern that arises. People look carefully at 
what’s being proposed. They look carefully at what the minister 
is talking about. I think that in this particular bill, there ends up 
being a number of ideas or issues that are laid out that are, I 
guess, difficult to square with what we know is a very 
reasonable, detailed review of the legislation that was put 
forward by Mr. Justice Dennis Ball. 
 
So what do we do? What’s the role for the legislature in this 

process, because we’re being asked to set out some rules of 
reasonableness or of practical response to what can be very 
difficult situations. I mean this is the situation where people are 
deemed to be essential. Their work is deemed to be essential to 
the point where they no longer have any right to use some of the 
traditional ways of bargaining for contracts. And so when you 
take away those kind of constitutional rights that people have, 
there must be some very strict rules on the people who are 
going to take advantage of the removal of those rights. 
 
So that’s what this legislation is about. It’s about making sure 
that health care workers are available when there are needs for 
them. But also it’s about protecting the workers and making 
sure that they’re not being taken advantage of. It’s about, in a 
province like Saskatchewan, where an issue with the lack of 
power or the lack of natural gas could be or will be a 
life-and-death situation on some of the coldest days of the year. 
It’s about snowstorms and making sure that highways are safe 
to be travelled and how you treat those people who basically 
risk their lives to clear the roads and make sure that others can 
have access there. And so, Mr. Speaker, these are really serious 
issues, and it’s not a place where past missteps by the 
government should govern or decide how an issue is being dealt 
with. 
 
And so what I suggest again, Mr. Speaker, is that the Minister 
of Labour, together with the Premier, that they end up stepping 
back from this legislation at this time and, you know, wait until 
we hear what the Supreme Court has to say about the type of 
interests and powers that are protected under our Constitution. 
 
Now when legislation doesn’t do what everybody expects it to 
do, that also creates a problem for the legislature and us here in 
this place as legislators, because we didn’t get a chance to have 
any input or advice before the legislation was introduced five 
years ago. When this legislation came forward, we also were 
somewhat surprised by the introduction of the legislation in the 
midst of the Supreme Court court case that’s there right now. 
 
What we end up raising questions about, then, is what is the 
role of the legislature? When a government has a substantial 
majority like they do now, there’s even a greater onus on the 
Premier and on his colleagues to be very careful in what kinds 
of changes they make and how they make those changes. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think that, in the whole area of labour law, 
this is an area where the Premier in retrospect, looking back as a 
historian or political science, will have some fairly difficult and 
strong criticism because there was not a process of listening to 
the people. There was not an understanding that this was much 
more complicated than the Premier thought. 
 
And so this legislation that we have here today further 
complicates that perspective that the legislature isn’t necessarily 
doing their job, that they’re being used as an ideological tool by 
the Premier and the Sask Party government and doing things 
which, if we put the best construction on, they don’t intend to 
do. But more importantly, I think they’re doing things . . . that 
they basically are responding to certain elements within their 
own area of support that is not appropriate for a government to 
respond to. So I think, Mr. Speaker, when we deal with this 
particular legislation, that we have to be very, very careful. 
 
Now always when you’re looking at legislation where there are 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4617 

competing interests, you have to examine which right or which 
concern takes precedence. This legislation deals with that 
fundamental question of the protection of a worker, the right of 
a worker to bargain, the right of the worker to withdraw 
services over and against the right of the public to have that 
service provided. Some of the toughest questions that have 
arisen in society have arisen in this area where these two 
interests are competing with each other. That’s all the more 
reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there should be more 
thoughtful work done and, I think, a respect for the courts to 
allow the courts to make some responses on this before we get 
this proposal that we have here, which I think attempts to blunt 
some of the comments that we know are going to be coming 
from the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
Now another possible scenario here, and probably the most 
likely one given the majority government that the Premier has, 
is that this legislation will be passed. The case will be argued in 
the Supreme Court of Canada. There probably will be some 
further protections for workers that weren’t there before the 
government sort of misstepped and introduced the 2008 
legislation. And we will have more questions arrive which 
causes more expense, both for employers and workers, around 
what’s the effect of this legislation in light of the comments of 
the Supreme Court of Canada. And so rather than simplify 
things, if I can use that in quotes, or rather than coming up with 
some kinds of “brilliant” solutions, what we will have is further 
discussion and further expense both for workers and for 
employers as we try to sort out what’s going on. 
 
And so when we look at this whole scenario, it raises questions 
about the ability of the government to listen to advice but more 
importantly the ability of the government to actually go and get 
advice from all of the appropriate groups that are involved. 
 
Now when we will look at this legislation here, and I know a 
number of my colleagues will have further comments about it, 
but when we also will look at it in committee, we’ll be doing a 
lot of speculation as to what will be the effect of this legislation 
vis-à-vis the comments that are going to be coming out in the 
court. I think practically our session ends just a couple of days 
before the case will be argued in the Supreme Court of Canada. 
So that ends up adding another element where it once again 
forces me to, you know, advise the Premier and the Minister of 
Labour to spend some time looking at whether this bill 
shouldn’t, in actual fact, be held back for now and reintroduced 
after we’ve heard from the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
So practically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one more step on a 
kind of a stumbling, blundering path of dealing with important 
issues for Saskatchewan employers and workers. It shows how 
the government does not necessarily consult with people to get 
appropriate solutions. And it’s one more example of a situation 
that has not been handled well, and it’s going to take quite a 
few more years to sort out. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate 
on this particular bill, and I know some of my colleagues will 
have more to say later. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 128, The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 129 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 129 — The 
Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to wade into the discussion about Bill No. 129, The 
Executive Government Administration Act. I think I’d like to lay 
out a little bit about what this bill will do and talk a little bit 
about that. 
 
So this particular bill is quite a complicated one. It consolidates 
the provisions of The Government Organization Act with 
Executive Council provisions of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2007. Then it also incorporates the 
provisions of The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991 and The 
Federal-Provincial Agreements Act. 
 
The new legislation will remove, as the minister said, “any 
confusion about the organization of ministries and the 
assignment of ministerial responsibilities.” So we’ve got a few 
things going on with this Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 
bottom line is it deals with executive government, which in 
essence is the Premier’s office and the cabinet’s, and that is 
who has sole responsibility really for the daily administration of 
our province. 
 
So some of the things that this legislation does — and the 
minister laid this out too in his comments — is that legislative 
secretaries will not be reappointed every year. Currently that’s 
not the case. And it’s interesting, one of my colleagues in his 
earlier remarks was asking . . . just took a straw poll about who 
on the other side of the House who happens . . . raise your 
hands who has been a legislative secretary. And we think that 
the list is better asked, who hasn’t been a legislative secretary 
on the other side of the House. 
 
But not to diminish some of the work that the legislative 
secretaries have done. There’s been some very good work done, 
Mr. Speaker. I had the privilege actually of sitting on the Traffic 
Safety Committee with the legislative secretary for traffic 
safety. So there’s been some very good work done in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. But that’s one of the things, when you take 
power away from . . . The goal, Mr. Speaker, in some of this 
Act is removing power actually from the legislature and taking 
more power and concentrating it in the hands of the executive 
which means less oversight, Mr. Speaker. Less oversight and 
more power to the Premier and the Premier’s office is in 
essence what some of this bill does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 



4618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

What else does it do? Regulations establishing ministries will 
not be subject to review by the legislature. Again I know the 
minister in his comments remarked that that already, very rarely 
. . . I should just go to his exact quote here: “Presently this 
approval is required if the advisory committee’s appointment is 
for more than one year. This will provide more . . . Pardon me. 
This is the quote regarding “. . . regulations establishing 
ministries will not be subject to review by the legislature.” The 
minister went on to say that “This exemption is not often 
granted, but because it’s the prerogative of the Premier to 
determine the organization of government, it is appropriate in 
this case.” 
 
So again, this is removing the need to come before the 
legislature in some cases, which ultimately is about 
concentrating power in the hands of the Premier and the 
executive, which we’ve heard federally now seems to be the 
case, and there’s some concern here that that might be the case 
as well. 
 
Another thing that’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, is “the 
appointment of the advisory committees to ministers will 
require cabinet approval in all cases.” I think one point that’s 
interesting here is, and I’m not quite sure what the government 
has in mind here, but the federal-provincial agreements will not 
require cabinet approval unless they require an expenditure by 
the government of more than $50,000. 
 
So I’m just curious. Obviously when you’re looking at 
legislation and changes to legislation, you want to know what 
was the impetus for the change. What was the government 
thinking when they’ve decided to make the change? Where 
does that stem from? What did they have in mind? So I think 
some of the questions at committee will be, what particular 
agreements or what thoughts went behind this particular 
change? Again that is something that we will be asking. 
 
I think often when . . . The goal when the opposition is debating 
bills and when bills come before the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we think about why a bill has come before the House. 
Who’s asked for it? Who are the stakeholders? Have the 
stakeholders been consulted? And in this particular case, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the stakeholders . . . Initially I thought well, 
who are the stakeholders? It’s not entirely clear. This is about 
executive government. But ultimately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
stakeholders here are the people of Saskatchewan, and that is 
the reality. We’re talking about the people who are being 
ultimately governed by executive government who has the sole 
authority and responsibility for the day-to-day operations of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. So I’m curious to know what the general 
citizen would think about some of these changes around the 
power concentration in the Premier’s office, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
What else is happening with this Act? All department Acts are 
being amended to remove the word “department” from their 
title, change all references from department to ministry or 
minister, and remove references to things like annual reports, 
seals, and staff. 
 
So it’s interesting to me. I wasn’t here in this legislature at the 
time of the debate between . . . And there was no debate, Mr. 
Speaker. The government in 2007 had a majority and made a 

move from calling things departments and moving them to 
ministries. And I won’t debate the merits of that here. I actually 
don’t know the rationale or the virtues of referring to something 
as a ministry rather than a department. I do know that there’s 
financial costs that come with doing those kinds of things. 
There are costs . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister of 
Finance is saying there’s very limited costs, but the reality is 
there are still costs for changing letterheads and all those kind 
of things. 
 
But I don’t know. I’d be interested . . . As I said, I wasn’t here 
in the legislature in 2007. I wasn’t here. I wasn’t here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at that point in time, but I’m curious about the 
rationale why a ministry over a department. I’m not sure about 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the other things that happens here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is grant-making and agreement-making powers are removed 
from The Department of Justice Act, as they will appear in The 
Executive Government Administration Act. So the minister 
pointed out those grant-making and agreement-making powers 
are redundant because they would have appeared in another Act 
already. That seems quite straightforward. And exceptional 
grant-making and agreement-making powers will remain in 
their respective Acts. So he lines that out. 
 
The Financial Administration Act is being amended to eliminate 
the investment board and provide the treasury board can have 
non-ministerial members. Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
one has to be clear that that already happens. So this 
government currently already appoints non-ministers to treasury 
board, so this Act is simply catching up with the current 
practice of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know just along the lines of responsibility, ultimately in a 
ministry where does the buck stop? The buck stops with the 
minister. And having spoken to some of my colleagues about 
this who’ve had the opportunity to sit around a cabinet table or 
sit on treasury board, that there can . . . And this goes back to 
the discussion about legislative secretaries, so both to the point 
about legislative secretaries and putting non-ministers on 
treasury board, there can be the question or concern, and it’s a 
valid concern to raise, that blurring the lines of responsibility is 
a possibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again, where does the 
buck stop? Does it stop with the Legislative Secretary? Does it 
stop with the minister? It should ultimately stop with the 
minister. Or when you’ve got treasury board decisions, should 
the buck be stopping with the ministers rather than 
backbenchers who are sitting on treasury board? 
 
So those are all things to think about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
Bill 129, The Executive Government Administration Act. I know 
I will have colleagues who will also want to enter the debate, 
and we will have a chance to have questions, to maybe get some 
clarification, when the bill eventually goes to committee. So 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 129, The 
Executive Government Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4619 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 130 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 130 — The 
Executive Government Administration Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government 
Administration Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to discuss Bill No. 130, The Executive Government 
Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. I’ve just 
spoken to its companion bill, Bill 129, The Executive 
Government Administration Act, and touched on some of the 
changes that will have . . . Basically this is just making sure that 
changes that occur with other bills are taken care of in this Act. 
So I have few words to say on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
think my comments on Bill 129 stand. So with that, I would like 
to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 130, The Executive 
Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 130, The Executive Government 
Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 116 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say 
congratulations to the Premier and the minister on this one. It’s 
taken a long time, but we have here a municipalities Act which 
effectively allows for the “forced” amalgamation of 
municipalities because it sets out all the rules about how you 
would have smaller communities join with their neighbours in 
creating a whole new map for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the caucus across the way has spent 
a lot of time looking at this bill or not, and I do want to thank 
the minister for providing some fairly detailed comments when 
he introduced the bill on November 25th, 2013. But I know he 
did say quite clearly on page 4175 in Hansard, the statement: 
“Nor are the proposed amendments about forced 
amalgamation.” And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that he knew and 

he knows that what’s been introduced here is all of the rules 
around how the government, over some time, will make some 
fairly substantial changes to how our municipalities operate in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that they would do this in a way that 
it’s not necessarily straightforward, but it’s not surprising, given 
how a number of other changes that have been made by the 
government have been made over the last few years. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what is this bill about? Well I think that 
what we’re doing or the minister is doing and obviously the 
Premier and others are saying that there are municipalities in 
the province that don’t function very well, and we need to do 
something about that. And so we’re going to set out some rules 
about how some of these changes can take place. And they 
basically console themselves in saying it’s not forced 
amalgamation because there’s nothing in here that specifically 
directs the various amalgamations to take place. But when you 
look at the way the legislation’s worded and you look at the 
ability for regulations to be put in place by cabinet on the 
advice of the minister, it’s very clear that there will be 
incentives to various parts of the province to organize their 
municipalities and the things that they do in quite a different 
fashion. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this isn’t necessarily a 
difficult or bad thing that’s being proposed here, but I think 
what’s hard for many of us is that it’s being done in a bit of a 
backhanded way. 
 
And so what do we have here? Well the minister states right 
upfront that the first thing this bill will do “. . . is provide better 
criteria on which to determine whether unincorporated 
communities and areas have sufficient capacity for local 
governance and municipal status.” And so, Mr. Speaker, there 
appears to be an underlying theme that there need to be broader 
regional type governments. They don’t use the word county 
anywhere in here like we have in our neighbouring province of 
Alberta, but there are a number of themes that come out of this 
legislation. And when you look at other pieces of legislation 
that are there around particular services, whether it’s some of 
the water legislation that’s been introduced by the Minister of 
Environment or some of the legislation around various regional 
services, whether it’s waste disposal or other kinds of things, 
you put all these pieces together, and we do have a plan. I don’t 
know if I can call it quite a plan, but it’s a possible path towards 
some fairly main significant changes in what’s going to happen 
in the province. 
 
So I’m not sure if this will be part of the budget of the Minister 
of Finance that we’ll see some incentives that come forward 
that make it obvious that these municipalities or villages or 
resort villages or however all the different pieces are put 
together, it just makes sense for them to do things more closely 
together. But clearly a lot of the rules that are in this particular 
legislation will be part of facilitating some fairly major change 
in the province. 
 
And so what, you know, what do we make of this? Now we 
know from what the minister said, and we’ve also seen letters 
of support from different groups in the province, and 
specifically SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] is quite pleased with this particular legislation, 
which is that practically we need to have some bigger areas that 



4620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

are managed together and that the old traditional distance 
between towns of 6 miles, or I think it was about an hour or a 
little less ride with a horse and wagon between our 
communities, isn’t really workable in the 21st century. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So what is it that is the vision for the province? That part is not 
here, either in the minister’s comments or in the legislation, and 
I think that that is a failing of . . . What we have here is that we 
may end up with a patchwork of things happening in the 
province that are quite difficult for everybody, but especially 
difficult for some of the smaller communities. And most people 
don’t mind having clear rules that come as a result of 
conversation and discussion across the province, but what they 
do object to is when things are sort of hinted at or pushed or 
somebody has a vision but they don’t really tell everybody what 
it is that that vision is, and they go ahead and make changes that 
facilitate that. 
 
Now I’m going to also comment about this particular legislation 
in light of the legislation for the Global Transportation Hub just 
outside of Regina. What we’ve seen is that the mayor of that 
Global Transportation Hub, which is, you know, bigger than 
many of our municipalities in the province, happens to be the 
Minister of the Economy, and basically that place competes 
with the city of Regina, competes with the RM [rural 
municipality] of Sherwood, competes with the city of Moose 
Jaw and other places across the province, but it can move very 
fast because there is really no council, at least no elected one 
position. It’s basically just the Minister of the Economy running 
that operation. And so what we see is transfer of taxpayers, or 
in the light of Crown corporations, people who . . . 
organizations that compensate the city of Regina or the city of 
Moose Jaw for services that are provided, moving to the Global 
Transportation Hub where they obviously pay for some services 
but it’s outside of the control of either of the cities involved or 
of the RM of Sherwood. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have this kind of strange creature 
which has been created by not public discussion, but just sort of 
things happening. And so, Mr. Speaker, given the history of 
how that’s worked, we have now this legislation being 
introduced in this session which has many of the same kinds of 
powers of transformation which aren’t clearly set out, which 
haven’t been discussed in the community, which don’t have any 
clear boundaries, and in many times they’re defined in the 
regulations which nobody has seen to this point. And so what 
are we supposed to do here in the legislature when this type of 
change to our communities is being introduced? 
 
Now if you’re a mayor of a small town or a resort village or 
even one of our cities, some of the things in this legislation are 
very good because it allows for some expansion of the area of 
responsibility without a huge amount of discussion. And so for 
existing local political leaders, it has some advantages. 
 
But do the public know about this? Do the public understand 
what this legislation means? Do they understand that what may 
have been a traditional area of local responsibility could be 
changed all of a sudden without them knowing much about 
that? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that is an 
area where we need to watch very carefully because practically 

what we have is once again an example of some inadvertent 
changes being brought forward that may or may not accomplish 
what’s intended, but clearly it will transform our province such 
as we have now. 
 
Now is this legislation here as a result of some of the initiatives 
that have come from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities around clearing a path, making sure that there’s 
common rules and regulations across some of the rural areas 
that allow for businesses to work properly, whether it’s oil and 
gas or whether it’s other businesses? I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. 
We don’t really see or hear where this comes from. 
 
What we do know though is that the minister who has 
introduced this information knows the issues and challenges 
that are present in rural municipalities and municipalities in 
general across the province. We know that he has, for many 
years, looked at some of these issues. I think what we all would 
have preferred is we’d use those skills and the skills of the 
Premier to communicate, to have a discussion about what the 
province of Saskatchewan should look like in 2025 or 2040. 
Because it really is our province. It’s our communities. And 
when things happen that are not explainable or you don’t 
understand where some of the rules come from, then you end up 
causing further difficulty over the longer term. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation has a number of 
aspects of that type of uncertainty which we don’t need because 
uncertainty is always a factor in having the economic health of 
the province suffer. And so when I first saw this legislation, as I 
said before, I thought, oh here we go. 
 
But we don’t have the plan. We don’t have the perspective. We 
don’t have the vision that basically can drive some of this type 
of legislation to accomplish what many people within the 
province want. I don’t think people are afraid of reorganizing 
how we provide services in municipalities or in regions. I don’t 
think they’re afraid of that, but they want to have a fair 
discussion. They want to have a reasonable discussion, and they 
want to be part of the discussion. And so that’s where some of 
this legislation, I think, fails because it’s been brought forward 
in a way that doesn’t have the bigger vision, the bigger plan for 
what the province is. 
 
It’s not dissimilar to what happened with the labour legislation. 
Things are brought forward without a lot of discussion. Now 
here, maybe some of these tools will be used in positive ways. I 
think probably many of them will. But to have the actual 
discussion, to actually have a sense of what Saskatchewan will 
look like in the longer term, that’s not part of this particular 
legislation. 
 
So I’m looking forward to hearing further comments about this. 
I’m expecting that there may be some financial incentives 
around some of these amalgamation provisions that will come 
in the Minister of Finance’s budget in a few weeks. There may 
be some other announcements that nudge this process along. 
But I’m disappointed and I think people of Saskatchewan 
should be disappointed that we don’t have the bigger picture. 
We don’t have the longer term vision of what the province can 
be because I think that people are ready to have this discussion, 
and they’d rather do it openly than have things happen to them 
in a surprised or unexpected way. 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4621 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have any further comments 
right now. I know that we’ll have some questions when we get 
to committee, but I do also know that a number of my 
colleagues will want to comment on this legislation because it 
affects all parts of the province in slightly different ways. And I 
look forward to somebody, hopefully the Premier, presenting a 
vision which this legislation fits into. With that I would move 
adjournment of debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 116. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 117 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and speak to Bill No. 117, An Act to make a consequential 
amendment to The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 resulting 
from the enactment of The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2). 
 
And so effectively what this legislation does in one page is kind 
of capture all of the change that is in the previous bill that was 
introduced, Bill No. 116, because what it does is it adds another 
definition in The Non-profit Corporations Act of something 
called municipal district. And so that word could be county. It 
could be regional authority. It could be lots of different things, 
but in Saskatchewan it’s called municipal district because 
maybe that’s not as disruptive as some other terms. And so 
what’s happening in this particular legislation is that this newly 
defined municipal district or this amalgamation tool from Bill 
No. 116 is going to be acknowledged in The Non-profit 
Corporations Act and is going to be recognized in the same 
fashion as municipalities and rural municipalities. 
 
So once again we have a possible vision of what the province is 
going to be like in 10 or 20 or 30 years, but there’s really no 
vision that unifies all of this and says, oh that makes sense. This 
piece of legislation is here to accomplish building strong 
regional governments and strong regional communities that will 
serve all of the people of the province. 
 
And so I think all Saskatchewan people are waiting for the 
Premier to articulate that, for the minister to articulate that, for 
the budget of the Finance minister to show us what the financial 
incentives will be to amalgamate. And we’ll accept that they 
won’t call it forced amalgamation, but I think it may be called 
facilitated amalgamation or it may be called encouraged 
amalgamation. But whatever you want to call it, it will be 

consolidation or amalgamation of regional governments in the 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that others of my colleagues will want 
to comment on this bill as well, and at this point I will adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 117. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 117. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:00] 
 

Bill No. 118 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to wade into the discussion on Bill 118, The Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic Act. 
 
I think one place that I’d like to start here today is on the 
consultation piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this government 
hasn’t had the best track record when it’s come to consultation, 
but noting in the minister’s comments actually, he does in fact 
say that they’ve consulted widely with the post-secondary 
sector including those at the University of Regina, the 
University of Saskatchewan, the regional colleges, the Dumont 
Technical Institute, the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies, and the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. And he goes on to say that SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
has consulted with its student association, SIAST faculty 
association, and the Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union, Professional Services. 
 
So he doesn’t go on to say what those organizations said about 
the legislation, but he does in fact say that they’ve consulted. 
But this government has a track record of doing cursory 
consultation and listening, but not always hearing what 
organizations have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But it’s good to know, at least in this case, that the government 
has reached out to all the stakeholders. That’s absolutely 
imperative when making legislation, that those impacted by the 
legislation are in fact involved in the process of saying their 
piece on the proposed legislation or what they’d like to see. 
 
What does Bill 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act do? I 
keep saying polytechnique, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m thinking 
about Quebec actually which was in Canada, I believe, it was 
the first province to have polytechnique institutes. And I 
remember as a young person doing a French immersion and 
learning about all my cohort who were going to polytechniques. 



4622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

So basically what this bill is doing, it has a few different parts 
and pieces to it. SIAST will be changing . . . It’s a name change, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology to Polytechnic. So the minister points 
out that this is an evolution moving from being an institute of 
applied . . . What word am I looking for, Mr. Speaker? Moving 
from an institute of applied science and technology to a 
polytechnic. So he doesn’t lay out particularly what a 
polytechnic is, but one of the things that a polytechnic can do is 
grant degrees, Mr. Speaker. So there will be degree granting at 
this institution. As well they’ll be able to do applied research 
and scholarly activity. 
 
One of the things that’s interesting is it’ll allow, The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act will clarify SIAST’s ability to 
fundraise for property. And the minister says this is increasingly 
important, and he points to the fact that SIAST was able to 
attract very significant dollars from Husky, which is useful, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Organizations that are benefiting from greater 
skills and trade training should participate in the growing 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there are some things to flag here. You have a government 
who has had some difficulty with funding around education, 
both at the pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] level and 
at the university level and at the technical institute level, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We heard today about tuition rates going up at 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. So we welcome 
participation from obviously industry, but you have to be 
mindful too that government . . . It shouldn’t be an opportunity 
for government to abdicate its responsibilities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I know when we think about technical colleges . . . Well my 
own experience, I have both a university degree and a diploma. 
And my diploma actually came from SAIT [Southern Alberta 
Institute of Technology] in Calgary. And I do know very well 
first-hand the advantages of a technical college, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I know in my two years of time at SAIT, I don’t have 
any experience here in Saskatchewan, but my two years at 
SAIT were incredibly beneficial, very hands-on, very practical 
learning. When I graduated from SAIT with a journalism 
diploma, I felt very well equipped to be able to go out in the 
world and work as a journalist. I benefited greatly from my 
university education as well, but I’m a big believer in skill and 
trade training, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And anything that supports 
SIAST’s ability to further do their job is a good thing. 
 
So interesting again, I think I’ve covered some of the things that 
are happening here — the degree-granting piece, the applied 
research and scholarly activity, the ability of SIAST to be able 
to fundraise for property, and the fact that the minister’s 
outlined that consultation has happened here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I do know I have colleagues who undoubtedly will 
have further to add to this debate and will have questions when 
we come to committee. And that’s always a good time to get a 
better sense of what has happened and why it’s happened, and 
it’s good to have that opportunity to be able to ask questions. 
 
But again the work of SIAST over the years, prior to this 
legislation coming into force at some point and becoming a 
polytechnic, SIAST has contributed greatly to our economy 
throughout the province and helped ensure our ability to have a 

trained, a high-quality, trained workforce, whether you’re a 
child care worker or someone working in the other trades, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So with that I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 118. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to weigh into the discussion on Bill 119, The Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. That is a 
mouthful. 
 
This Act is a companion Act to Bill No. 118, to which I just 
spoke. It’s just dealing with pieces of . . . changes that need to 
happen in other pieces of legislation to ensure that Bill 118 can 
go ahead. So I know I’ve addressed some things in Bill 118, 
and my comments on that still stand. So between now and the 
time that this bill makes it to committee we will have an 
opportunity to think of some further questions, but I think it’s 
fairly straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So with that, I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 119. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 
Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s always good to be recognized by yourself to join in the 
debate in this Assembly. Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act, 
interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I should say off the 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4623 

top, I haven’t been lobbied one way or the other about the 
contents of this legislation, just to register that for the House. 
 
But it’s interesting. The sort of genesis of this particular piece 
of legislation would seem to have been an article that Guy 
Giorno, one-time chief of staff to Stephen Harper, a prominent 
Ottawa lawyer, had written in which he’d talked about how 
Saskatchewan was the Wild West when it came to the lack of 
lobbying legislation. 
 
And it was interesting to see the wheels kick into action after 
that, Mr. Speaker, in terms of special committee activity being 
undertaken on the part of the Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice Committee. I believe it was the work heading out to 
Ottawa to meet with various folks there including, I believe, 
Mr. Giorno, and then the sort of gestation that was undertaken 
on the providing of a committee report, and then how that 
ultimately translated into the legislation that we are debating 
here today, Bill No. 120. 
 
I’d like to say a special word of thanks to our member and 
representative in those proceedings, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, herself a lawyer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
she certainly kept us as a caucus well abreast of the 
developments and well briefed on the developments and at the 
end of the day, in terms of the work that she’d done in 
conjunction with the committee, felt compelled to provide a 
minority report as regarded the final report of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. And then it’s 
her that we look to for guidance as we proceed through the 
legislation. 
 
So it’s been an interesting evolution for this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, now, and I guess one of the more 
interesting descriptors as this has come to fruition in terms of 
Bill No. 120 finally being in front of the House. 
 
Again given the contributory role that Mr. Giorno, Mr. Guy 
Giorno had played in terms of spurring action from the 
provincial government on this front, it’s interesting to look to 
what his take is on it now. Whether or not it takes 
Saskatchewan from being the Wild West perhaps to being the 
mild west we shall see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s interesting, in an interview with Saskatchewan political 
columnist Murray Mandryk from November 23rd, 2013 in the 
Leader-Post, Mr. Giorno described Bill No. 120 as . . . stating 
that, to set up the quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The key is for the public to be able to see what 
government is doing, said Giorno, likening the Lobbyist 
Act to a flashlight rather than a hammer. 
 
“Right now, you (in Saskatchewan) don’t even have a 
two-watt flashlight,” he said. 

 
And then carrying on here, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

Admittedly this law — as Giorno points out — could have 
gone much further in its transparency requirements. Its 
failure to even require public disclosure about individuals 
and organizations cabinet ministers and premiers meet 
with speaks to its ample deficiencies. 

But bills can always be fixed in second reading with 
amendments. Laws, too, can always be later amended. 
 
This may not be a great law right now, but it is a start. 

 
From the article again authored by Mr. Murray Mandryk and 
reported in November 23rd’s Leader-Post. So moving from no 
flashlight to possibly a 2-watt flashlight with this legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to see that, again referring to the column 
Mandryk had written wherein: 

 
Giorno suggested the proposed law “would give the 
province one of the most strongly enforced lobbying laws 
in the country, and lobbying conflict-of-interest rules 
among the toughest in Canada.”  

 
You know, that would seem to be a good thing on the fact of it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to carry on with the quote: 
 

He went on to credit the law for its broad, encompassing 
definition of lobbying activities, which, incidentally, 
include any communication regarding “privatization, 
out-sourcing and contracting out.”  
 

Again, given the various activities we see this government up 
to, Mr. Speaker, those kind of provisions are now more 
important than ever in terms of the increasing activity we see 
when it comes to privatizing, when it comes to outsourcing, and 
when it comes to contracting out. And so again that Giorno 
thinks that they’re well dealt with in terms of the scope of the 
legislation. That brings some encouragement. 
 
Carrying on from the Mandryk article: 
 

However, the lawyer and lobbying expert was far less 
generous in assessing the “large gaps in the legislation” 
that mean the law “would not affect interest groups, many 
non-profit organizations and some businesses.” 
 

[16:15] 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there are some interesting things that you 
can do with legislation. Sometimes you go broad and deep. 
Sometimes maybe you go more like a laser in terms of 
penetration. But sometimes legislation arises in this Chamber 
where you think it’s more like a light in the window. And if 
again the scope is such and the activities that are to be covered 
under the legislation are fairly encompassing, fairly significant, 
that’s great. But if alongside that then you’ve got the ability to 
find out what those organizations that are involved in lobbying 
are up to and they’re excluded or exempted from the Act itself, 
then that doesn’t make for the greatest teeth in the world in 
terms of the legislation. 
 
So I think the way that Giorno described it on his website on 
November 22nd when the legislation was brought in or 
introduced in the House, he had titled his thoughts on it: 
“Saskatchewan government introduces long-awaited lobbying 
law — strong enforcement, strong conflict-of-interest rules, but 



4624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

many lobbyists unaffected.” 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of like you’ve got a big, 
ferocious dog that doesn’t have any teeth. So you know, while 
we all, I’m sure, fear a vigorous gumming from the big 
ferocious dog, at the end of the day, it’s not like the going-over 
you got if there’s some actual teeth in the equation. So if you’ve 
got this big, ferocious-looking dog of a piece of a legislation 
here, Mr. Speaker, but all you’re going to get is a good 
gumming at the end of the day, then it doesn’t accomplish very 
much at all, other than perhaps the need to towel down for all 
the slobber involved. 
 
But you now . . . So with apologies to Marmaduke I guess, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of, you know, where we’re going with this 
legislation, right out of the gates I mean I think Giorno has very 
charitably taken the approach that it’s better than what went 
before. But in terms of having some teeth and some effect, Mr. 
Speaker, and in terms of who is incorporated into the 
legislation, I think that there’s some doubts emerging in terms 
of the work of the commentators. 
 
In terms of, again in Giorno’s thoughtful discussion of the bill, 
he goes over the scope of the bill — so obviously very 
important, and we touched on that — it goes over the conflict of 
interest rules. And there, I might add a bit parenthetically, Mr. 
Speaker, where he talks about: 
 

One significant omission from Bill 120 is a code of 
conduct for lobbyists. The federal, Quebec and 
Newfoundland and Labrador laws itemize specific ethical 
rules that lobbyists must follow. The Saskatchewan 
Government has declined to do likewise at this time, but 
will continue to review the possibility. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, something that would equip, better equip 
the law to have better effect right out of the gates, you know, in 
terms of the fundamental rules of engagement, the ethical 
expectations that are there to be lived up to or to clearly 
demarcate that line. And if you’re on the right side of that line 
or not, that we don’t have that code of conduct in place is a bit 
of work that I would submit remains undone. So again, we’ll be 
looking to see how that is addressed either in amendments to 
come or perhaps in future iterations of the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. But odd for its omission right out of the gates. 
 
Carrying on in Giorno’s discussion of the bill, where he talks 
about other transparency features, and again this would seem to 
be a good change. Under the legislation, “The bill proposes that 
the government and government institutions would be required 
to publish information about any payments that they make to 
lobbyists.” 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting to know who’s 
involved at the dance. Just last week, Mr. Speaker, we had an 
individual introduced in the Assembly, former colleague of 
members opposite who has been engaged by one of the 
post-secondary education institutions in this province to engage 
in some lobbying work, presumably between the province and 
the federal government and the institution. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, knowing who some of these 
individuals are and where they come from and what the 

connections are, it helps to break down how different decisions 
are made that otherwise might not be readily apparent, Mr. 
Speaker. But critical to that is knowing who’s at the dance, 
knowing who’s doing the matchmaking, knowing who’s trying 
to put deals together. 
 
And certainly lobbyists have a very legitimate function to 
perform, Mr. Speaker. But the people also have a very 
legitimate expectation that they should have transparent, 
accountable government. And if you don’t know who the 
people behind the scenes are, really making the magic happen, 
then it’s less than it should be. It’s less forthright than it should 
be for the people in terms of the legislation that we’re 
entertaining here today and how government makes decisions. 
 
And again I’d remind you, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
government that said they would be the most transparent and 
accountable government in the history of the province. Well 
you know, seven years on we’re here debating Bill No. 120, the 
lobbyist registry Act. And you know, great, great. Glad to see it 
here. The seven-year alarm on the snooze . . . The snooze bar 
hit seven years. But you know, again, good start. It’s maybe not 
a hammer. It’s maybe a bit more of a 2-watt flashlight, but you 
know, on we go. 
 
Anyway, again carrying on in Mr. Giorno’s discussion of the 
legislation, he talks about enforcement. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide my own sort of analysis of again Mr. 
Giorno’s analysis and the way that he had described it at the 
top: “. . . long-awaited lobbying law — strong enforcement, 
strong conflict-of-interest rules, but many lobbyists unaffected.” 
Again you can have very . . . Maybe you’ve got the big dog, 
and maybe you’ve got the big, ferocious dog. And maybe 
you’ve got teeth for that dog. They’re just not in that dog’s 
head. And if you’ve got the teeth somewhere offstage, Mr. 
Speaker, or the teeth deployed in a manner in which they’ll 
never be allowed to give some bite, some force to the 
legislation, then again is it more about doing right or trying to 
be seen to be looking like you’re doing right? Is it more about 
managing the optics of the situation or is it more about having 
something that has force and effect and will provide real and 
urgent transparency and accountability for the people of 
Saskatchewan? So as it regards to the enforcement provisions of 
Bill 120, again there would seem to be some good provisions 
therein, but we’ll see how those play out in reality. 
 
I guess the one thing that’s of particular interest for us, Mr. 
Speaker, again is arguably the product of bipartisan 
co-operation to a certain extent, and we’re glad to see that in the 
House. But as is sometimes the case, it doesn’t seem to go far 
enough in terms of some of the exemptions. 
 
And again the exemptions, there are legitimate concerns to be 
countenanced there, Mr. Speaker, you know, how to strike that 
balance in a province like Saskatchewan where you’ve still got 
. . . You know, politics is very close range here. And people not 
only expect that they’re going to have that level of contact and 
connection with their legislators, but that you’ve got a system 
that on the other hand is workable and doesn’t have you running 
around with a stopwatch or something to perhaps make it a bit 
more ridiculous than need be the case, Mr. Speaker. But again 
having a workable, viable solution that doesn’t hinder or harm 
that close contact that I think in many ways really recommends 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4625 

the Saskatchewan experience in terms of that connection 
between the political process and people. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, it’s to provide that balance 
to make sure that it’s above board, that there aren’t sort of 
mystery operations taking place backstage that you don’t 
understand where particular things come from, but you know 
who’s talking to whom. You know, what the agendas are and 
how to get that in plain sight of the public, I think, is very much 
in the ken of a piece of legislation such as the Bill 120. 
 
So we’ve got a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, and some of them 
are best given voice to here in the Assembly. Some of them 
obviously we’ll be addressing in committee, and some of them 
it will be I think a function of wait and see in terms of what sort 
of consequences arise from the legislation. Does it improve that 
transparency and accountability? Is the regime workable? Does 
it strike that fair balance between the people and the process in 
a durable manner? These are things that we’ll be looking to see 
in the days and weeks and months ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s an interesting parentage with this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, and an interesting process that has it before us today 
for consideration. And I’m sure that its continued evolution will 
only be more interesting as well. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
just wanted to put a few thoughts on the record from our 
perspective as regards Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. And 
with that, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 122, 
An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 
1997. And I think this is one that people pay an awful lot of 
attention to. 
 
And I want to just say one thing before I get into the main body 
of my comments, about how a bill like this is so important, 
important to our Canadian identity, our Saskatchewan identity. I 
think about the Olympics and just how the big controversy 
about how we wanted the public houses open on that Sunday 
morning so we could watch the Olympic, the men’s hockey 
final at 6 o’clock in the morning. And I do want to acknowledge 
the government. It’s unfortunate that not every house or bar or 
establishment could be open, but Regina and Saskatoon, I know 

people were appreciative of it. And it’s a bit of the sign of the 
times. You know, I don’t know whether 20 years ago or 30 
years ago, whether we could have been watching a hockey 
game like that in the morning, period, or the quality of that. So 
it’s about keeping up with the times and I know that people 
were very appreciative of it, and in fact they were lining up. 
 
And I think that somebody said there were three things that 
make Canadians patriotic, and one of them of course is the 
Olympic hockey. And both the women and the men did us so 
proud, and a little add-on like being able to do this is a very, 
very, very good thing. So I think that in some small way it 
might be an unusual thing for me to acknowledge the good 
work of the government for that thing, but I know that I join I 
think a lot of people in acknowledging that. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But having said that, having said that, now that I want to get 
back to the main body of my comments on this important piece 
of legislation and how important it is because it really does 
affect the fabric of our communities. And we’ve seen that. And 
I will in a minute talk a bit about the minister’s comments, and 
we’ll go through them very carefully and parse them out to 
really understand the ramifications. This is one piece of 
legislation . . . I mean they all are, but this is one in particular 
where you want to make sure there are no unintended 
consequences and that it is not completely driven by the ability 
to raise money. 
 
And while we are . . . And particularly at this time we are 
thinking about the provincial budget that’s about to come down 
in a few days, and government resources. We’re hearing a lot 
about the challenges the government is facing, and well they 
may be looking at different pots of money and wondering how 
can we expand income from this pot or from that pot, how can 
we get more resources. This is one where the unintended 
consequences are huge. 
 
And just earlier in the day we were debating and I entered into 
the debate — I believe it was Bill 127, the mental health 
amendment Act — where we talked about the unintended 
consequences there in the issues around addictions. And we’ll 
talk about that and talk about the comments the minister has 
made about that. And I have some grave, grave concerns that 
we are not doing enough to deal with gaming addictions. And I 
think we need to do more. In fact and I just recall a story in the 
paper, and I don’t know if you’ve heard this. 
 
The news story out of Los Angeles, but based in Las Vegas 
where a fellow and his girlfriend travelled to Las Vegas as part 
of the Super Bowl weekend, and after the game — I think it 
was after the game; it could have been before the game — 
where the fellow decided to partake in some gambling 
activities. And the law of Nevada is that you cannot, you have 
to make sure that the person who is gambling is in full capacity 
of their abilities to gamble. They can’t be too intoxicated. 
 
Well this fellow had gambled for 17 hours straight, had 
numerous drinks — unbelievably intoxicated — and couldn’t 
remember himself gambling and lost half a million dollars. And 
of course the casino has come after him to pay up on his bill. 
But his line of defence is he was too drunk; he doesn’t 



4626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

remember this. And well we’ll see how this plays out in the 
court. But I do say that we need to, we need to have strong 
regulations, strong regulations when it comes to that kind of 
thing. 
 
We see that in our communities. And it’s great when we can, in 
our establishments, celebrate the great things in life like Canada 
winning the gold medal and allowing that to happen. That’s a 
common sense thing and we support that kind of common sense 
activity. 
 
Except for in P.A. [Prince Albert], and I will get to P.A. in a 
minute. But . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I will get to 
Prince Albert; that’s on my list of topics to hit here. But at the 
other hand, I do want to say that when we have situations where 
people have issues, have real problems with addictions and 
whether they be alcohol, whether they be, you know, illegal 
substances, or whether they be gambling or any of the other 
addictions, we need to make sure we have the proper 
regulations in play here. And so I think that’s critically 
important. 
 
Now and I was reminded, and rightfully so, by the members 
opposite, about who should be consulted, and we know that’s a 
common concern that we raise over here in terms of who has 
been consulted with these regulations. What did those 
consultations look like? What was the input? 
 
We know for example the minister — and I’ll talk about this in 
a minute — has gone on at length about cutting red tape. And 
we know that’s an important initiative of the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business. It’s one that in many 
instances, particularly as governments evolve over time, you 
see doubling up of regulations, things that just don’t make any 
sense. So it’s only reasonable that we continually examine our 
regulations and our legislation to make sure they are current and 
they’re not doubling up, that they make sense. But at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, we have to make sure we 
protect the vulnerable in our society. And often those aren’t just 
people who we often may think in stereotypical ways, but those 
who actually do need some help with their addictions. And so 
this is really important. 
 
And I know the minister has referred to public safety, that 
there’s a balance between cutting red tape and public safety. 
And of course we see in some communities and we think of — 
and we’ve heard about this a lot in the media — communities 
like Prince Albert who wrestle a lot with this. And it’d be 
interesting to hear what the members, the two members from 
Prince Albert have to say about this. Of course we won’t, 
unfortunately, hear their comments. We might hear their 
questions in committee. But it is deeply, deeply unfortunate 
when we don’t see the proper consultation with communities at 
stake.  
 
So what makes sense? What is giving too much power to local 
businesses that make sure we don’t have a consistent business 
community . . . playing field across the province? Why is it that 
some of our communities seem to wrestle with this issue, 
particularly with alcoholism and gambling, to a larger extent 
than others? What is it that makes that difference? And what 
can we do as a province to support them to make sure that 
people are healthy, that they are able to make choices and be 

able to go out for a night, have some entertainment, have some 
fun, but at the same time not put themselves at risk either 
through accidents or whether through long-term situations? 
 
And so this is deeply a concern of mine. I think it’s an 
important one. But I do want to take a minute here to review 
what the minister has to say about this. I always find it 
insightful and helpful to review back on the minister’s 
comments. And again she doesn’t . . . And it seems to be the 
style of this government to not talk about their consultations. 
And we don’t know whether that’s because they don’t have 
anything to talk about, that’s it’s not one that they’ve gone out 
and done a lot of consultation on. And again as I say, in 
opposition, those changes that make sense, we’ll be there. We’ll 
support. Those that we have and I think the public has some 
questions about, we will raise those questions and hold this 
government to account. 
 
So this again this was introduced just before the dying days of 
the Christmas session before we rose and went home for 
Christmas. But she talks about this Act, the Act to amend The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, establishes the 
foundations and regulation of licensing alcohol and gaming 
products in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so she talks about having four primary themes. And I mean 
this seems to be vague, but this is what I’m quoting the minister 
saying: “The first is providing authority for a First Nations 
gaming licensing authority to register on-reserve charitable 
gaming employees and suppliers.” That sounds like a 
worthwhile theme. “The second is allowing Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority to establish a subsidiary 
corporation through an order in council. The third is ensuring 
effective regulation.” Now that’s the one I do have . . . I don’t 
know exactly what that means, but when we get to it, we’ll pull 
at that a bit and find out more about what she’s really aiming to 
do. And the last, Mr. Speaker, is the housekeeping amendments 
which often seems to be an awful lot of work that this 
government does. 
 
But I want to take a look at the first one, and this is about the 
First Nations gaming and licensing authority. And what’s 
happening now, we understand, that there’s been more . . . This 
is, you know, a continuation of the 2002 agreement which was 
started with the 1995 Gaming Framework Agreement that 
talked about respecting the regulation of on-reserve charitable 
gaming by First Nations. So to facilitate this, the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations created Indigenous Gaming 
Regulators or what’s known as IGR. Since 2007 they have been 
responsible for the licensing and registration of on-reserve 
charitable gaming, including bingos, break-open tickets, raffles, 
Texas hold’ems, Monte Carlo, table games, and so forth. 
 
During that time, they fulfilled, they’ve done a good job, 
according to the minister, and that’s good. I would believe that 
would be the case. We have a lot of faith. And we think the 
SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] and IGR, 
they have done good work, and it’s good to see that they have a 
co-operative relationship that’s beneficial to both. That’s an 
important thing. 
 
So it’s important to have this registration. It’s a tool that is used 
to make sure that there is integrity and accountability within the 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4627 

gaming industry, and that’s very, very important. 
 
And so apparently, come my understanding from what the 
minister is talking about, SIGA and IGR began discussions, 
talking about IGR’s authority to register on-reserve charitable 
gaming employees and suppliers. And there we are, here we are 
later, and this sounds to be the part that fulfils that discussion. 
And I think that sounds like a reasonable thing. So as a result, 
she’s proposing amendments that will authorize a First Nations 
gaming license authority such as IGR to register on-reserve 
charitable gaming employees and suppliers, and that it will be 
only exercised by a First Nations gaming licensing authority 
that has an agreement with SIGA. So that’s very, very 
important. So that’s good. That’s pretty well straightforward. 
 
And in addition, amendments to the Act will enable the Liquor 
and Gaming Licensing Commission to review the decisions of 
IGR. So this talks like a very productive, very co-operative 
relationship, and an important tool is talking about registration 
and the decisions that flow from that. So this will resemble 
those already in place respecting commission views of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. So that’s really 
pretty well straightforward. 
 
And I think, you know, at this point, I would say that we would 
have questions about that to help us understand it further. But 
we would think that’s straightforward, and it’s really important 
to see a good working relationship between the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, SIGA, and the IGRs, very 
important that that has that happening. And this is an important 
tool to ensure appropriate accounting and management. 
 
She does go on to talk about the red tape committee review of 
liquor regulations in Saskatchewan. And she talks about just a 
short time ago, November 2012, she wanted to take a longer 
look, continue to look for ways to reduce red tape and remove 
redundant regulations for business. And that continues on with 
this bill. And so it takes out apparently the irritants that no 
longer have relevance for an effective regulation of alcohol in 
this province. She’s getting rid of the requirement for medical 
use, non-consumptive use and educational use liquor permits, 
and removing provisions that grant Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority to demand explanations from permittees 
when a person has been refused entry. So that’s an interesting 
thing and we might have questions about that. It sounds like 
there’s a story there that, when people have been refused entry, 
that we don’t have to ask why. 
 
And I automatically go to my human rights aspect and say, who 
is doing the checking up on their permittees? And now if 
they’ve been refused entry, we automatically go to the place — 
and I would — that maybe it’s because of intoxication. And 
that’s fair enough. And that’s good. 
 
But I have questions, you know, because we’ve seen just in 
Saskatoon a tragic, tragic story of a bouncer where apparently 
there was conflict with a fellow in a bar, and now we 
understand there may be charges laid. But a young man lost his 
life apparently. His body has not been found in Saskatoon but 
he had been on some of the buses that cruise from bar to bar. It 
was his stag night. 
 
[16:45] 

And we want to make sure that there’s not an unintended 
consequence here of not having, you know, appropriate records 
or information for what happened that evening. I know that in 
fact we are hearing calls, we’re hearing calls from the woman 
who is engaged to this fellow saying that there has to be better 
and stronger training of bouncers. What happened that night in 
Saskatoon that apparently led to the passing, the untimely death 
of this young man? I think there’s a lot of questions we have. 
 
And can we learn from that, a tragic incident, to say, so here is a 
really happy story — you know, a stag where you’re celebrating 
the wedding, the marriage of a young man — that went 
tragically wrong, that went tragically wrong. That he went 
missing so quickly. His friends lost track of him. He apparently 
may have got onto a bus, got to a different part of the city. We 
don’t know all the details, and that’ll be uncovered in the 
courts. But clearly alcohol was involved. Clearly public safety 
was involved, clearly some decisions that we need more 
background on. 
 
So I think that this is a real question about red tape, and this one 
about refusing entry just causes me to think right away, are we 
creating a problem here? What’s the unintended consequence of 
that? I mean on one hand it seems relatively straightforward, 
but there is a responsibility for the community that when this 
kind of thing happens we want to make sure people are safe, 
that they’re not just . . . And especially, Mr. Speaker, as we 
know how cold this past winter was, if somebody’s had too 
much to drink and they’re at the door of the bar and you say 
you can’t come in, I think that it’s incumbent on all of us as a 
community to think, so can this person get home safely that 
night? 
 
I don’t know what happened in that situation, all the details, but 
I do know that it’s something that we should be learning from 
and so that kind of thing doesn’t happen. And we know the 
young woman who was engaged to be married thinks that there 
should be something. Whenever a tragedy happens we always 
hope that (a) it won’t happen again, and (b) that we can learn 
something from it. And if we can from this situation that 
happened in Saskatoon just a few short weeks ago, I think that 
we really need to take that opportunity. 
 
So the minister talks about taking the opportunity to remove 
outdated legislation, for example eliminating the discretionary 
ability of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority to 
require a permittee to stock beer manufactured in 
Saskatchewan. It’s not been enforced in recent memory, and 
there is no need to regulate in this area. 
 
And you know, I’m not sure what the implications of that is, 
and she talks about recent memory. I don’t know what the 
definition . . . and I looked in the Act to see if there was a 
definition of recent memory. It’s not defined. And so I’m 
curious to know what the implications are. I mean we can 
remember the days when most beer was actually manufactured 
in the province, and that was a big deal. We had a much more 
vigorous, lively industry, but that seems to have gone by the 
wayside. But we still have some, some fantastic beer in 
Saskatchewan, and I think that those producers may appreciate 
having some home team advantage. And I don’t know if this 
comes out of the New West deal and you know, it will be 
interesting to know. And I am thinking of Great Western. They 



4628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2014 

are, I think, our last larger manufacturer even though — of beer 
— even though that they are not in the big leagues as say 
Molson or Coors or Labatt’s. But still, has there been some 
consultation with Great Western on this? 
 
It would be interesting, seeing we’re on the topic of beer, 
whether or not there’s been changes to allow more craft beer in. 
And what are the regulations around craft beer, particularly in 
terms of safety, but also in terms of promotion? I think that’s 
really important. 
 
So and she does go on. She says, and I quote, “We continue to 
recognize the government has a role in the effective regulation 
of alcohol in order to maintain public safety.” And that’s where 
I just want to stop for a minute and say, so we’ve heard 
concerns from communities across the province, as have 
members from across the way. And I’m glad they recognize that 
Prince Albert, but there are other communities have concerns. 
What are their thoughts on this and do they think that this is the 
appropriate way to be going? Do they have some comments and 
what were they? And did the government listen to them or did 
they push them off to the side? 
 
She goes on to say: 
 

As a result, Bill 122 contains an amendment that places 
increased responsibility on permittees to not only refuse to 
serve alcohol to persons who appear to be intoxicated but 
to ensure that those persons are not in possession of 
beverage alcohol. 

 
And so that’s a good safety thing as well. 
 
But again in Saskatchewan, and I think, you know, it would be 
interesting to know if — and we’ll talk about this in committee 
— some sort of sense of responsibility so people get home 
safely or are not just pushed out the door. When we’ve seen the 
kinds of winters that we’ve had just . . . I shouldn’t say as if it’s 
in past tense. We’re not quite finished winter even like today 
may feel like it’s the end of winter. We could be back into 
really cold weather. And you know, whether it’s the incident 
that I talk about where we had the young fellow die in 
Saskatoon earlier this year or in Prince Albert where we had 
four people die because of exposure and we know . . . We see 
the Minister of Social Services have a cold-weather strategy, 
but what do bars have in terms of cold weather? It would be 
interesting to know if there’s been any research or any data 
done on this. I don’t know, but I think in a province like ours, 
it’s critically important that we don’t have people . . . that same 
sort of scenario that played out in Saskatoon or in Prince Albert 
the year before. 
 
So she talks about doing some housekeeping amendments. 
Again as I said, it’s important to keep current. It’s important 
that we have legislation that’s in plain English that people can 
read, they can follow, and they do the right thing. We want to 
make sure that Saskatchewan has a great hospitality reputation. 
It’s a safe one, but it’s a lot of fun. And I think about the 
summers in our cities and our communities. They’re absolutely 
wonderful. And I think about, for example, the jazz festival 
that’s about to come up and how much fun people have at that, 
or our different communities. 
 

So we want to be a real tourist attraction. We don’t want to be 
sort of outside what’s happening across Canada. I remember a 
few years ago. My wife and I were touring Quebec, and we 
were in a beautiful old hotel, and we were able to purchase a 
bottle of wine and go out onto the lawn and have wine out on 
this grand lawn looking across the St. Lawrence River. And so 
that’s a kind of thing; it’s really important that we have those 
kind of initiatives. 
 
And I think one of the best initiatives that I’ve seen from . . . 
And you know, I’m not sure what side of the House started this, 
was the fact that you now can not finish a bottle of wine but 
have it recorked and take it home with you. But it would be 
interesting to hear, we want to . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s important 
that we have people drink responsibly and not overdo it, not 
feel that they have to drink a whole bottle of wine that, in fact, 
they can cork it and take it home. I have not yet myself taken 
advantage of the ability to bring my own wine to a restaurant. I 
look forward to that occasion. I think that’s going to be really 
interesting. 
 
I’m not sure; I understand there’s issues around corkage and 
different things like that. But I know, Mr. Speaker, that we all 
want to make sure that our province truly is, as I say, a place 
people want to come to and that we are part of the 21st century. 
But I do want to say that there are some challenges that we 
have. And when it comes to addictions . . . and I do want to say 
I don’t understand why we can’t do more to work on 
regulations that help protect people from overdoing it when it 
comes to gambling. 
 
I think and I know that many on this side, and I would bet on 
that side too, think that gambling can be a real problem. We 
know people in our own communities where it’s unfortunate 
when we hear the stories of it having gone too far and lost 
homes, lost savings. Things have gone too far and there was . . . 
We would all hope that there would have been some way that 
the establishment, whether it would be a local bar with VLTs 
[video lottery terminals] or whether it be casinos, would have 
stronger powers to do that. In fact actually, I think casinos 
probably do have, and I understand they have the training. But 
it is some of the other smaller places that may not. 
 
And so it’s curious that we do a lot to reduce regulation. But 
sometimes I think it is important that we in fact strengthen 
regulation because as new challenges come up, we think about 
new innovations, but we also think of new challenges. It’s 
important that we have the ability to do the right thing. You 
know, on one hand we’re going to be dealing, we hope in the 
near future, with a mental health and addictions strategy, and 
it’ll be interesting to see what recommendations come out of 
that and whether there’ll be recommendations that deal with the 
gaming Act. And I would encourage government to be really 
thinking that completely through. 
 
You know, I’ll go back to where I started. There is a lot of 
positives. I think about the Olympic hockey game where we 
could all celebrate, and we all feel very good about being 
Canadian, and that’s a kind of thing when you should be 
innovative and on the spot and flexible, but at the same time, 
you know, we’ve seen it, as I say, in our community in 
Saskatoon where we lost a young man because of things that 
went awry, went horribly awry in the bars early this year. If 



March 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4629 

there was some way that we could have done something to 
protect him and the family, that would have been great. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll wrap up my comments, and I 
think it’s important that we get more people into this, and I 
would like to adjourn debate now on Bill 122, An Act to amend 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. I do so move. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the attendance of members at the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association function this evening, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4601 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4601 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4601 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4601 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4601 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Brain Awareness Week 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4602 
 Reginan Wins Paragon Award of Distinction 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4602 
 Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4602 
 Heritage Language Day 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4603 
 200th Anniversary of Celebrated Ukrainian’s Birth 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4603 
 Moose Jaw Spring Sparkle and Shine Salute 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4603 
 National Volleyball Championship 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4604 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Fire Prevention on First Nations 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4604 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4604 
 Environmental Protection 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4604 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4605 
 School Construction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4605 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4606 
 University Costs and Support 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4607 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4607 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4608 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4608 
MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4609 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Chairs of Former Speakers 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4609 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Launch of Redesigned SaskTenders Website 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4609 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4610 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4610 
 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4614 
 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4617 
 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4619 
 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4619 



 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4621 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4621 
 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4622 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4622 
 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4625 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


