






















































Hansard: November 25, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 18A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6033 
 November 25, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to this 
Assembly some very special visitors. They are officers from a 
number of policing agencies. They work together and with 
other enforcement agencies to keep Saskatchewan communities 
safe. 
 
Today I’d like to welcome Saskatoon Inspector Dave Haye, 
officer in charge of the combined forces special enforcement 
unit, or CFSEU. Dave, can you give us a wave? Thank you. The 
CFSEU played an important role in a major drug takedown on 
November 6th of 2014. 
 
A number of other agencies also took part in this investigation 
and have members also seated in your gallery today. 
Superintendent Corey Zaharuk with the community safety 
division of Regina Police Service. Corey? Superintendent Brent 
Schmidt of the criminal investigation division of the Regina 
Police Service. Superintendent Rob Cameron, the assistant 
criminal operations officer with RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] “F” Division. Chief Troy Cooper, chief of 
police, Prince Albert. And of course Dan Pooler, director of 
policing and community safety from the Ministry of 
Corrections and Policing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
the minister in welcoming these well-trained and well-respected 
officers of the police forces in Saskatchewan. We very much 
appreciate the work that you do. And I know that often it’s not 
thanked. You’re not thanked enough for that, and so I would 
say thank you very much on behalf of all of us. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to join with the minister and members opposite in 
welcoming these police officers and ministry officials to the 
Legislative Assembly today, and in particular point out one, Mr. 
Speaker, who I know rather well. That’s my brother-in-law, Mr. 
Troy Cooper, chief of Prince Albert Police Service, who I know 
the members from Prince Albert Carlton and Northcote tell me 
they run into him quite a bit over in Prince Albert at various 
functions. And I just want to welcome Troy to his Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 14 grade 11 and 12 students from the law 30 class at 
Sheldon-Williams Collegiate in Regina Lakeview. And they’re 
sitting in the east gallery. They’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Mrs. Lindsay Vindevoghel. So I ask all members to welcome 
them here today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And we know that in September of this year, this government 
walked away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable 
housing project in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and then rent the units at full market 
price. And when asked to explain how the government could 
allow this to happen, allowing a developer to back out of a 
fixed-price contract without any penalties, the Minister of 
Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re assuming that there’s 
these desperate homeless people,” showing how disconnected 
this government is from the realities within our communities. 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: cause the government to 
recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 
in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 
now allowing private developers with whom the 
government has close relationships to default on 
fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to 
the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 
Avenue. They speak to the importance of the west bypass being 
completed in a timely way and they speak to the importance of 
urgent actions to ensure safety on Dewdney Avenue. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 



6034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents from across 
Regina as well as directly on Dewdney Avenue. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of Creighton, Denare Beach, and area. Many residents 
in these communities are struggling with disabilities and 
currently do not have the support services they need and 
deserve. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
should take the following action: to cause the provincial 
Government of Saskatchewan to establish and build a 
residential and day program in the Creighton/Denare 
Beach region to support the immediate and ongoing needs 
of the community, and so that persons with intellectual 
disabilities thrive in their respective community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am proud to stand in my place today to present a petition 
on the second bridge for Prince Albert. And the petition reads 
as follows. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 
senior government. 

 
A good commitment, Mr. Speaker. And the people that have 
signed this particular petition are from Moose Jaw. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today in support of safe staffing levels in long-term care. The 
petitioners point out, Mr. Speaker, that many aspects of 
long-term care are deteriorating under this government; that the 
Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for 

safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents; that 
the government is failing to fix the basics in long-term care, 
including rejecting the further urgent requests from long-term 
care facilities for increased and needed staffing levels. They 
point out that the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in 
neglect; that chronic understaffing in long-term care facilities 
results in unacceptable conditions, including unanswered calls 
for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in physical violence 
amongst residents. And they also point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
fixing the basics and achieving real improvement in long-term 
care services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 
front-line health care workers, residents, and their families, as 
opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 
the following action: to cause the government to commit 
to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. In the prayer that reads as follows the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 
to act on readily available information about safety 
concerns with its smart meter program, including through 
the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 
concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 
safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Warman, Maple Creek, Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very honoured to 
rise today to present a petition from some of my constituents, 
and this is on a petition to support better health care in 
Saskatchewan. What they would like to do is bring to our 
attention the following: that emergency room wait times in 
Saskatchewan have doubled since 2010, and the government’s 
own statistics show that patient safety is getting worse. We also 
know the government is spending untold millions of dollars on 
its lean project, including a $40 million contract with an 
American consultant and flying in Japanese senseis for $3,500 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6035 

per day. The prayer reads as follows. They: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to recognize health care is getting 
worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics by 
listening to health care workers, patients, and their 
families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 
and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 
spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Immigrants of Distinction Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the first ever in Saskatchewan Immigrants of 
Distinction Awards were recently celebrated in Yorkton. 
Partners in Settlement and Integration, a division of the Yorkton 
branch of the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, collaborated to 
host this event in recognition of the significant contributions of 
newcomers to the east central region of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Immigrants of Distinction Awards recognized 
eight individuals and organizations that have increased the 
region’s diversity and enriched the community’s culture. 
Winners include Amitada “J.J.” Chogata who won the Youth 
Scholarship Award; Mauricio Gomez who won the Business 
Award; Vivian Quan who won the Distinguished Service 
Award; Oksana Burback who won the Volunteer Award; and 
Jobert del Rosario who won the Immigrant of the Year Award. 
 
Organizations in the community have also stepped forward to 
support these new residents. Parkland Filipino Canadian 
Association Inc. won the Arts and Culture Award. 
Saskatchewan-Melville and Area Happenings and Gathering 
FiliCan won the Immigrant Group of the Year Award, and 
McDonald’s restaurant won the Organizational Diversity 
Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government strongly believes that diversity 
and inclusion will have a central role in driving productivity, 
innovation, and growth in economic prosperity in our province. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
all of these outstanding individuals and organizations for their 
hard work and dedication to strengthening our growing 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Agribition Is for Everyone 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in 
this House to celebrate the start of an important week for 
producers, our city, and our province — Agribition. For nearly 
50 years the Western Canadian Agribition has been a fixture in 
the calendars for people across Saskatchewan and around the 
world. It’s a time for producers, entrepreneurs, and innovators 

in our great province to show the world our excellence in 
agriculture. 
 
The slogan for Agribition is, Agribition Is for Everyone. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, certainly is accurate. From livestock to 
agricultural equipment to the trade show and shops, to the 
rodeo, to the music, the dancing, and the food, there truly is 
something for everyone. 
 
One of the most important parts of Agribition is the educational 
component. Thousands of lucky kids will be arriving on yellow 
school buses from all over Saskatchewan over the next few 
days. For some students it may be the first time they’ve seen 
livestock up close and personal. For others it will be an 
opportunity to expand and share the knowledge they already 
possess from life on the farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has a long history of success in 
agriculture, and I know that our producers will continue to lead 
the world in technology, crop science, and stockbreeding for 
many years to come. I hope that all members will join with me 
in congratulating all the organizers and volunteers on what will 
surely be another successful Agribition. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Streamlining of Student Loan Process 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Beginning this year, 
post-secondary students are benefiting from a new initiative to 
streamline the administration of student loans. In order to make 
it easier for students to apply for student financial assistance, a 
more manageable and time-saving process has been developed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one-time signature for a student loan consent 
and Canadian Revenue Agency release will replace the current 
requirement for students to sign forms each year when applying 
for student financial assistance. It will also include one-time 
signatures for parents, guardians, sponsors, and spouses using 
the designated forms. Mr. Speaker, this is in addition to other 
improvements to the student loan process which include 
reducing interest rates to prime from prime plus 2.5 per cent, no 
longer counting vehicles as a resource when determining loan 
eligibility, and no longer considering part-time employment 
while in school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these improvements to overall client service 
delivery for student loan borrowers are the result of a lean 
process. Students will save time in the application process and 
will receive their assistance results more quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008, the Government of Saskatchewan 
invested $5.5 billion in post-secondary institutions and students. 
This includes student financial assistance supports to help 
students pursue their post-secondary studies and find a job in 
our growing economy. This is just one of the many ways that 
we are encouraging young people to stay in our great province 
and keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Celebrating Saskatchewan Film 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 
attending an event jointly hosted by the Saskatchewan Media 
Production Industry Association and Creative Saskatchewan to 
celebrate Saskatchewan film. Many folks from across 
Saskatchewan turned out to the Regina sound stage for evening 
screenings of WolfCop and Big Muddy, the last two films made 
in Saskatchewan under the film employment tax credit. It was 
great to see so many people out to support our local film talent 
here in Saskatchewan and to take part in the celebration of all 
their hard work. 
 
As someone who grew up in southern Saskatchewan, I was 
filled with pride of place to see the iconic vistas of the badlands, 
Moose Jaw’s downtown, and the prairie sunsets on the big 
screen. It was also exciting to see the names of many 
Saskatchewan people that I know in the credit reels at the end 
of the films. 
 
I’d like to thank Nova Alberts and the rest of the SMPIA 
[Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association] board 
for all of the work they put in to make the evening a success. 
Also congratulations to Lowell Dean, the writer and director of 
WolfCop, and Brian Paccione, the writer, and Jeff Moneo, the 
director of Big Muddy, for their amazing accomplishments as 
Saskatchewan filmmakers. 
 
WolfCop 2 is slated to be filmed in the spring of 2015. And 
many are hoping that it too will be filmed in Saskatchewan, but 
much hinges on the funding available, and Alberta and 
Manitoba are making a pitch to have it filmed there. Here’s 
hoping the province will find a way to make it happen here at 
home. 
 
There was also considerable buzz about the film debut of 
Corner Gas: The Movie which will be showing in theatres soon. 
Mr. Speaker, there was much pride in the room last night, and 
hope — hope that one day the film industry in Saskatchewan 
will be revitalized and will be put back on an equal footing with 
the other provinces. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

SaskEnergy Service Achievement and Employee Awards 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of the Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy to the SaskEnergy Service 
Achievement Awards and Employee Awards of Excellence. A 
number of long-serving SaskEnergy employees were honoured 
and recognized for their 25th, 30th, 35th, 40th, and even 45th 
years of service. Some SaskEnergy and TransGas employees, 
work groups, and teams were also recognized for going above 
and beyond their daily roles. 
 
This recognition is part of the new Employee Awards of 
Excellence program which allows employees from across the 
company to nominate their peers to receive awards in four 

categories: Service Excellence, Achieving Growth, Our Team, 
and Creating Value. Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy employees and 
teams are recognized for the hard work that kept the province 
warm during the bitter cold of last year’s winter, as well as for 
the quick response during the recent flooding in southeast 
Saskatchewan and for stepping up to meet the energy demands 
of our growing province. 
 
SaskEnergy has grown along with the province, adding 7,600 
new customers in over 300 communities last year. This brings 
the customer base to a total of 373,000 customers. The work of 
SaskEnergy employees has been crucial to meeting the 
challenges of growth, including increased energy usage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating all the award nominees and recipients on these 
very well-deserved honours. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Police Officers Keep Our Communities Safe 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to take the time 
to recognize the men and women that serve in our police forces 
across Saskatchewan. These officers work to keep our 
communities safe through targeted policing initiatives like the 
missing persons task force, enhanced community policing, 
internet child exploitation, community mobilization, the serious 
and habitual offender comprehensive action program, and most 
recently, the dedicated traffic safety enforcement units. 
 
Another important initiative is the combined forces special 
enforcement unit or CFSEU. This unit is responsible for 
investigating and dismantling high-level organized crime. In 
2012-13, the CFSEU led 37 investigations resulting in 54 
arrests and 126 criminal charges. By mid-year 2013-14, they 
had seized 1.6 kilograms of cocaine, 135 kilograms of cannabis, 
over $71,000 in cash, and nine vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 6th, 2014, the CFSEU was involved 
in a major takedown of a group of people believed to be 
trafficking cocaine and marijuana. This takedown was 
successful with the help of the joint forces operation team, 
Regina Police Service, the RCMP, safer communities and 
neighbourhoods investigators, and the Moose Jaw organized 
crime unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands the important and 
challenging work that is being done by our police officers. That 
is why we have committed to providing annual funding for 125 
police officers through the municipal police grant program. This 
year’s funding total is $15.4 million. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I extend my 
sincere thanks to all of our province’s dedicated police officers. 
I look forward to working with you in the future. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Quality of Long-Term Care 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday in 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6037 

question period the member from Saskatoon Riversdale said the 
reality is that poor quality of care is the norm in long-term care 
facilities in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we completely disagree 
and feel that statement is an insult to the over 1,300 registered 
nurses, over 700 licensed practical nurses, and nearly 5,000 care 
aids who are performing compassionate and professional care in 
our province’s long-term care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in many of our long-term care homes. 
My father lived in two separate long-term care homes, both 
Lucky Lake and Davidson. I found, in the five years my father 
was in both homes, the care was excellent. And those staff 
worked hard every day to make the last years of his life as 
comfortable as possible. Mr. Speaker, that’s the norm. 
 
We can certainly have a debate about the challenges facing 
long-term care facilities in our province, challenges that were 
largely created by the NDP [New Democratic Party] closing 
beds, closing facilities, and cutting staff. But that debate should 
be based on facts. And the fact is that the overwhelming 
majority of the staff is providing excellent care in long-term 
care facilities in our province. Poor quality care is not the norm, 
as the NDP want people to believe. The member for Riversdale 
should correct the record and apologize for that comment. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Long-Term Care for Seniors 
 
Mr. Broten: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this government just 
doesn’t get it. You know, we saw last week, Mr. Speaker, we 
saw two government members heckle while a grieving family 
was in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, as concerns about their 
mother’s death were raised. That’s the kind of approach we see. 
Well today, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this government actually 
listens, that they actually listen to the story of Emily 
Krushelnicki. And I hope they be respectful because her son 
Garry is here, and he’s travelled a considerable distance. 
 
You know, after a rough year of being moved around between 
facilities, Mr. Speaker, Emily Krushelnicki finally ended up in 
the Ituna care facility, her home community. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, the government moved her again, almost an hour 
away. And they did so, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the direction 
provided by her doctor. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. How is it 
acceptable for government officials to ignore the very clear 
direction given by a doctor and to put the health of a 
93-year-old woman at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the hon. member for his 
question, and the gentleman for coming forward today with the 
case of his mother, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that I’m sure 
the minister will want to look into. Perhaps there’s already been 
some correspondence, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We obviously want the system to respond to the 
recommendations of doctors. We know that unfortunately in the 
province of Saskatchewan for many years, regardless of who 
has sat on this side of the House and who has sat on that side of 
the House, in some cases with respect to long-term care, 
residency has not been able to be provided in home 
communities. 
 
We have also noted, Mr. Speaker, over the years in this 
province, over the long history of Saskatchewan, it has been the 
occasion that a couple who require different levels of care are 
not always together. This bothers, I think, every single member 
in the House, on that side and on this side. It’s why we must 
continue to open new beds in Saskatchewan. It’s why we must 
continue to provide more resources for long-term care, as the 
government has done. We must hire more nurses so that care 
could be provided. We must provide for more doctors. We must 
build, open more beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went through a time in this province not that 
long ago where the opposite was happening, where there was 
cuts in staffing resources and bed closures. This is something 
we must reverse. We’re determined to do that. The work is 
under way. And with respect to the case of Mr. Krushelnicki 
and his mother, we’d be happy to look into it further. I’m sure 
the minister will meet with him if that’s what is requested 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going through a time right 
now in this province where seniors’ needs are not being met, 
where the quality of care on the front lines, Mr. Speaker, is 
suffering greatly. And as a result, seniors do not have the 
dignity, do not have the respect that they are most certainly 
entitled to, and Emily’s case is an example. Her doctor, Mr. 
Speaker, wrote a letter, made it very clear to the government, 
Mr. Speaker, that her health was too fragile to move to another 
facility. This government, Mr. Speaker, ignored that letter and 
that’s why Emily’s son Garry is here today, because he is 
frustrated and he is scared because of what his mom has gone 
through. 
 
You know, I met with Garry earlier, Mr. Speaker, and he talked 
about how seniors are moved like cattle, Mr. Speaker, how 
respect is not given to them and what their needs are. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Garry wants this type of treatment to stop. 
 
Again my question is for the Premier. How is it acceptable for 
government officials to ignore the direction given by an 
individual’s doctor, a doctor who said that a 93-year-old 
woman’s health was too fragile to move to another facility? 
How is that acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister for Rural and Remote Health has provided me with a 
bit of a briefing. We are aware of this particular case in the 
minister’s office and, Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House 
that the Ministry of Health staff have been in communication 
with Sunrise Health Region regarding this matter. I’d expect 
that part of that communication would be to determine an 



6038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

answer to this very question that’s been posed by the Leader of 
the Opposition and, even more importantly, by Mr. 
Krushelnicki. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a certain protocol, as members will know, 
about first-available bed policy that’s followed by the regions. 
It’s been followed for some time in the province. If it has let 
down this particular family, this 93-year-old woman that is on 
the minds I think of all members now today, then it’s something 
we should look into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, for the Opposition Leader to paint the 
system in the general way that he has, I think, is unfair, as we 
heard in the member’s statement from the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking about Santa Maria senior 
citizens centre, and I want to report to the House that the funds 
that have been transferred by this government to the Santa 
Maria Senior Citizens Home Inc. have increased 81 per cent 
since our government took office: 5.2 million under the last 
budget of members opposite, now $9.4 million. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, between ’06 and ’07, there was a $1 million cut in that 
institution’s funding by members opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that these resources — 
the additional staff, the additional money that’s being provided 
— is actually benefiting families and benefiting the cases that 
the individual member raises today. And I think we are as 
determined as anybody on either side of the House to get to the 
bottom of it and to find out in specific cases why the people of 
the province are not getting the care that they richly deserve. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier thinks that the 
concerns around seniors’ care are isolated to Santa Maria and to 
Emily’s situation, Mr. Speaker, he is dreaming. If he heard what 
the workers yesterday said, Mr. Speaker, about the case at Santa 
Maria, they say, well there’s no end of resources for more 
bloated administration, but on the front lines, for care aids, for 
LPNs [licensed practical nurse], for cleaners, Mr. Speaker, there 
is a huge deficiency. And that is hurting the quality of care. 
 
You know, in Emily’s situation, Mr. Speaker, after a very rough 
year of being moved from facility to facility, Emily finally 
ended up in Ituna, in her home community. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, the government kicked her out and shipped her nearly 
one hour away. But get this, Mr. Speaker. They only left Emily 
in that facility for three weeks, and for much of that time, for a 
majority of that time, the bed that she left in Ituna remained 
empty. So then, Mr. Speaker, they moved her back again to that 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this decision not only defied the direction given 
by Emily’s physician but also defies basic common sense. My 
question to the Premier: how is this acceptable? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with the 

preamble to the hon. member’s question here in a moment, but 
first let me say with respect to this specific case, it has been 
brought to the attention of the Minister of Health. The Ministry 
of Health has raised the matter with the Sunrise Health Region, 
and we would expect the very answers that are being requested 
now by the Leader of the Opposition to be provided to the 
family and certainly to the Ministry of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s though talk about resources to the system, to 
the front-line of the system because the member gets up day 
after day and makes generalizations that are false about well, 
about resources to the system. 
 
Here’s what happened in 2006 at this particular nursing 
long-term care facility. The NDP cut funding between 2006, 
2007 by $1 million to 5.2 million operating funds for Santa 
Maria. It increased to 9.4 million by this last year. That’s an 81 
per cent increase. He says there’s fewer staff. Wrong. The same 
complement of staff today as existed when they where in office, 
the same population in terms of residents. The ratios are the 
same. 
 
Now this means . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the hon. 
member asks what’s changed. We do need to find out what’s 
changed in the case of this institution. The Ombudsman is going 
to be looking into the case that was raised last week and any 
other cases come forward because the fact of the matter is that 
funding has increased 81 per cent over what members opposite 
provided. The complement of staff has been preserved. There’s 
actually, I think, three more total staff. 
 
So we want to find out exactly what’s happened, Mr. Speaker. 
This government’s committed to ensuring that there are 
increased resources for long-term care. That’s our record. We’re 
just as committed to make sure that it’s resulting in better care 
for seniors. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that 
rejected and turned down health regions when they brought 
forward urgent requests for seniors’ care throughout the 
province. 
 
The Premier talks about dollars being spent. Mr. Speaker, $40 
million to John Black, the one US [United States] American 
consultant. Japanese senseis still being flown into 
Saskatchewan, $3,500 per day; still recruiting interpreters. Mr. 
Speaker, $17 million each and every year for the provincial lean 
kaizen promotion office. This is where the government has its 
priorities. This is where it’s spending dollars, not fixing what 
matters on the front lines of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw this same approach that we see with Emily 
with Roy Armstrong, a 95-year-old veteran, Mr. Speaker, 
fighting three types of cancer, two heart attacks, 10 trips to the 
hospital by ambulance, Mr. Speaker. Roy’s physician said that 
he needed to be in long-term care. Guess what this government 
said, Mr. Speaker. They said there wasn’t a spot. Roy’s family 
had to fight for Roy to receive the proper treatment, Mr. 
Speaker, the proper respect that he was owed. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t be fighting against 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6039 

families. This government should be listening to families 
instead of dismissing their concerns, instead of heckling at the 
concerns that they raise, Mr. Speaker. They should take this 
seriously and they should start to act. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Why doesn’t he 
listen to the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley? Why 
doesn’t he listen to her when she recommends the establishment 
of a seniors’ advocate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just to again correct the 
record. The member gets engaged in some emotional hyperbole 
certainly in this Assembly when he would cast an aspersion on 
the motives on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, he basically 
says to anybody who’s listening that members on this side of 
the House are somehow purposely out to denigrate the care of 
seniors in Saskatchewan, when the record shows that we have 
significantly increased in every way possible for senior . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . No, no, for senior care in the 
province — more nurses, more care aids, more beds. 
 
After those years of members opposite cutting those resources 
and closing beds, Mr. Speaker, we’ve begun to reverse it. When 
cases are brought forward, the hon. member asks about Mr. 
Armstrong, Mr. Speaker, the government reacts. What you 
won’t hear on this side of the House when an individual case 
comes forward is what members opposite said when we were in 
opposition and raised a case. The member for Lakeview, the 
then minister of Health, called them Sask Party patients of the 
day. That has been the approach of members opposite when 
specific cases are brought forward. 
 
We are going to take a different tack. We are going to deal with 
them earnestly and get answers. With respect to the question, 
the member has done a good job in terms of the long-term care 
report she offered to the government. The seniors’ advocate was 
recommended. We felt we went a step beyond that with an 
actual independent officer, well a health care ombudsman, the 
only one like it in the Dominion of Canada. The only one like it 
whose job is not just to advocate for seniors, but to advocate for 
all people in the system who have a concern, and to do so 
completely independent of the ministry, independent of the 
government, and accountable only to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Seniors in Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that 
eliminated the minimum care standards that were in place, Mr. 
Speaker. This is the government that has been gutting seniors’ 
care, has not been taking the right steps. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier should be listening to the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. It would have helped people like 
Emily and Roy, and it would help so many of the families, Mr. 
Speaker, that are coming forward. And it was something, Mr. 
Speaker, that, as I said, the Legislative Secretary for long-term 
care recommended. Here’s what she said: 
 

There is a need for a seniors’ (or vulnerable adults) 
advocate. In particular, there was general agreement that 

vulnerable adults need someone who can advocate on their 
behalf particularly when it comes to health services and 
navigating the health system. 

 
That was the Legislative Secretary’s recommendation in 2010. 
And today, Mr. Speaker, after all of the examples that we have 
seen come forward in the past months, Mr. Speaker, the need 
for it is even greater. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how could he 
possibly be against having an independent seniors’ advocate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we created the position and 
funded that position of the health care ombudsman within the 
Office of the Provincial Ombudsman in part because of the 
inaction on specific cases from members opposite. In fact we 
campaigned on something quite different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has 
recommended a seniors’ advocate. We believe that the 
Provincial Ombudsman special resources to be a health care 
ombudsman is going to achieve the objectives that she’s 
highlighted. 
 
Now as a result of potential further cases that might come 
forward with respect to seniors’ care, we would be open to that 
suggestion from the Ombudsman. If the health care ombudsman 
reports to the government and says, we probably need even 
additional resources to aid as the member wants, it’s something 
we would absolutely look at. 
 
The fact of the matter is there’s only one province in Canada 
that has funded a separate health care ombudsman. It’s this 
province. That ombudsman, that office, she is there to assist 
people who have cases with respect to the health care system, 
and certainly that includes those in long-term care. 
 
With respect to standards that were in the member’s preamble, 
we’ll have to correct the record again. Here are the standards for 
the province of Saskatchewan for long-term care in 
Saskatchewan. Here’s a quote from the first page: 
 

The standards set within this manual are considered 
minimum standards and must be adhered to in all publicly 
funded facilities that offer long-term care services to 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have clearly heard from this 
government how their own political advisers say that the 
guidelines that are in place are extremely general, Mr. Speaker. 
And we can ask ourselves, how in fact is this working? Well it’s 
not working very well, Mr. Speaker, as seen by the Santa Maria 
workers who came forward yesterday, Mr. Speaker, as seen by 
Margaret’s family sharing their story, as seen by Roy’s, as seen 
by Emily’s. Mr. Speaker, this government’s approach to 
seniors’ care is not working, and they need to take a different 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard stories, people coming forward, 



6040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

about bandages — and the minister from the front is heckling 
again — about bandages, Mr. Speaker, bandages covered in 
feces and soaked in urine, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ve 
heard. We’ve heard stories of seniors being malnourished 
because they’re not being properly fed. We’ve had stories about 
falls and premature deaths, Mr. Speaker, where families don’t 
know the full story because management has covered it up. 
These are just the concerns that have been made public, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
British Columbia has a seniors’ advocate. Alberta has a seniors’ 
advocate, and Saskatchewan needs a seniors’ advocate too. My 
question to the Premier: why doesn’t he take the leadership on 
this and make the call to have an independent seniors’ advocate 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Alberta does not have a provincial health 
ombudsman. BC [British Columbia] does not have a provincial 
health ombudsman. The health ombudsman is there to do 
precisely this job. If the casework requires some additional 
resources, we are prepared to look at that. Mr. Speaker, that 
recommendation hasn’t come forward. 
 
The member gets up again and says — and this is fine; we can 
go through all of question period and correct the record — that 
the guidelines, the standards that we have in place vis-à-vis the 
last quote I read are not specific. Mr. Speaker, the standards in 
place go to issues such as personal space and belongings. They 
go to the standards around the psychosocial needs of each 
resident, of good personal hygiene such as clean and healthy 
appearing skin, clean and trim fingernails and toenails, clean 
and neatly groomed hair, clean teeth and mouth, and an absence 
of cracked lips, that each resident is up and dressed in their own 
personal clothing for a reasonable time period every single day. 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on from dental to podiatry to optical. 
Mr. Speaker, the standards are here. They must be adhered to 
and they are most assuredly very specific. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No they’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well they are. He says they’re not. We’ll 
table the document and he can read them himself. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the institution that he’s referring to that 
the workers brought forward concerns about now has us very 
concerned because we reviewed the funding record. And under 
the NDP, that institution that he’s talking about, Santa Maria, 
received 81 per cent less funding than they do today under our 
government — same complement of staff, same number of 
patients, Mr. Speaker. So the easy answers he’s advocating 
clearly aren’t applicable in this particular case.  
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I do believe it’s a bit of an insult to all 
of the other professionals across the province, all of the other 
care homes who are providing high-quality care for our seniors, 
doing so in part at least because of significant injection of new 
resources by this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — The government keeps claiming that 
short-staffing is not a widespread problem, but the workers 
from Santa Maria who spoke out yesterday are very clear. They 
say the only increase they’ve seen is in overseers and 
paper-pushers, not on the front lines providing direct care. And 
they say the quality of care has gotten worse over the last few 
years and that they’re working short far too often. 
 
These are the same kinds of concerns that were identified 
throughout the CEO [chief executive officer] tour reports last 
year. To the minister: how can he keep claiming that 
short-staffing is not a widespread problem when his own CEO 
tour report says that it is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier 
made it very clear that the complement of workers across the 
province is at least at the same levels as they were under the 
members previous when they were in government. 
 
I can also report that the staff complement at Santa Maria . . . 
There was a study done across the whole province, Mr. 
Speaker, by the University of Waterloo to determine the 
relationship between actual staffing in Saskatchewan of 
long-term care facilities. And when comparing it other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker, I can report that staffing levels in 
Saskatchewan are greater than provinces like Ontario. In fact 
Santa Maria at the time of that report was at 113 per cent of 
expected staffing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that falls right in line with what the Premier just shared, that 
there was likely about three more complement, when we look 
back to 2006. And again, same amount, maybe a few extra in 
different areas, but 81 per cent more funding than under the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps the minister needs to be reminded of 
what the CEO tour report said. In Dalmeny: “Staffing levels are 
inadequate.” In Duck Lake: “Staffing level is the main issue.” 
In Saskatoon Convalescent Home: “The staffing levels are 
deplorable. They have not kept pace with the increased level of 
acuity of residents.” In Porteous Lodge: “Need more people to 
answer buzzers. Buzzers’ average wait time is 40 minutes. Need 
more staff.” 
 
To the minister: did he forget that this is the kind of feedback 
that is pervasive in the CEO tour report? How can he keep 
pretending that short-staffing is not a widespread problem? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we realize that staff is 
very important in these facilities, and staff was cut to a lot of 
very low levels under the former government. We’ve been 
working very hard to increase these staff levels. I will remind 
the members across, when some of these issues did come 
forward, we were very quick to react with, firstly it was the 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6041 

Urgent Issues Action Fund which complemented or gives the 
ability for these regions to purchase 700 pieces of equipment 
and address issues in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also remind the members across that along with that went an 
additional $3.7 million in annualized funding under the Urgent 
Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker. I’ll also remind the members 
opposite, generally throughout the province, we’ve got over 420 
more doctors than under their government. We have over 2,600 
more nurses under all complements than under them. We 
currently have over 700 more CAs [care aids], LPNs, and RNs 
[registered nurse], full times, and LPCs [licensed professional 
counsellor], and additionally 50 more under the Urgent Action 
Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I guess the government needs to hear more 
from its own report. They’re still not listening. From Rosthern: 
“Staffing levels are inadequate.” From Samaritan Place: 
“Residents notice staff shortages. Continent residents have 
soiled themselves because of it.” From North Battleford there 
are concerns about “length of time for call bells to be 
answered.” From Stensrud Lodge: “They can hear people 
crying for help in the evening because of staffing shortages.” 
 
To the minister: how could he have forgotten about people 
being left to cry for help because of staff shortages? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we realize there’s 
challenges in long-term care and the health system, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why we’re focusing all of our energies on these 
issues. I’ll point to the 13 new long-term care facilities currently 
funded under this government, an innovative approach to 
seniors’ care: 100 beds in Saskatoon in Samaritan Place; the 
new P3 [public-private partnership] project in Swift Current, 
225 beds. I pointed out the increase in the complement of 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll also point out that, under our health budgets, continually 
since 2007 we’ve seen an average increase of 5.4 per cent. 
That’s far outpacing the cost of living index, Mr. Speaker: years 
as low as 3, 3.2 per cent; as high as almost 9 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, again far outpacing that complement. If we look at 
health in our government, it’s been a priority to us. And if you 
look at our health care budget, Mr. Speaker, over 50 per cent of 
our health care budget is directed directly at seniors, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there are many more quotes. 
From Parkridge Centre: “Staffing levels are inadequate to meet 
the needs of the residents due to the increased level of acuity.” 
From Oliver Lodge, a common theme throughout the CEO tour 
report: “Staffing levels are an issue. They have not kept pace 

with the increased levels of acuity of residents.” “Residents not 
taken out of chairs during the day because of a lack of staff.” 
“30, 40, 50, 60, 90 minutes go by waiting to go to the bathroom. 
Very great loss of dignity when you have to just go to the 
bathroom in your pad.” 
 
To the minister: how can he not recognize that short-staffing is 
a widespread problem? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt there’s 
challenges in some areas, and we recognize those. That’s why 
we’ve appointed the health care advocate, the Ombudsman to 
look into these issues, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking forward to 
the report coming back from them. 
 
But I want to point out to the Speaker some of the experiences 
I’ve had. Long-term care facilities, and specifically in the 
North, where we look at some of the issues that they have had 
previously, but through continuous improvement processes, Mr. 
Speaker, what I can report back is amazing improvements. One 
example, one of the long-term care facilities in the North was an 
individual, Mr. Speaker, that had been falling almost daily as 
reported to us. But once the implementation of continuous 
improvement processes, the report back to us was, continue 
with this. Don’t stop. Keep going. This individual hasn’t fell 
once since implementation of this process, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 163, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to say next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 



6042 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 347 through 356. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 347 to 356. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 161 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill 161, An Act to amend The Wildlife Act, 
1998. Mr. Speaker, this bill provides a number of changes to 
The Wildlife Act, and some of them are practical and some of 
them have some broader implications. I will speak to a number 
of these issues that are here. 
 
I think the first part of the bill relates to the fact that our hunters 
and fishers in Saskatchewan, but for here the hunters, apply 
online for their licences, and these licences are obtained through 
an American contractor. The legislation that we have now 
doesn’t accurately reflect the process, and so there’s a change to 
the legislation to make sure what’s being done is done 
appropriately. This is interesting that they do it after they’ve 
already implemented the new program, and it raises questions 
about whether this has got the accurate statement on how to do 
this. 
 
Another interesting aspect of the area of licensing relates to the 
fact that presently wildlife research activities do require a 
licence but only when the wildlife is taken or captured or in fact 
killed. What the legislation does is expand the scope of wildlife 
research activities where a licence is required to include those 
type of passive observation situations where researchers go and 
observe animals, birds, in their natural habitat. 
 
This is an interesting proposal, and I think it makes some sense 
in that it gives the officials in Environment information about 
all of the kinds of research that are happening in the province as 
it relates to the wildlife in the province. But it has to be 
carefully written so it doesn’t affect the ability of those people 
who like to observe wildlife for recreational purposes. I don’t 
think anybody is in a position where they want to charge a fee 
for people to observe the wildlife in Saskatchewan, and so that 
particular exemption is there in the licensing requirement. But it 
does raise the possibility that maybe at subsequent dates a 
government requiring revenue might want to put in some kind 
of a tax on the ability to view wildlife in Saskatchewan. But I 
hope that that’s not what this provision indicates is going to 
happen. 
 
Now another area that’s dealt with in this legislation relates to 

the convictions that people have received for wildlife offences 
in other jurisdictions, in other provinces, so in Alberta or 
Manitoba or perhaps in Montana or North Dakota or other 
places around the world. And that information is now 
transferable and recognized in Saskatchewan when offences are 
committed here so that the appropriate prohibitions or the 
appropriate steps are taken to keep a hunter who doesn’t follow 
the rules in other jurisdictions from hunting in our province or 
at least having very strong restrictions placed on their ability to 
hunt. 
 
Another aspect of the bill relates to the fact that prosecutions 
can be implemented up to three years after an offence, not just 
two years. And the request obviously comes from the 
prosecutor who works with Environment on prosecutions of 
wildlife cases where it’s been recognized that the amount of 
work and the amount to get the evidence to prosecute these 
cases may take quite a while and that the two-year time limit 
just wasn’t long enough to make sure cases were not dropped. 
 
Now we’ll see how that applies in actual practice because three 
years seems to be quite a long time after an offence for someone 
to be charged with an offence, but perhaps we can get an 
explanation from officials when we’re with them in committee 
about some of the procedures that are involved in that particular 
issue. 
 
Now another aspect of this legislation involves the penalties, 
and the penalties that are being implemented by this legislation 
are fairly dramatically expanded to be much harsher. And the 
penalties create prohibitions from hunting of various lengths of 
time, including a lifetime hunting ban if a person has been 
convicted on three separate occasions for serious wildlife 
offences. 
 
What we know is that given the number of court cases 
involving The Wildlife Act, that this may end up with some 
further challenges. In Saskatchewan, The Wildlife Act applies to 
all residents of the province. But there are certain carve-outs, if 
I can put it that way, or certain areas where other rules apply. 
One would be with the First Nations people in hunting in the, 
following the terms of the constitution, and also clearly the 
rights of Métis hunters as they are being developed. And I’m 
not sure if there’s any intention to affect some of the court cases 
that are presently before the courts or possible future court cases 
by this legislation. 
 
I think that drafting the legislation to make sure that it isn’t 
offensive to some of the provisions in treaties and some of the 
provisions in the Canadian Constitution can be a tricky effort. 
And so I think that we’ll need to ask, on the record, about this 
so we understand why the lawyers who are advising on the 
drafting of this particular legislation have come up with the 
kinds of clauses that are here in the legislation. 
 
We want to make sure that there’s a fair system for the 
harvesting of wildlife in Saskatchewan, but we also want to 
make sure that it complies with the Constitution of Canada, that 
it complies with the treaties that we have entered into over the 
years, and that the discretionary parts are very clear so that we 
do not end up with further expensive litigation, both on behalf 
of the province and on behalf of those people who are caught up 
in the system. 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6043 

Mr. Speaker, when The Wildlife Act is amended over the years 
and various changes are made, we know that the suggestions 
come from a number of different places. But practically, we 
have to make sure that it’s an even-handed change, that it’s a 
change that will be respected by all people involved. 
 
Now the legislation itself has quite a few provisions. And as 
you will note, there’s a very large regulatory clause which 
allows for all kinds of rules to be made by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, the cabinet, or the Premier and the 
cabinet, and I think that we need to be careful when we give 
that much power to the cabinet on a whole number of these kind 
of issues that are extremely sensitive. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
know we will be looking at this in our caucus as we move 
forward. We’ll be asking questions in committee. I know that 
other of my colleagues will have comments about this from 
other practical aspects but, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would 
move to adjourn debate on this, The Wildlife Act, Bill No. 161. 
Thank you. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 162 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
very honoured once again to be able to rise in the Assembly and 
enter into debate on the government legislative agenda. In this 
particular case, I have to say I don’t think I can come near to the 
comments my colleague yesterday provided on this particular 
bill, and certainly he held the floor for a long time, raising some 
of the issues that are of concern and, I think, certainly commend 
him for those efforts. 
 
Bill 162 is another example, and I’ve noted this in the past, of 
this government amending bills that it recently introduced. So 
The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act was in this 
Legislative Assembly in 2010, and it looks like once again there 
was some mistakes made, and they’re using this opportunity in 
this legislative session to fix the problems that were with the 
bill when it was originally introduced. 
 
There are a number of changes being made. The minister in his 
comments identified a number of amendments and changes that 
are being instituted at this point in time and, I guess, sadly I 
think this is another example of maybe going too fast when the 
bills were first introduced, not getting it right the first time. 
 

But thankfully we have bills like this to even talk about, Mr. 
Speaker, because again what I would call the whole legislative 
agenda of this particular government is legislation light. There 
isn’t a lot of substance to any of these bills. There’s certainly no 
policy direction or leadership in terms of a legislative agenda. 
And we entrust that with a government. We want to see policy 
and new ideas coming forward, a leadership and a vision from 
this government, but all we see is them spending the additional 
monies that they’re receiving as a result of the good economy, 
and we do not see any sort of exciting legislative agenda. 
 
What we have seen over and over and over again this particular 
session is fixing old bills that they got wrong the first time 
around. And obviously our public servants have a list of things 
that they want to see corrected in a number of bills or updated 
or refreshed, and that’s all fine and dandy. And obviously they 
don’t have a lot else to do at this point in time because there is 
no new ideas coming from over there. There’s no new policy. 
There’s no excitement at all in terms of being a government 
that’s responsible for introducing legislation. 
 
So sadly we have something like this . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh I guess we do have one excited person over 
there. But that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have 
more members that are bringing forward interesting and 
challenging new ideas to the people of Saskatchewan and 
showing leadership in the policy realm. 
 
In terms of this particular bill, as I said earlier, there’s just a 
number of corrections to a bill that was introduced in 2010. I 
suppose the one new change is that there’s now a director of 
sheriffs for the enforcement of judgments and I assume, and I 
think the minister said this in his opening comments, that this 
came from the sheriff himself or the sheriff’s office. So I guess 
they need a director over there. That’s all fine and dandy. 
 
A number of smaller changes that the minister pointed out, he 
said, well for example, a notice of seizure for employment 
income will now last for a 20-month period without requiring it 
to be renewed after 12 months. Highly scintillating, Mr. 
Speaker, but there it is. 
 
Second thing, a revised process for the sheriff to provide timely 
clear title to a third party purchaser of land where the judgment 
creditors and the judgment debtor have agreed to payment out 
of the proceeds of the sale in order to address the judgment debt 
of the vendor. Again a really, a zip hummer of a change there, 
Mr. Speaker, but there you go. It’s a number of these types of 
changes that we see presented here. 
 
Again all the credit to the sheriff’s office for finding these 
problems with this bill that was introduced in 2010. They didn’t 
get it right the first time, but we know our public servants are 
there working hard to ensure that these bills are properly 
worded and properly operational. So we commend them for that 
work. 
 
I know my colleague yesterday was pointing out some of the 
concerns with how people get into these situations to begin 
with, and when people are brought into court for enforcement of 
these types of judgments where they’re being ordered to pay 
money by the court to another individual, obviously there’s 
some serious financial concerns that arise. And I again 



6044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

commend my colleague for representing the situations that 
many people are finding themselves in these days when it 
comes to debt because of the high cost of living, the high cost 
of rent. Even trying to buy a house for many, Mr. Speaker, is 
beyond their reach because of all the extra expenses that people 
are facing these days with this economy that we’re in. And 
again these types of judgments are the unfortunate result I guess 
of a lot of these situations that people find themselves in. 
 
At any rate, you know, there’s not a whole lot more to say about 
it. Again my colleague yesterday covered a lot of territory. So at 
this point, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 159 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter this debate about Bill No. 159, an Act to repeal the farm 
credit Act. Mr. Speaker, as you would know, this is an 
incredibly short bill, one page. It is the short title, The Family 
Farm Credit Repeal Act, and it’s simply repealing the Act; and 
it will come into force on assent — three simple lines, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As the Minister of Agriculture pointed out, he says that, the 
minister says: 
 

This Act has long since become redundant. The Family 
Farm Credit Act was enacted in February of 1979. [And at 
that point] Its purpose was to make long-term credit 
available for the establishment and development of family 
farms. It also provided the basis for the intergenerational 
transfer of farms. [He points out that] At the time the Act 
enabled Co-operative Trust Company of Canada . . . to 
make loans to farmers. It also enabled CTCC to issue 
securities and raise money to lend to farmers. Furthermore 
the Ministry of Finance was able to purchase and 
guarantee those securities under this Act. 

 
He points out, Mr. Speaker, that in 2012 and ’13: 
 

. . . the Ministry of Finance indicated that they were not 
aware of any present securities under this Act. Nor were 
they aware of any securities purchased by the Minister of 
Finance in recent years under this Act. 

 

So while the government was reviewing this Act, they 
consulted agencies. 
 

. . . and no issues were identified. The CTCC was the only 
lending institution that was an approved agency under this 
Act. [And CTCC] . . . has since restructured into 
Concentra Trust and Concentra Financial. [So there’s] No 
other associated agencies [that] exist under this Act, and 
loan guarantees have not been offered for many years. 

 
So again the minister points out that this is a redundant Act and 
so repealing it is a bit of housekeeping, Mr. Speaker. I would 
say, Mr. Speaker, though, to have one agricultural bill on the 
legislative agenda indicates a very weak agenda in terms of 
what this government is bringing forward for its agriculture 
agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re heckling over there. Admittedly, Mr. 
Speaker, I am an urban kid. My roots, my farm roots go back to 
my dad who grew up on a homestead near Rapid View, 
Saskatchewan and moved to Saskatoon actually during World 
War II when his mother, with all the kids, had a difficult time 
maintaining the farm and my grandfather was away, Mr. 
Speaker, and so they moved to the city. So admittedly, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m an urban kid. I live two blocks from my childhood 
home where my parents have spent about 60 years, Mr. 
Speaker. But I know the one thing that I’ve tried to do in this 
job. I’m an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
Saskatoon Riversdale but I’m also an MLA for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I know a great deal about my own constituency 
but as I’ve been in this job I think we all recognize we 
specialize in certain areas but we are also generalists in many 
respects and try our very hardest to learn about issues that 
impact the whole province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So admittedly I am not a rural MLA but what I do know is I do 
know a bit about urban agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and urban 
agriculture is a growing area, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 there was an 
international urban agricultural conference that brought together 
many, many people. I grew up, Mr. Speaker, with a giant 
greenhouse next to my house. My parents had two lots, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s interesting. So I grew up with a greenhouse. 
My parents were some of the initial participants or vendors at 
the Saskatoon Farmers Market. They initially started growing 
bedding plants and then eventually they sold herbs and other 
specialty items like tomatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But my dad has always been a huge proponent of urban 
agriculture, whether it’s beekeeping . . . There’s beekeepers in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker, and urban agriculture. You see 
the landscape changing. You see instead of giant lots, empty 
vacant lots sitting there for parking, Mr. Speaker, you see 
organizations and individuals suggesting that perhaps we look 
at food security and how we feed people in our own 
communities locally, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that they have this 
knowledge and the skills to grow their own food and to be able 
to purchase food locally as well, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to commend actually the Saskatoon Food Bank as one of those 
organizations who has taken over a giant patch, a giant vacant 
lot, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago and has done a really good 
job. They started out with just potatoes, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
but have expanded that. 
 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6045 

There are many, many individuals and organizations who are 
interested in rooftop gardening. I go back to my own family. 
My dad is a bit of a unique individual, Mr. Speaker, but he is a 
man ahead of his time. Urban agriculture has been something 
that I’ve known about, or my father has sort of ingrained in me, 
for a very long time. Food production and food security is 
absolutely imperative. 
 
And so we grew up with this greenhouse, but over the years it 
transitioned and changed what it looked like, Mr. Speaker. And 
in recent years the greenhouse . . . My parents about five years 
ago stopped vending at the farmers market. My parents are 
aging as we all are, Mr. Speaker, and I think it was getting very 
difficult to attend the farmers market every Saturday, which had 
been something my family had done since the time I was a 
small child, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what my dad, like I said, is kind of an interesting fellow and 
so when the city of Saskatoon decommissioned their giant 
garbage bins and cleaned and sanitized them and cut them in 
half, my dad thought they’d make great raised beds. So what he 
did in his greenhouse, stripped down the whole greenhouse and 
turned the whole greenhouse into a urban garden, Mr. Speaker. 
It was interesting. 
 
So the food production that my parents produce is quite 
phenomenal. He’s taken over . . . I used to cut the grass, Mr. 
Speaker, at my yard and it’s a large city yard that my parents 
own, Mr. Speaker. And that grass was the bane of my existence, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to report, despite the fact it’s not 
all their land — it’s city property, the boulevard — my dad had 
taken over that complete boulevard for food production, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So you’d think about, you think about food production and 
urban . . . They’re heckling over there, Mr. Speaker. Urban 
agriculture actually is an incredibly important wave of the 
future, Mr. Speaker. I would be the first person . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member there, I’m being told that no one 
is heckling. As she tells me, she’s heckling while she’s 
heckling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is I would be the first to fess up and say I’m an 
urban kid. But urban agriculture, urban agriculture is absolutely 
imperative and it might have been nice to see something in 
terms of their, this government’s agenda encouraging and 
supporting the development of urban agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m sure that there are many rural MLAs on that side of the 
House that probably could have identified some interesting 
issues around what needs to be improved in terms of rural 
Saskatchewan and supporting farms in rural Saskatchewan as 
well. But like when you think about urban agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, you think about, Mr. Speaker, you think about urban 
agriculture, you think about rooftop gardens. You think about 
community gardens. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I think one of the most exciting things that I’ve seen in my own 
community is the popping up of all these community gardens, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s one two blocks away at St. John Bosco 
School. There was one a block away from my home adjacent to 

Abbeyfield seniors’ home. There is one at Saskatoon French 
School, and throughout the constituency, Mr. Speaker. In 
Fairhaven a few years ago, they started one; in King George in 
Riversdale. 
 
People are starting to realize that this land that we have can . . . 
And some of it is parkland, but some of it, they were in fact 
vacant lots. There’s a way to turn that into productive lands, and 
also to regain some of the skills that we lost a generation or two 
ago when people, when families started moving to the city and 
stopped having gardens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So urban agriculture is something I think that, although I’m not 
a rural kid, I do know a little bit about urban agriculture and I 
would’ve liked to have perhaps seen the government thinking 
about how we continue to support that kind of measure, Mr. 
Speaker, how we ensure that food production happens locally 
and that our young people have the skills and the ability to be 
able to grow their own food. There is nothing better. 
 
I know when I look at my own kids who’ve had an opportunity 
. . . I don’t have a garden myself, but I live two blocks away 
from my parents, so my kids have garden space at my parents’ 
place. And that feeling of when you see something coming out 
of the ground that you planted and tended and that yields and 
bears fruit, Mr. Speaker, is pretty exciting. 
 
So I think with respect to this bill, as I said, it’s a one-page bill, 
Bill No. 159, and it’s simply their agriculture agenda right now, 
Mr. Speaker. Their legislative agenda is simply to repeal a bill, 
Mr. Speaker. I would’ve hoped that there would’ve been a little 
bit more vision and creativity over there. They have many rural 
members who I’m sure could’ve brought forward water issues, 
Mr. Speaker, some increased support. Last spring we saw this 
government’s inability to stand up to its federal cousins when it 
came to grain transportation. Perhaps we could’ve seen 
something like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I know that I will have colleagues who will be willing and 
very interested to speak to Bill No. 159, An Act to repeal The 
Family Farm Credit Act. With that I would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 155 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 



6046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

very pleased to rise today to speak about the Bill 155, The 
Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 
Makers Act, 2014. 
 
Many in the Assembly will remember back in 1993 when Sue 
Rodriguez, who was a woman from British Columbia suffering 
from ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis], and she appealed to 
the Supreme Court to allow her to have medically assisted 
suicide. And back in those days, we know that the Supreme 
Court of Canada denied her request, saying that it was a 
criminal act and that the right to medically assisted suicide 
would not be provided to Canadian citizens. 
 
Let’s fast-forward now. That’s already over 21 years ago and, 
Mr. Speaker, I remember that case a lot because I was a law 
student at the time. And this was a story that was making the 
news when Sue Rodriguez, I mean a very intelligent woman, a 
very articulate woman who pled her case as best she could to 
the Supreme Court of Canada . . . And it raises a host of ethical 
issues. But at that time, that’s when we started hearing talk 
about health care directives and advanced health care directives. 
 
And I remember in law school working on some of those and 
actually preparing one for myself and one for my parents. And 
it’s something that I think has become a bit more of the norm 
these days, is for people to think about some advanced 
directions to their loved ones in the event that they can’t make 
their own health choices and decide about some of the things 
that will happen to them if they’re incapacitated and unable to 
make those decisions. 
 
There’s something happening in Quebec right now that I think 
might be of interest to this government if, you know, perhaps 
they are looking for leadership in policy circles. And I know 
our Premier likes to come out in front of the parade on a 
number of things in Canada. Sometimes there’s nobody 
following him, in the example of the film employment tax 
credit, which is unfortunate, and maybe he’ll stop that parade at 
some point. We’ll see. But in the case of the advanced health 
care directives, there’s a minister, a junior Health minister in 
Quebec, who has passed North America’s . . . or has shepherded 
North America’s most radical end-of-life legislation to all-party 
support in Quebec’s National Assembly. 
 
And this was just recently, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell you a 
little bit about what the Quebec Assembly has done in relation 
to this topic. Again it’s a very highly emotionally charged topic 
and certainly one that has a number of ethical issues, and the 
debate continues around that. 
 
But the woman who’s done this, her name is Véronique Hivon. 
And she was a law student at McGill University in Montreal in 
1993 when Sue Rodriquez was advancing her case through the 
courts. She was a student just like I was back then. I guess our 
paths have taken somewhat similar paths or route because we 
both ended up as legislators. But anyways she brought . . . She 
was very interested in medical law. And we see her approach is 
quite different than Ms. Rodriguez; Ms. Rodriguez chose the 
path of the courts, but what Ms. Hivon has done has taken this 
issue through the legislature. 
 
And we now know there’s also a Supreme Court hearing that 
happened in October on a case in British Columbia. And this 

was another woman, her name was Gloria Taylor, and she was 
also afflicted with ALS, and another woman, Kathleen Carter, 
who wanted help dying because of a degenerative spinal 
condition. 
 
So what Ms. Hivon has argued in terms of the legislation that 
they’ve passed in Quebec is saying that medical aid in dying is 
simply a part of health care. It’s part of the continuum of heath 
care, Mr. Speaker. You know, she’s avoiding the argument 
about the human right to end our own lives if and when we 
choose to do so. And the question is, is this just a health care 
issue? Is medical aid and dying part of the health care 
continuum or is it a human rights issue or is it a bit of both? 
 
And there’s an article in The Globe and Mail from October 3rd, 
2014, written by Sandra Martin where she’s talking a lot about 
the, sort of, the dichotomy of the issues and all of the 
complications that are involved in this kind of discussion; 
whether or not a person has the right of life, liberty, and 
security under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, whether or 
not that goes as far as deciding when you want to die. It is a key 
question. And of course that was the crux of the case back in 
1993. 
 
Ms. Rodriguez could commit suicide because attempting 
suicide was removed as a Criminal Code offence in the 1970s, 
but because of her condition and the advanced condition she 
was in, in ALS, she couldn’t end her own life without help. And 
the Supreme Court said, that’s illegal. It’s illegal to have 
someone help you end your own life. 
 
They agreed that her rights to autonomy under the Charter were 
violated, but the court ruled in a narrow 5 to 4 ruling that that 
type of discrimination under your rights was justified because 
making assisted suicide legal for the disabled would imperil 
vulnerable people and deny the supremacy of the sanctity of 
life. 
 
So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, these are some pretty heavy 
issues that the Supreme Court had to decide on. It was agreed 
by all in the Supreme Court that her rights to autonomy of her 
own person were being violated. But to make a law that would 
allow people to assist others to die — and we think of the case 
of Robert Latimer and his daughter Tracy — that the vulnerable 
people who aren’t able to speak for themselves might have their 
rights violated by having someone think they want to die, 
helping them die. And then you don’t know for sure if that was 
actually the wishes of that vulnerable individual. Often in those 
kinds of extreme health situations, they can’t speak for 
themselves; they don’t have an advanced health care directive, 
particularly young children, obviously. 
 
So the ethical issues are incredibly complex and very, very 
sensitive issues, but we brought it to the Supreme Court. And 
back in 1993 the Justice John Sopinka who wrote for the 
majority of the court at that time said nobody else is doing this: 
“. . . nobody else was decriminalizing assisted suicide, and to do 
so would allow a constitutional right that goes beyond ‘that of 
any country in the Western world.’” 
 
So at that point she was denied her right to have someone assist 
her in dying when she wanted to die. Ms. Rodriguez then chose 
to do exactly that, but she had to do it in secret. Less than a year 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6047 

later she died with the help of an anonymous physician. So it’s 
a rather tragic case, Mr. Speaker, and when you think about the 
agony she went through just to have the right to do that without 
being declared, and putting that physician at risk of being a 
criminal, having to do it secretly and anonymously must have 
been a very, very difficult time for her. 
 
Now this article goes on to say that the world has changed 
dramatically in the years after that decision was rendered in 
1993. We now know that: 
 

Assisted suicide and euthanasia are legal under strict 
criteria in the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg; 
physician-assisted dying has been implemented in several 
American states; and for those who can afford it, assisted 
suicide has long been available for foreigners . . . [to] 
travel to Switzerland. 

 
This article is claiming that public attitudes have often also 
evolved. They state that opinion polls consistently say that a 
large majority of Canadians support medical aid in dying. And 
even late this summer the Canadian Medical Association voted 
overwhelmingly in favour of allowing physicians to follow their 
own consciences in caring for dying patients. 
 
Now what happened in the meantime is these two different 
routes are being followed, one through legislation and one 
through the courts. So we have a political process in Quebec 
and we have a challenge in the BC courts that’s going forward 
to the Supreme Court or has gone forward to the Supreme 
Court. 
 
So the Carter case in British Columbia is the one that’s being 
brought forward now. And what they’re doing is challenging 
again the prohibition against assisted suicide, and at the trial 
level, they were successful in arguing that. So the case was 
heard by Justice Lynn Smith in the BC Supreme Court. She 
listened to massive amounts of evidence from scores of expert 
witnesses and reviewed protocols and data from several 
jurisdictions, and she gave her judgment in June of 2012. 
 
She wrote a very long, thorough judgment and gave ample 
support for her decision. And what did she decide? She decided 
to strike down the assisted-suicide law and the euthanasia law 
in Canada. She’s saying that the prohibition against the 
physician-assisted suicide was unconstitutional. She gave 
parliament a year to introduce new legislation and gave Ms. 
Taylor an exemption to seek medical help in dying. Now of 
course that was appealed, not surprisingly. And also 
unfortunately and unexpectedly, Ms. Taylor died of a bowel 
infection in October 2012. So her ability to make that choice 
was taken away from her, and she died prematurely of a bowel 
infection. 
 
But that wasn’t the end of the legal case of course. A year later 
this case was overturned in the BC courts, BC Court of Appeal. 
And they’re saying the problem is on jurisdictional grounds 
because the Supreme Court ruled in 1993 that although it 
violated your rights, it was still — what was the word? — 
justified because of the vulnerability of people in that situation. 
And they say that you can’t reopen issues that the Supreme 
Court had settled in the Rodriguez case. 
 

So right now the court is hearing, it’s on a technical issue 
actually, and it’s whether or not a lower court has the authority 
to declare a law unconstitutional. And of course this is a key 
issue when the Carter case is being heard. And it was just last 
month when it was heard in appeal. Other issues that were 
heard in the final appeal at the Supreme Court were questions of 
individual autonomy and jurisdiction. And they have a quote 
here. And I don’t know if you remember seeing this, Mr. 
Speaker, but I certainly remember Ms. Rodriguez in the news 
from 1993 and her quote. The quote that is in this article says: 
“If I cannot give consent to my own death, whose body is this? 
Who owns my life?” 
 
So the question that’s being raised in this article is, what has 
changed in the last 20 years? How has public opinion changed? 
What are the legal issues? How have the ethical opinions 
changed? And one of the professors of law at Dalhousie 
University, her name is Jocelyn Downie. And she says, “The 
principle of respect for autonomy has gained strength in Canada 
and abroad.” 
 
[15:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what’s being suggested by this particular law 
professor is that the idea of the autonomy of your own body, of 
being able to make that decision and decide not only whether 
you want to continue to live or whether you choose to die, is 
gaining strength in a number of jurisdictions. And there’s 
another professor, Professor Sumner, has also said, “Denying a 
person the right to determine the course of their own dying is an 
invasion of their autonomy over their own life and very often an 
invasion of their dignity.” 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, with all the discussion we’ve been 
having lately in this Assembly in terms of seniors and some of 
the end-of-life issues that we’re talking about for seniors in 
level 4 care, we know the level of acuity has increased 
dramatically in these types of care homes and that people are 
living longer with much more complicated health issues. So 
whether or not you can determine the course of your own dying, 
and whether that is an invasion of autonomy is certainly one 
that’s very current in the affairs of Canada. 
 
The Canadian government itself has refused to consider any 
easing of the physician-assisted death rules in the Criminal 
Code. But what Quebec has done, and now I’m going to go 
back to what’s happening in the province of Quebec where the 
government, on a proactive level at the legislative level, rather 
than going through the court has taken a . . . They call it a 
jurisdictional end run around the Criminal Code. And what 
have they done is they chart a political route within the 
provincial law “. . . to provide a continuum of care ranging from 
palliation to euthanasia for people who are facing imminent 
death.” 
 
So the question that Madame Hivon raised at a conference in 
Chicago a couple of months ago, she said: 
 

“The . . . [opinion] we took was one of health care. We 
should not leave anybody suffering” at any stage, so why 
“would it be okay at the end of life?” 

 
So the bill she said is “ . . . about people who are ill and who are 



6048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

suffering and need to have their pain alleviated.” So the focus 
of the Quebec legislation is on the alleviation of pain. Death 
may be a result of that alleviation of pain. It may not, but the 
focus is on the alleviation of pain. And this woman who has 
brought this bill forward in the Quebec legislature, in the 
National Assembly, said she watched some of her own family 
suffer before dying. And she’s convinced that when these issues 
come up it’s the duty of parliamentarians to face these issues 
and not wait for the courts to tell you what to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a very courageous position to be taken by a 
legislator, and I think it’s one that should be applauded. So 
we’re certainly going to keep an eye on this legislation in 
Quebec. And again I want to note that the way it was introduced 
was a motion in the National Assembly, and it got all-party 
support for public consultation to hear ordinary people’s 
thoughts and experiences about end of life. That was the 
beginning, and then there were several steps that went through, 
and Bill 52 in Quebec was passed just this last June. 
 
Obviously to get any bill passed with all-party support is a 
significant achievement by any government, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think she’s being recognized for her ability to do that, although 
there were obviously protests. And in Chicago there’s a 
disability rights group called Not Dead Yet, and they actually 
went into the hotel and protested quite vociferously. But what 
happens is that this raises the public discussion, and I think that 
is something that is worthwhile and something that we will 
continue to discuss here in Canada. 
 
Now she is waiting to see what happens with the Supreme 
Court and whether or not they will use the Carter case, which 
they are hearing as we speak, or they’ve heard the arguments 
and they’re deliberating. Will this be an opportunity to rule on 
the constitutionality of Quebec going it alone on end-of-life 
care? Both of these balls are up in the air right now, Mr. 
Speaker, and it will be very interesting to see how the courts 
come down on this. 
 
The end of the article here, it talks about: 
 

If the Supreme Court agrees that the Criminal Code 
prohibition against assisted suicide is unconstitutional, 
[like the BC trial judge ordered] . . . it will have “to weigh 
in on the issue of jurisdiction, so that the federal 
government knows what it can and cannot do in drafting 
the new legislation that will be necessary.” 

 
But Madame Hivon, the article says, is thinking, well, we’ll see 
what happens. She said, “Our approach is very different. Our 
jurisdiction is over health care.” So you can see two very 
different approaches to this issue that inform I think any health 
care directive that any individual may be thinking about. 
 
I wanted to find out exactly who in the United States has bills 
that have legalized physician-assisted suicide. There are three 
states that have legalized it. Oregon, Vermont, and Washington 
have legalized physician-assisted suicide through legislation, 
and in Montana they also have legal physician-assistant suicide, 
but that was through the courts, where it became a law in 
courts. So only four states have actually legalized it, and of 
course 46 states have not. That’s the status in the United States 
right now. 

We have the situation in Quebec where the bill has been 
introduced. And of course we know the Supreme Court heard 
the appeal on the Carter case last month, and I suspect it’ll be a 
few months yet before we get their final ruling on this, but it’s 
something I think that we need to be aware of. 
 
Interestingly also, Mr. Speaker, on March 27th, 2014 in the 
House of Commons, an MP [Member of Parliament] named 
Steven Fletcher tabled legislation that amends the Criminal 
Code to allow physicians to assist individuals to end their life 
where there’s a certain set of criteria followed; and secondly, 
establish a Canadian commission on physician-assisted death to 
produce public information on physician-assisted death and to 
support law and policy reform with respect to 
physician-assisted death. So that bill is on the order paper, I 
believe, federally. And certainly that’s something else I think 
that we’ll see more debate in legislatures and in the House of 
Commons, that we’ll see how this discussion is going across 
Canada. 
 
There are a number of other countries that have also legalized 
assisted suicide: Belgium, Colombia, I believe Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands, Switzerland. So those are a few of the jurisdictions 
where physician-assisted suicide is allowed. 
 
Now back to Saskatchewan. Of course it is not allowed at this 
point in our law. We don’t have legislation tabled by this 
government to make it a health care issue and an end of life . . . 
not end-of-life issue but one about the continuum of care. But 
we do know that there are ways within your health care 
directives to certainly indicate to your loved ones and to your 
family and to your physician what your wishes would be when 
you are in that situation, when you are at an end-of-life situation 
or terminally ill and unable to communicate your wishes to your 
loved ones and to your physician. Then a health care directive is 
something that is available under this bill, and it’s one that I 
believe is being taken very seriously by the medical 
community. And certainly I would think, in the case of any 
families where these directives exist, that the family members 
would take it seriously. 
 
It’s funny, you know, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had a health care 
directive for 20 years now, and certainly have encouraged, used 
language in my own health care directive that says, in the event 
where I’m in pain, to use any means necessary to provide me 
comfort. And that’s as far as the law will allow me to go in 
terms of directing my care in the event of sort of the 
incapacitated end-of-life kind of situation. But that’s as far as 
the law will allow us to go. I know that my ex-husband is quite 
the opposite from me. He says, keep me alive at all costs. Do 
whatever you can. I don’t care if you have to freeze me and put 
me in a cabinet, but keep me alive and, you know . . . And so at 
any rate, that’s his choice, and certainly I would expect that his 
family would respect those wishes. And I hope and wish that 
my family will respect my wishes as well. So that’s the whole 
point of the health care directives. 
 
And as a trend, it was obviously . . . became very popular when 
the Sue Rodriguez case was being heard in 1993, and I think 
many, many people take advantage of that. And I would 
certainly encourage all members, if they haven’t done already, 
so to think about this and decide what it is they would like to 
see in their health care directive in the event that they become 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6049 

incapable of making their own health care directives. 
 
Now there’s two types of things that individuals should think 
about in this and while they’re thinking about this situation. 
First of all is the living will or the health care directive — I use 
the word health care directive; many people refer to it as a 
living will — and then durable powers of attorney for health 
care. 
 
So what is the difference between the two? A living will is the 
health care directions. And there’s a definition here from Merck 
Manuals, which is online, and it says: 
 

A living will expresses, in advance, a person’s instructions 
or preferences about future medical treatments, 
particularly end-of-life care, in the event the person loses 
capacity to make health care decisions. 

 
The second definition . . . That’s the end of the quote. Now the 
second definition is, what is the power of attorney for health 
care? So this is how it’s described: 
 

A durable power of attorney for health care appoints a 
person (called a health care agent or proxy, health care 
representative, or other name depending on the state) to 
make decisions for the person (the principal) in the event 
of incapacity to make health care decisions. 

 
So you can see that the power of attorney is appointing an 
individual who will make decisions for you if you are incapable 
of making those decisions. That’s one thing. And then of course 
the living will or the health care directive advises your family or 
anybody that’s responsible for your care in terms of what your 
wishes would be if you are at an end-of-life situation. 
 
So you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I just had a 
constituent call a couple of weeks ago, and her husband is in a 
. . . I think he . . . I can’t remember what his health situation is, 
but he is becoming sicker and sicker all the time. His care is 
becoming much more difficult all the time. He’s in long-term 
care right now. He’s a fairly young man. And she needs power 
of attorney in order to make some health care decisions. And 
it’s very difficult for her right now without that because she’s 
very upset about some of the care decisions that are being made 
on his behalf by the physicians. 
 
So I would again advocate to all folks, including people at 
home, people that are listening today, but certainly this is 
something that we all should be thinking about, is that you think 
about those things before you come to a point of incapacity. 
You think about who it is you want to be making those 
decisions for you and how it is you want those decisions to be 
made. So I can’t stress that enough. 
 
In terms of a living will . . . I mean it’s a living will because you 
haven’t died yet so it’s something that you are incapacitated, 
you’re not able to make decisions for yourself, but you’re still 
alive. So it’s a living will. Now it’s not the same kind of legal 
force and effect as a will upon your death, which has a whole 
set of legal precedents and laws that are associated with a will 
once you die. But some cases, you know, the living will is in 
flux probably. There’s a lot of different varieties of what they 
look like. Sometimes it’s called the medical directive. It’s 

usually about end-of-life care but it could actually apply to any 
kind of care or treatment, especially when you have lost 
capacity to make a health care decision. Sometimes you could 
talk about only end-of-life decisions. You could talk about the 
whole continuum of decisions. 
 
It says in this article by Merck that people believe death is 
preferable to being perpetually dependent on medical 
equipment and others feel the opposite, like my ex-husband, 
that extreme heroic measures and technology should be used to 
extend life as long as possible. So again it’s very important for 
people to know what your wishes are if you end up in that 
situation. 
 
There’s examples of language, and certainly if anybody’s 
interested in preparing one of these, there’s a number of good 
precedents or examples on the Internet. The Canadian Cancer 
Society also has a page on their website called advanced 
directives and there’s different things they tell you you should 
think about in terms of a living will. What about the use of 
breathing machines or ventilators? What about the use of CPR 
[cardiopulmonary resuscitation] if your heart stops or if you 
stop breathing? What about artificial feeding? Are you willing 
to be tube fed if you are incapacitated? What about things like 
treatments and antibiotics, pain, anti-nausea medicines? What 
about continuing or not continuing with treatment such as 
chemotherapy or radiation therapy? 
 
And one very important thing that I know we’ve heard our 
Minister of Health talk about recently as well is organ or tissue 
or body donations. And certainly with the discussion on some 
positive legislation that’s on the floor right now regarding 
cornea transplants and different types of transplants, it’s very 
important that individuals let those wishes be known before 
they are incapacitated. 
 
And one of the things they note here on the Canadian Cancer 
Society page is that people with advanced cancer have the right 
to refuse treatment. And I think again we saw a case recently in 
the courts, I believe it was in Quebec, where a family with a 
young daughter were able to refuse treatment, chemotherapy 
treatments. And that certainly is people’s right to do so. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s sort of a very brief 
summary of where we’re at with the law in relation to health 
care directives and things like physician-assisted suicide. 
Certainly health care directives have become very popular and 
been legalized and enshrined in legislation for many years. 
 
What the Minister of Justice indicated in the terms of the bill 
that’s being introduced right now is quite straightforward, 
actually. This is part of the work of the Legislative Assembly to 
ensure we have as many bills translated into French that we can. 
And so what’s happened with the tabling of this particular Bill 
is that it’s now been translated, and it’s being provided in both 
official languages. 
 
The minister indicated in his very brief comments that there 
really isn’t any substantive changes in the bill. It’s just been 
translated. I think there’s a few that are kind of interesting, and 
I just want to point them out. 



6050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

This is about using plain language, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
when I was in law school that was sort of a trend as well, back 
in the early ’90s, about cleaning up the language. Legalese is 
exactly that: legalese. It’s very difficult to understand. It’s often 
obscure and obfuscational, I would suggest as well, because the 
idea is to make it so that nobody can understand it. And I don’t 
think it’s intentional on the part of lawyers, although in some 
cases it certainly is. And if you want to be obscure, you 
certainly can choose words that would make you obscure. 
 
There’s a few phrases that are being reinserted in the English 
portion of this bill that I find kind of interesting. One is in 
clause 2(2), where there’s an addition to the existing English 
wording which currently says, “a decision in a directive . . .” Or 
sorry. I should start with the full subclause. Subclause (2) reads: 
 

(2) Nothing in this Act authorizes: 
 

(a) a decision in a directive, by a proxy appointed in a 
directive, by a personal guardian or by a nearest relative, 
that is prohibited by the Criminal Code. 

 
Now they’ve chosen to add an additional phrase here, and it’s 
“. . . with respect to an act or omission that is prohibited by the 
Criminal Code.” The phrase “with respect to,” I was told in law 
school, is one that should never be used anymore. It’s three 
words when you can use one. And so it’s very strange that 
they’re actually going back to that language in 2014 when 20 
years ago it was the style to not do that. 
 
Another example of that it is in section 2(1)(b)(iii), and it 
currently reads: 
 

(b) [reads] “capacity” means the ability: 
 

(iii) [reads] to communicate a health care decision on a 
proposed treatment. 

 
And now they’ve crossed out the word on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they’ve added the three words, with respect to. And I find 
that a very strange way to make an amendment in a bill when it 
was perfectly fine the way it was. And using archaic language, 
going back to archaic language doesn’t make any sense to me. 
 
Another interesting thing I’ve noted is that in section 5 and in 
section 6 of the existing bill, quite often the clauses start with 
the word where. So for example, “5(1) Where a health care 
decision in a directive . . .” And then it goes on. “(2) Where a 
health care decision in a directive does not clearly anticipate 
. . .” And then it goes on. And (4) says, “Where a directive is 
made by a person who is the subject of a certificate . . .” 
 
What they’ve done here is they’ve struck out the word where, 
and they are putting in the word if. So it’s not earth shattering. 
It’s certainly not going to change the direction of the universe 
or anything. But it’s interesting that they’ve taken upon 
themselves to make that change in clause 5. 
 
Now in clause 6(2) we have the same language: “Where a 
directive is signed pursuant to clause (1)(b).” And they’ve 
changed the word where to the word when. 
 
And again the inconsistency here I find is kind of interesting. 

I’m not sure what the legislative drafters are looking at here and 
why they feel that that’s necessary, but I just wanted to point 
out some of these interesting changes that are being made to the 
English version despite the fact that the minister was talking 
only about the fact it’s being translated into French. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve exhausted my comments 
on this particular bill, so at this point I would like to move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 156 is a very 
short bill that deals with some consequential amendments to 
other bills in relation to the bill I just spoke to, Bill 155. So 
there’s only four different bills that are being amended, and all 
they’re doing is taking out the name of the Act that exists right 
now. Any of the bills that refer to the previous Act are now 
going to be amended to reflect this Act, and really all it’s doing 
is adding the word 2014 at the end of the bill. 
 
So I’ve exhausted all my comments on the topic at this point, 
and so I would just move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 
Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 157 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 157, The Human 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6051 

Tissue Gift Act, 2014. I guess before I get into some of the 
comments . . . And I realize, you know, members of this 
province, different reasons, may go on dialysis, and I want to 
talk about some of that stuff. Whether it’s heart . . . There’s 
different transplants that individuals go through because their 
family members are sick, and they’re there supporting them. 
And I guess we have many people who are on dialysis, and I 
think about those family members who do all the travelling and 
the cost to the family for the travelling. 
 
And I know in the North we have many people that travel for 
dialysis and, you know, they have to travel to P.A. [Prince 
Albert], whether it’s Saskatoon, and sometimes it’s three times 
a week for dialysis and they’re exhausted. They’re tired. And 
actually, it was interesting. I know we’ve had people back home 
who are concerned about that and, you know, their loved ones, 
and they’ve asked — and we’ve actually requested from the 
health region, from the Minister of Health, from his ministry — 
to give us the numbers on how many individuals in the three 
health regions are travelling for dialysis currently that they 
know about. And we’ve got those numbers and, you know, it’s 
very concerning. 
 
And I know that for the family members that struggle, and it’s 
not only the cost but it’s about, you know, they’re already 
exhausted. They travel down for hours and they have their 
treatment and then they travel all the way back to the North. 
And I know that there’s been challenges there when we look at 
that also, but I wanted to talk a little bit about that because I 
know some of the family members have asked us — and we’ll 
continue to work on their behalf — but maybe we can have 
dialysis machines or some type of a . . . We have to look at that. 
And they’ve asked too, could it be in the North? Are there units 
where they’re portable or you can move them into some of the 
communities? And I think it’s interesting to look at, and we’re 
going to be pushing on that. 
 
I know some of the family members, you know, that are faced 
with that dialysis are going to talk. If they can’t get the 
transplant, of course, for a kidney, there’s not a kidney available 
and there isn’t the opportunity for different reasons whether it’s 
a match, whether there’s enough kidneys . . . And I think from 
some of the ministers and people speaking and hearing out there 
when it’s coming to organ donation and transplant to go on, you 
have to have obviously those that are giving a gift, a donation, 
you know. Some people sign the cards with your driver’s 
licence that say, yes, I would like to donate their organs, and 
they’re willing to do that. And we have many people in the 
province that, you know, that go ahead and do that. 
 
But I guess at the end of the day, you have to make sure the 
organs that are harvested are ones that can be, I guess, 
transplanted into individuals, that they’re a match. There’s 
different reasons and I mean, I guess those professionals out 
there will know what those are. And I don’t know who 
requested the change that they’re making to this Act. I’m not 
sure. But I know back home, for those that are travelling and 
those that need a transplant . . . And there’s many different 
reasons why, medical reasons, whether it’s young children, 
whether it’s, you know, a mom or a dad. It could be a 
grandparent. And there’s different transplants they need, not 
only, you know, when we look at hearts. You look at lung 
transplants. 

I know individuals that have been in the North and have had the 
opportunity to go and have a transplant, and some of them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it has given them an opportunity at life, to 
spend many years with their family and has been successful. 
And we know that. That’s the gift of life. And you know, when 
you’re hearing somebody who’s gone through a transplant and 
they talk about it, what it’s given them, you know, and I know 
there’s many individuals that have been very successful and, 
you know, get to spend more years with their grandchildren, 
with their loved ones, because of a transplant. Somebody gave 
that gift of life so that they could have I guess the added years 
of comfort and without pain and, you know, whether you’re 
breathing, whether it’s heart. 
 
So those individuals that do that, again I want to say to all those 
. . . And some of them, it’s very emotional when you have a 
child or, you know, you have someone who’s ill and maybe 
they’re in a coma, or for whatever reason. And you decide. And 
there’s a way to . . . that I guess our doctors approach 
individuals. There is probably a process that’s the right timing. I 
don’t know. It’s up to the professionals, up to I guess social 
workers. It’s up to the health professionals to decide when you 
want to approach a family and if you approach a family. 
 
I’ve been fortunate, you know, and I’m grateful and thank the 
Creator that I have never had to have that come before me with 
one of my loved ones, my grandchildren and children, to say 
we’re faced with that, having to make that decision of giving 
that gift of life or having to have a transplant where one of your 
grandchildren need it. But for those that are doing it, I know 
that . . . and are waiting in the lineup, and some individuals, 
unfortunately, you know, their life, they lose their life because 
they need that organ transplant and they don’t receive that. And 
there are those sad stories and my heart goes out to them with 
that, you know. 
 
But having said that, having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s opportunities for I 
guess the professional. And the bill’s talking about going a little 
further than that, than just somebody donating. And it isn’t just 
about donating. It isn’t about the gift of life. They’re talking 
about giving provisions in the regulations, and that’s where 
we’re going to want to watch these, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re going to want to watch the regulations, because it’s like 
there’s a change. And I ain’t going to say that I understand all 
of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I do know this: that you’re now 
talking about giving powers to the minister and the ministry and 
to have certain provisions in the regulations, and it’s going to 
come out in the regulations. And we have to make sure we 
understand what is in the regulations. 
 
And as they move this forward . . . And sometimes we bring in 
legislation that’s good legislation. It makes sense. People have 
requested it, whether it’s physicians, whether it’s family 
members out there. There are many reasons why legislation 
comes in. It’s the government’s job to bring in and introduce 
legislation, and it’s up to us to debate the bills, look at them. 
Have they consulted? Have they done what’s needed? Have 
they made sure that they’ve talked to the professions? Have 
they talked to individuals? Who requested that? Who’s asked 
the government? Is it an initiative the government has decided 
they want to move forward? 



6052 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

So on this bill, it goes into the regulations. And we’re going to 
have to pay close attention to that because we’re not sure where 
this is going. 
 
I talked about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those individuals who have 
given the gift of life. But they’re now talking about moving, 
with the regulations, into a different area and an area of 
purchasing, you know, corneas and different things, different 
. . . And we don’t know where it’s going to go. And where does 
it end up? Is it those that can afford to pay for a certain organ 
that’s being . . . I guess you can purchase them. We’re 
concerned about, where does this go? 
 
And in the regulations, the minister will have the power and the 
ministry will have the powers. You’re giving certain powers. 
When it comes to regulations, who will be involved in deciding 
those regulations? Will it be, you know, doctors? Will it be 
family members? Will it be those individuals who have given 
the gift of life? Is it those individuals who have received the gift 
of life? Is it those family members that will be consulted? Who 
will be consulted, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Who will be talked to? 
And we want to be clear, because if this in the end . . . and I 
know my colleagues will ask questions wondering, will this be 
if you can afford to purchase . . . And we talk about the cost. 
Yes, you want to encourage those to give the gift of life. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And you know, changing those regulations, and I realize it 
starts with, you know, paying for corneas. And they’re going to 
start it . . . If that’s where they’re going to start, where else will 
they go? And what is going to open it up, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Are they going to be those that can afford come before those 
that are waiting in line, waiting for the service, waiting for that 
gift of life from somebody who is donating if you can buy it? 
 
So there’s going to be a lot of questions, and no doubt those 
individuals that are waiting for the gift of life . . . And we know 
that whether it’s a kidney, there’s many . . . a lung, there’s 
many different . . . a cornea, there’s many different reasons 
why. Family members are sick, and the reason why we have to 
have organ donation. 
 
But now we’re talking about changing it, and that’s concerning, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to be very cautious that it isn’t 
about leaving the most vulnerable behind because someone can 
purchase. And we’ve seen those discussions when we talk about 
MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and different things. If 
someone can afford to pay, then they get in front of the line. 
And some people who have struggled to make ends meet and 
take care of their loved one because of that loved one is ill, and 
they’ve spent a lot of their resources and money and can’t 
afford maybe the purchase, if that’s where this goes . . . And 
we’re not sure about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the 
government is going with this. We’re going to be watching it 
closely, but I know there’s a lot of questions need to be asked. 
 
Saskatchewan people, you know, the good people that we are, 
we want to help each other out. We help out our neighbours. 
You know, we want to make sure that people aren’t left behind. 
I know the members of this House want that. And I hope we all 
work together, and sometimes it means working together, 
making sure we understand what’s going on and when there’s 

needs. And we’ve co-operated sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But sometimes, I’ll be honest, it hasn’t been good co-operation 
by that government for whatever reason. 
 
But in this bill and the regulations, they’re introduced and 
they’re going to give certain powers. And I want to make sure, 
and I know back home people that are the most vulnerable, 
whether they’re in this province, whether they’re . . . because 
they have limited resources at their disposal, for whatever 
reasons. Maybe it’s been medical costs that it’s cost them for 
years and they’ve been paying maybe for hotel rooms, and 
maybe there isn’t a system where they’re getting covered, their 
expenses, hotel rooms and the mileage and the meals. And we 
know that the cost, the cost of, you know, not everything is 
covered. Some people have private insurance. Some people 
don’t. Some people, the Saskatchewan Health covers their 
costs. But there are many individuals who do not have coverage 
and support, so they’re on their own. 
 
And some organizations, we know that there’s many 
organizations, whether it’s the . . . We have all kinds of 
community organizations, whether it’s . . . you know, there’s so 
many of them, you know, to mention. The Elks. Kinsmen. 
There’s so many different groups. United Way. There’s so 
many different groups that fundraise to help individuals who 
need the help and supports so that they can bring their loved 
one. And some of them have to travel, we know, out of 
province. Some travel out of country to have organ transplants, 
and the cost of it is great. 
 
But we go back again and I want to say that those, you know, 
we wish . . . I don’t wish that on any family member out there 
or any Saskatchewan resident, having to deal with the decision 
of organ transplant or having to deal with the illness where you 
have to make those decisions. 
 
And if you didn’t have the dollars to cover the costs and 
somebody else could pay for it because . . . for whatever reason. 
They’ve had an opportunity where, you know, they’ve done 
well. And I don’t disagree that some individuals have done 
well, whether it’s education, whether they’re in business, 
entrepreneurs, they’ve done really well for them and we’re glad 
for that. But I hope our system, our health system doesn’t turn 
over where those that can afford to pay get to go in front of, you 
know, the line of others that are needing life-saving and the gift 
of life. And we hope that never happens. 
 
So I’m a little concerned with the regulations, and I know my 
colleagues have shared some of their concerns. And you know, 
when you think about it, you know, one of my colleagues I was 
asking a little bit of background, and I know here like I talked 
earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to sign the donor card. 
And if you do that, you know, you’re donating your organs 
should something happen, a misfortune of, you know, where 
someone loses their life. And if they can retrieve those organs 
to assist in saving someone and giving somebody else the gift of 
life, that’s great. And I know that many people in our province 
do that because we are a caring province. 
 
But having said that, they have to sign that donor card. And if 
they don’t, and I mean . . . I know my family, even we’ve talked 
about it, you know. It’s a good thing to do and you should do 
that. But I wonder how many of them and, you know, a 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6053 

checklist for ourselves, wondering how many have signed the 
donor card to do this, to make sure that, you know, if something 
would happen that individuals have signed their cards so that if 
something should ever happen to a loved one, that they have 
that. 
 
So having said that, but I know one of my colleagues I was 
asking and giving me a little background information, in some 
countries, my understanding that I got, that it works the other 
way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you don’t sign a card that says you 
didn’t want to donate your organs, that that can happen that 
way. You know, he was explaining that to me. And I’ve never 
heard of that but he was explaining that to me and I was like, 
well that was different from what we have in our system here in 
the province of Saskatchewan where you sign that card. 
 
But having said that, I know that there are so many people who 
need — yes, and we will say that — organ transplants. I know 
I’ve had community members like I talked about, and I know 
some of them have kidney dialysis and go down . . . I’ve had 
someone who we would call back home as a friend of ours. She 
needed that and she used to travel lots. You know, 
unfortunately she passed away. She got older and she passed 
away. But it goes down to the travelling for, you know, when 
she would go down for dialysis, the travel and how exhausted 
she was. And there’s others that talk about how exhausted they 
are. 
 
And I’ve talked about the portable units, and hopefully maybe 
there’s opportunities under Health for those individuals in 
northern Saskatchewan and the rural areas, because they have to 
do so much travelling, to have these portable devices. And 
that’s one way I realize of alleviating because they need that. It 
saves their life, and that’s the process that’s there. 
 
But having said that, they have to travel to the bigger centres to 
have that. Maybe if we had more portable units for the rural 
area, for the North, for isolated communities, we could have 
that where those individuals who have to have dialysis three 
times a week are exhausted. You know, you’re already 
exhausted going, and then they have the treatment, and they 
have to travel all the way back. And they’re exhausting. It just 
must seem like you get done . . . You go through the process, 
and then you go back home exhausted, whether it takes four 
hours, eight hours, you know, whatever it takes to go through it. 
And I think probably it would be a good exercise for all of us as 
members and community members to go through somebody 
and make sure we understand what they have to go through for 
dialysis. 
 
And you know, that’s important, but it’s not just that. We think 
about transplants, and we think about who will be . . . who will 
get in line. 
 
And when I talk about the regulations — and I was going to go 
back to that, and I’ll finish up when we get into the regulations 
— there’s going to be certain powers that the minister will 
have, that the ministry will have, and to bring out the 
regulations. We’ve talked about it sometimes. It has to be clear. 
Where’s this going? Who asked for these changes, and what’s 
the purpose of them? Like I mean is it going . . . Where are they 
going? Like is this going to open it up where they look at so 
many options? Is it going to be consulting, talking with 

individuals, talking with Saskatchewan residents, doctors, 
whoever? Like I said this earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
dialogue and consultation needs to happen. 
 
And we want what’s best for Saskatchewan people. We do. We 
all do. We do want to see . . . Saskatchewan people, I know that 
we’re good at heart. We care about our neighbours, and we look 
out for one another. 
 
And you know, sometimes it’s showing respect. And we have 
to make sure that we work together and that we achieve what’s 
being asked when people come, whether it’s this side of the 
House or the government side, whether bills are introduced by 
government on the request of individuals, by organizations, 
whether it’s by groups, whether it’s by government. The 
opportunity for us to talk about those bills, discuss them, ask for 
clarification, not always for ourselves. Sometimes we have 
individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who want us to ask on their 
behalf. And we need to make sure that we do our due diligence, 
that we’re doing what we need to do to preserve that. 
 
Now nobody’s trying to, on our side of it, you know, I hope and 
I would never want to stop a process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s going forward to help individuals in this province. We 
want to work, and I’ve said that earlier. We’ll work with 
government, but also we’ve got to make sure that it’s clear from 
our side and from government, whether it’s debating the bill in 
that process or it’s in committee. And we asked . . . [inaudible] 
. . . And we’ve got to do our work too, and I realize that. 
Sometimes we encourage people to get a hold of us to talk, as 
opposition. And I know we have our Health critic, the member 
from Riversdale. She’s always asking people if there’s issues 
facing with health, to get a hold of us, as opposition we are. 
 
If there’s bills or if there’s issues that are facing, and whether 
it’s . . . And there’s many bills. I’ve had somebody who’s going 
to get a hold of us on a number of bills. I’ve mentioned it to 
them. When it comes to violence against women, they have 
some good input, and domestic . . . And they have some good 
advice. And they have some recommendations that they would 
like to share, and they’re going to share that with us so we can 
use that to get into the debate and share some of those 
challenges and concerns that they have. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many 
challenges in all kinds of situations with families. But my heart 
again, I want to as I close, I want to, you know, my heart goes 
out to those individuals who have to or who are waiting in line 
for a transplant. And there’s so many of them waiting for 
different organ transplants, and we have to, you know, we hope 
that all individuals get that. But we know that’s not happening 
by the numbers that the minister is referring to. 
 
You know, those that are waiting are waiting for a kidney 
transplant, many different . . . you know, corneas. So they’re 
going to go to a different area, and like in one area, they’re 
going to purchase corneas. And I think . . . I’m not sure if it was 
100, or I’m not sure if that’s the correct number, but they’re 
going to start that. They’re going to harvest, go to a place, and I 
guess you purchase them, and you bring back. So that starts it 
off, and we don’t know where else it’s going to go. 
 
But the only concern, you know, and when I think about it from 



6054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

. . . Well there’ll be many concerns. But one that comes to heart 
for me is those that are most vulnerable, those that are most 
vulnerable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not put at the back of the 
line because somebody could afford to pay for them. 
 
If this is where this goes with the regulations and if this is the 
change that this government is going and the direction they’re 
going by, you know, doing some of the changes and bringing 
this in, they might be making changes that are being requested 
to make it easier. But I also want to really stress that it has to be 
that it can’t be that someone that can afford to have the surgery 
or afford to buy organs can, can go ahead of anyone else. There 
has to make sure that process doesn’t happen, that the most 
vulnerable and those that can’t afford it . . . Like I said, there’s 
many reasons why they can’t maybe afford it. 
 
So we have to make sure that the regulations again . . . and in 
committee we ask the tough questions. We go out, and 
government, on both sides of the House make sure we’re 
getting the information that we need from our Saskatchewan 
residents, those that are most vulnerable, those that are waiting 
in line, and the physicians and the transplant teams and all those 
individuals. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that my colleagues 
will have more questions about the bill. And there’ll be more 
opportunity, but they’ll also have an opportunity in committee 
to ask a lot of questions when we get there. But right now we’re 
going to go through, and we’re going to go through. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re going to go through. I know the members want 
to get in on it. They’ll have their chance. They can come to 
committee and take part. So they can ask questions in there. But 
at this point, I know it will go to committee. 
 
We’ll ask the tough questions. We hope people will get a hold 
of my colleague, like I said, the critic from Riversdale who’s 
the Health critic, if they have issues, the minister as well, to 
make sure any issues or concerns they have, that they’re heard. 
There’s many people out there that could share some good 
advice on the things that do work, don’t work. There are many. 
At this point, I have no further questions. I adjourn debate on 
Bill 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue 
Gift Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 158 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As always, 

it’s a privilege to be able to arise to enter in debate, this time on 
Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2014. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a bill actually in large measure that 
we passed, that was passed about a year and a half ago and 
proclaimed actually in 2013, Mr. Speaker. It repeals Bill No. 
82, which: 
 

. . . predominantly dealt with the legislative changes that 
would be required for Saskatchewan Pension Plan to 
accept transfers in from Saskatchewan-based locked-in 
pension plans and locked-in retirement accounts, LIRAs, 
by bringing Saskatchewan Pension Plan in line with 
provincial pension benefits legislation.  

 
So we had a bill before us about a year and a half ago, Mr. 
Speaker, that passed and was never proclaimed. And so Bill No. 
138 contains — and the minister goes on to say this — contains 
much of that, well all that material, Mr. Speaker. So my 
question around that is, there are additional amendments, but 
why the government didn’t do its homework in the first place 
. . . Everybody’s time is valuable here, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t know. I don’t think so much has changed in that time 
period that these are things that the government couldn’t have 
foreseen when they . . . had they done their homework initially 
with Bill No. 82. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So the few additions here to this that built on Bill 82, the 
amendments, the minister points out, “. . . the amendments 
include an update to survivor benefits so that married members 
must name their spouse as beneficiary of their account unless 
the spouse waives that right.” He points out that: 
 

Also retiring members who are married and who choose a 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan annuity at retirement will have 
to choose a joint and last survivor 60 per cent annuity 
unless the spouse waives that right.” 

 
And he says that “The proposed amendments are in line with 
provisions in The Public Employees Pension Plan Act.” So I 
don’t know why they didn’t catch this or see this when Bill 82 
was before us a year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He points out, the minister also points out that, “The Act . . . 
clarifies the language around the board’s authority to offer 
prescribed pension benefits to members. This language [he 
says] simply clarifies the duties of the board,” and says that 
“Any new pension benefit would still need to be set in 
regulation.” 
 
He also, the minister in his second reading speech says that: 
 

The amendments introduce the term “specialty fund,” 
which is similar wording to that included in other 
government pensions plans and will allow the board to 
introduce unitization, which is a standard in the mutual 
fund industry. 

 
And yet another amendment here is allowing “. . . funds 
payable to a member of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to be 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6055 

transferred to the General Revenue Fund [or GRF] in the event 
that the member can not be located.” He says that “This would 
only be done after all other avenues have been exhausted, and 
the funds would continue to be held in the member’s name.” 
And he says that, “This protocol is similar to the process used 
by the financial institutions when clients cannot be located.” 
 
As well: 
 

Amendments [he says] will allow members to object to a 
marital division of their account on certain grounds. The 
Act has been silent on the issue. [So these] amendments 
modernize the language in the Act as well as clarifying the 
board’s duties and responsibilities. 

 
I’m interested in the language around modernizing the language 
in the Act because it was just a year and a half ago that the bill 
was before us, so I don’t know how much modernization 
happens in a year and a half, Mr. Speaker. But I think this 
shows that the government doesn’t always do its due diligence 
when bringing pieces of legislation before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The issues . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the Minister of 
Finance is saying that’s why they’re reviewing, but we had this 
bill, a very similar bill, which contained all these, many of these 
elements before us a short while ago, Mr. Speaker. So again the 
question is, why did we not have these other amendments that 
are being added, Mr. Speaker, to Bill No. 82 a year and a half 
ago? What did the government miss in doing their homework, 
Mr. Speaker? So I don’t know what’s changed in a year and a 
half, but apparently a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But pensions and retirement, Mr. Speaker, is a growing concern 
for more and more people, Mr. Speaker. And the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is 
incredibly important, but by no means is it the cure-all for the 
retirement woes that will be facing many people as we age, Mr. 
Speaker. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan . . . And the minister 
points out . . . I’m not quite sure why it’s so noisy in here, Mr. 
Speaker. I can barely hear myself speak, Mr. Speaker. So the 
importance of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, by no means am 
I diminishing that. That’s incredibly important to many people, 
but it is not the panacea to the retirement woes that will be 
impacting many people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are great benefits to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and 
the minister points that out. It’s “Simple: the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan takes pride in being easy to join and understand. 
Paperwork is kept to a minimum.” It’s “Consistent: the plan’s 
philosophy is to invest cautiously over the long term, which is 
an attractive approach for many people but especially for those 
with little or no investment experience.” It’s also voluntary. He 
also points out that it’s flexible and you can make a contribution 
at any time of the year. And it’s “Portable: it is always your 
plan regardless of where you live or what you do.” And it’s 
professionally managed, which is incredibly important. 
“Investments are handled by a professional investment firm.” 
The minister has pointed out it’s true, “It’s the only plan of its 
kind in Canada offering members professional investment 
management at institutional costs.” 
 
But I think these changes and ensuring that we’re supporting 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which is really great often for 

seasonal workers or students or people who don’t have regular 
income or don’t have that opportunity to contribute all the time 
. . . But the reality is we have some really serious retirement 
issues facing us, Mr. Speaker, and people being able to not live 
in abject poverty as they approach their supposed golden years. 
 
I think some numbers . . . I don’t have the numbers here for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in Canada only one in 
three working Canadians belongs to an employer pension plan. 
And when we look at private sector workers, or pulling the 
public sector workers out of that, that ratio slides to one in five. 
 
And although I think many experts have pointed out that it may 
not be such an issue obviously for more affluent Canadians who 
are able to sock away a little bit extra money, and I’ve heard 
some experts say even for lower-income individuals who would 
have CPP [Canada Pension Plan] and maybe the guaranteed 
income supplement might help them as well. But there’s really 
. . . Some of the argument has been around middle-class 
earners, or lower middle-class earners with household incomes 
of 35,000 to $55,000 a year face incredibly bleak retirement 
prospects here. Just looking at this article from the Calgary 
Herald that if you look at an income, if a homeowner . . . 
Actually, it took a look at the median Nova Scotian income in 
2012 was $68,000. If your household income is 25 or 35 per 
cent below that, you are going to have a tough time saving for 
anything, including retirement. 
 
It points out that if you’re a homeowner with two kids, a 
mortgage, a gross household income of $50,000 per year, and 
you forgo eating out, having a computer, watching cable TV, 
gift-giving, drinking alcohol, smoking, supporting a church or 
charity — which many of us like to do even if we have a lower 
income — or going on a vacation, whether it might just be a 
couple of hours away to Waskesiu, Mr. Speaker, or something a 
little bit more grand than that, many people are very hard 
pressed to come up with substantial retirement savings. 
 
I see this in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, in talking to people. 
With the rising cost of housing, with the rising cost of utilities, 
groceries, Mr. Speaker, all those kinds of things, those 
median-income earners are having a harder and harder time 
finding money for those extras, let alone those things that most 
of us or many of us take for granted, let alone having money to 
set aside for retirement. It’s not that people don’t want to, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think we all know that it’s very important. But 
when you look at the numbers, in 2005 only 6 in 10 families 
had RRSPs [registered retirement savings plan] with a median 
value of $25,000. 
 
And there’s also a gap actually around gender, Mr. Speaker, 
which has some big concern for me. When it comes to pensions 
and RRSPs, median 2011 pension income in Canada for men 
was $31,700, but for women was only $22,400. And so many 
retirees live on much less or must go back to work. 
 
And I see that, Mr. Speaker. I was actually at the gym this 
morning and there was a woman who had her transportation 
device . . . Why can’t I think of the name? It wasn’t a 
wheelchair, but a scooter, Mr. Speaker. And she was talking in 
the change room about she was feeling very proud about all the 
baking that she’d been doing since September: initially muffins, 
and now she’s got tons of Christmas baking lined up. This is a 



6056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

woman who’s in her 70s who loves baking, but has been forced 
to do that. She was talking about the cost of the batteries for her 
scooter, and she just doesn’t have any money. There is no 
money, Mr. Speaker, for this woman to be able to afford 
batteries for her scooter. So she is in her 70s now trying to 
make extra money by baking, which is great if that’s what you 
want to do, Mr. Speaker. But when that becomes what you have 
to do in your 70s, that is incredibly unfortunate. 
 
We hear, see more and more elders or more mature adults 
working in restaurants in the service industry. And you know, 
occasionally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s because they want to be 
getting out of the house. But many people I talk to, they’d much 
prefer to be getting out of the house to do volunteer work, 
things that they love that engage them. But in many cases, it’s 
because they need more income, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when we think about pension income, I know CPP, 
there’s been many people, many Finance ministers across 
Canada who’ve called for the enhancement of CPP. We’ve got 
Prince Edward Island, Ontario, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Manitoba, and Quebec all calling for some kind of 
enhancement to our CPP program. There’s many pension 
experts that say expanding CPP is the cheapest and most 
effective way to improve retirements and address that pension 
gap, Mr. Speaker. It’s an efficient system with low fees and 
enough capital to mitigate market risks than those with smaller 
cash pools. But our Finance minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
not in favour of doing that. He’s not keen on boosting the CPP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’d argue on this side of the House that, although 
enhancing the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is a good idea and 
one tool, Mr. Speaker, we really need to look at the universality 
and what we could be doing to ensure that all Canadians retire 
with a decent standard of living, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
isn’t the case right now and will become even worse into the 
future. 
 
So again I have to point out that it’s again odd that we had a bill 
before us a year and a half ago, and the government failed to do 
its homework to ensure that all those pieces around the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan were addressed in that bill. And 
that’s why we find ourselves here with these additions, Mr. 
Speaker. But I would encourage . . . It is disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker, that ours is one of the few provinces or one of the few 
Finance ministers who does not think expanding CPP is a good 
idea. 
 
In Ontario, in Ontario, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Kathleen Wynne, 
the Premier there, is proposing a made-in-Ontario top-up to 
CPP. So different provinces are doing what they have to do to 
ensure that their, to ensuring that their citizens have a decent 
standard of living upon retirement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again the benefit of CPP is that it is efficient. It’s got low fees 
and enough capital to mitigate market risks. It’s about 
universality and making sure that all Canadians, Mr. Speaker, 
have a secure retirement. And that is not the case right now. 
 
So I know I will have colleagues who would like to speak to 
Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2014, and as well we’ll have questions in committee, but at the 

moment I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 158, The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 153 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to join 
the debate on Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2014. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes in this 
political life of ours the work that we do can coincide with 
history. Sometimes there are events where it’s like the passing 
of Halley’s comet. It’s almost a millennial event, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s in that sort of sense of awe and just wonder, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I rise to join in this debate, bring attention to the 
way that this Minister of Justice and this government has 
declared clear and unequivocal war on the hyphen, the way that 
they’ve finally got around to, you know, solving the judgement 
versus judgment debate. Is there an “e”? Is there not? 
 
You know, these are some of the things that you wonder about 
in this life, Mr. Speaker, and finally, finally we see a 
government that’s willing to get tough on hyphens. We see a 
government that’s willing to get down to business when it 
comes to, you know, extra-long words, just running them all 
together. It’s really a sight to behold, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
terms of this piece of legislation. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now of course irony doesn’t translate terribly well in politics, 
Mr. Speaker, which is too bad because, you know, there’s rarely 
any shortage of irony in politics. But this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker, if you’ll pardon my introduction to my remarks here, 
this bill is largely about housekeeping, and it’s largely about the 
kind of housekeeping that happens but once. I think in this case 
since 1978 some of these things have been rattling around in the 
books just waiting to be taken on by a government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting bill in terms of sort of the, I 
don’t know, the dendrochronology of the thing, in terms of the 
tree rings that grow up in legislation and the way that different 
words come into favour and words go out of favour. It’s 
interesting in that respect, Mr. Speaker, but it is hardly a clarion 
call to legislative action. It’s hardly the signal being shot off by 
this government that’s, you know, finally this is a legislative 
agenda that you can really get excited about. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s some words that are updated 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6057 

and, you know, a greater attention being paid to gender-neutral 
language. Fair enough. That’s great. But in terms of the way 
that this has gone through the books and finally, again, you 
know, is there a hyphen to be inserted in pipeline? Does 
judgment have an “e” or does it not? I mean . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh brother. Oh brother. My colleague from 
Greystone is wondering if I’m being ironic. And yes, yes to 
make that clear, I am being ironic. I don’t know if that was clear 
enough from the start but . . . And also to be clear, this isn’t 
quite the passing of Halley’s comet. It’s not of that import, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again there’s some fine, fine efforts in here, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s like 100-plus pages of explanatory notes where it goes 
through how the great facsimile versus fax debate has finally 
been wrestled to the ground, and you know, the minister in his 
remarks introducing this piece of legislation. And you know, 
it’s not just enough that there’s one piece of legislation like this, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also its twin piece of legislation. We’ll get 
to that soon enough. Don’t you fret. 
 
But in terms of the minister’s second reading speech, “. . . an 
inter-ministerial committee with representatives from ministries 
of Justice, Social Services, and Health provided a report with 
recommendations on potential amendments to the legislation.” 
You know, I can imagine the rush that took place to get on that 
committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can imagine the sort of hot, 
hotly contested fight that would have gone on to say, you know, 
I want on that committee in the worst possible way. Because 
you know, who doesn’t want to get in there and take on the, 
does pipeline have a hyphen or does it not? Who doesn’t want 
to get in there and take on the judgment versus judgement? 
 
It reminds me of the old Kids in the Hall skit where there’s the 
guy that liked to introduce himself as, no it’s DeRill. You 
know, so is it judgment or is it jugement? I mean, are these the 
things that this government is seized with in terms of trying to 
paper together a legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker? Well 
apparently so, apparently so. 
 
And again there’s some fine efforts here in terms of, you know, 
some updated language around the use of lunatic or the use of 
incompetent or questions of competency. Fair enough. The 
greater attention paid to more gender-neutral language, again 
fair enough. 
 
But again I think it signals that this is one of the larger bills 
being brought forward by this government, one of the more 
substantial bills. But of course, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
the force in effect in today’s society, the unsubstantial character 
of this legislative agenda I think is this particular piece of 
legislation provides a significant window into that fact. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, I don’t think I could do better than him in terms of this 
debate, in terms of this second reading discussion of Bill No. 
153. And I’d certainly urge all members, you know, if you 
haven’t had enough of this debate, I’d refer them to his remarks 
because he really brings out the sort of ridiculous quality of the 
kind of things being taken on in this legislation like I certainly 
couldn’t do here today, Mr. Speaker. So hot Hansard reading 
tip for the reading audience out there: Saskatoon Centre, Bill 
153, a great read. It was even better to see it go down live and 

in concert, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this is a pretty thin piece of legislation coming forward, and 
again I think representative of, on the whole, a pretty thin 
legislative agenda on the part of this government. So with that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 154 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — It’s sort of like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: but 
wait, there’s more. In terms of the sort of thin legislative heft 
being brought to the table under 153, 154, well it’s all that and 
more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again in terms of taking on the great 
facsimile becoming fax endeavour, electronic mail becoming 
email. You know, thank goodness for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Safe-keeping, hyphenated, becoming safekeeping, no hyphen. 
Very interesting. Pipe-line, hyphenated, becoming pipeline, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Again, the great old judgment versus 
judgement with an “e” debate. I’m finally glad to see a 
government with the guts to weigh in on that. And chairman 
becoming chairperson — great, fair enough. 
 
Extra-provincial becomes extraprovincial, no hyphen. Again, 
you know, it’s the war on the hyphen continues. I’ll give them 
points for diligence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Data-base, 
hyphenated, becomes database, no hyphen. Again you know, 
thank goodness there is a government had the guts to take that 
one on. Subject-matter, hyphenated, becomes subject matter, 
two words. Two for the price of one there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
trading in that hyphen, bringing two words forth. I mean it’s 
really great to see a government really going at it like that. 
 
But this one’s more of a three for one. It’s sort of the eight ball, 
three banks to the corner. Insofar, all one word, becomes in so 
far, three words. You know, it’s like the trinity of nitpicking, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Anyway, you know, they’ve also cleaned up some typos, but I 
think you get the gist of what we think of this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again fair enough. Some of 
these things have to be done once every 25 years, whether you 
need to or not. It’s important to update language, absolutely. 
But in terms of what this piece of legislation and its predecessor 
have to say about the heft of this government’s legislative 
agenda, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of laughable. 



6058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 154. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 149 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 149, An Act to amend The 
Health Administration Act. Mr. Speaker, this bill continues in 
the trend of being rather thin in its content and it sort of fits 
with the whole fall agenda of legislation, that it’s all very thin 
or it seems to come from scraping the bottom of the barrel, if I 
can put it that way. 
 
But this particular legislation, all it does is add one part of a 
clause in The Health Administration Act to deal with some of 
the changes that have already taken place in government around 
who issues basically the health cards for individuals in the 
province. And so what for many years was an operation handled 
by staff within the Department of Health or the Ministry of 
Health was then moved to effectively another agency, and 
finally now it’s rested in what’s called eHealth Saskatchewan, 
which is effectively the digital part of health administration. 
 
Unfortunately when it was moved there, officials realized that 
there wasn’t actual authorization to move it there, in the 
legislation. And so what we have here is another kind of oops 
bill. Well we made a little mistake. Let’s fix it. It’s not maybe 
going to cause too much trouble, but let’s fix it. 
 
So what’s happening here is it gives authorization to the 
cabinet, the Premier, on the recommendation of the minister 
which . . . [inaudible] . . . would be the Minister of Health, to 
effectively transfer the functions that are to be handled by the 
minister to a Crown corporation or an agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And I think practically the 
eHealth Saskatchewan operation is a separate agency handling 
the digital side of the health system. But in the process of doing 
some of the things they’ve already done, they realized there are 
a number of responsibilities that are not accurately covered by 
the type of legislation that we have now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the goals of this Premier a few years ago 
was to reduce the number of civil servants. And we know that 
some of this shell game that we see of moving employees out of 
departments into other places is an aspect of that reduction in 
the civil service. And so we continue to ask how many 

employees are in different agencies or in different corporations, 
whether it’s the registry officials over at ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] or officials that are in 
an operation like this. 
 
What we need to do obviously is compare apples to apples. 
Like how many people were doing this kind of work before? 
How many are doing that kind of work now? And practically, 
this work is being handled by an internal or a Crown agency. 
For a while it was handled by another agency which specialized 
in registries, which had the name of ISC. When the government 
made the decision to privatize ISC or sell off a fair chunk of 
that, they were caught then with having a non-governmental 
agency handle the crucial private information of individuals in 
the health system, and so arrangements were made to quickly 
transfer that responsibility to the eHealth organization. And 
now we have, as I say, the catch-up bill or the correct the 
responsibility bill or make sure that things are done 
appropriately bill, and so this one is what we have here right 
now. 
 
And so practically what information eHealth is able to have in 
their system can now be managed to the full extent of the 
powers of the minister. Mr. Speaker, we need to watch very 
carefully what is happening as it relates to this, as we know that 
individuals in Saskatchewan are concerned about the privacy of 
the information that they have provided to the system so that 
they can get a health card so that they can get services here. 
 
There have been so many incidents, including an incident today, 
of tax information that the federal government had in a very 
private file being released to the public. Concern also then 
arises with even more crucial information, that information 
related to our health, and to how is that being protected. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I think every time there’s another layer of 
responsibility moved farther out from the minister, from the 
government, we need to raise some questions about how this is 
being done and why this is being done. And so we have this 
particular legislation that ends up talking about how that change 
can be made. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now eHealth is an initiative that gathers together much of the 
work that was done over many years in creating a digital health 
record or an electronic health record. It has many different 
names. The importance of that is that it does provide a 
coordinating or a coordinated spot where our individual health 
information can be gathered. But it’s absolutely crucial that the 
public have 100 per cent confidence in that system and how it 
works. 
 
We know that many of the initiatives of the Health department 
over the years — I know a number of the initiatives that were 
part of the Health plan which is already 13 years ago — 
included managing chronic diseases, watching and getting a 
sense of public health issues, other issues that could be 
monitored with de-identified information within the community 
of Saskatchewan. And I applaud those kinds of things that can 
be done. But let’s make sure that how we’re doing this is done 
in a way that carefully protects our health information, and 
makes sure that all of us as patients in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are covered by this system feel confident 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6059 

that everything is being dealt with appropriately. 
 
Now the way the legislation is set up, it gives the cabinet, the 
Premier, the power to transfer this responsibility to a Crown 
corporation or an agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
It doesn’t specifically name eHealth Saskatchewan. It gives a 
general transfer of power. I mean that’s simpler for obviously 
some of the administrators, but once again it removes a layer of 
protection for what I would say is some of the most crucial 
information that we have as citizens. And I think that we’ll 
want to understand why they’ve gone to this sort of generic 
transfer of information rather than having a very clear 
protection in the legislation around our health information. It’s 
always troubling when there’s a fuzziness or there’s not very 
much clarity in the legislation itself. 
 
But practically, Mr. Speaker, this is something that’s already 
been done. They’re trying to figure out how to make sure that 
it’s covered appropriately by the legislation, and they may have 
been overly generous in the power given to the Premier and 
cabinet. And I think that’s a question that we will want to 
discuss with the officials when we see them in committee. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further 
comments, but I know some of my colleagues will have some 
comments later. So at this point I would ask to adjourn debate. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The Health 
Administration Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 144 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my honour to rise to address this particular bill which deals with 
some very important and serious issues facing a lot of people 
here in Canada today, victims of . . . It used to be called The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act and this government is 
making the change to refer to it as victims of interpersonal 
violence, which I think is a very appropriate move as we know 
that violence against women happens in all sorts of contexts, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the work of legislators in trying to 
deal with this issue is very serious work and certainly work that 
needs to continue. 
 
As the minister pointed out in his commentary, the first 
domestic violence legislation in Canada was introduced here in 
Saskatchewan back in 1994. Again I remember when the bill 
was introduced. I was finishing up law school and was dealing 

with a lot of issues of women in law, and this was something 
that was seen as a very progressive piece of legislation at the 
time and certainly still is. So I’ll get into the substance of the 
bill in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just wanted to sort of generally address the issue of 
interpersonal violence and particularly violence against women 
as it now is reflected in our society. And as you’ll know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, certainly issues of violence against women 
have been front and foremost in the news recently, first of all 
starting with missing and murdered Aboriginal women. And we 
know that there’s several hundred, several hundred women who 
have gone missing over the last few decades, many of whom we 
don’t know what happened to them. They’re simply gone. And 
of course the fear is that they met a violent end at the hands of a 
perpetrator, and this is borne out in a number of circumstances 
where the actual perpetrators have been found and brought to 
justice. 
 
In particular it’s touched me in a direct way because one of my 
very good friends, her daughter-in-law was murdered about 10 
years ago now and was missing for several years. And her body 
was finally located through good police work, and the 
Saskatoon Police Service worked really hard on finding the 
perpetrator and the trial is now still ongoing after several years. 
 
I’ve seen though what’s happened when . . . Daleen was her 
name, Daleen Bosse. She was born Daleen Muskego, and she 
was murdered. I don’t know. I was at her wedding 15 years ago 
and then when she got murdered it was a real tragedy for the 
family and certainly for our community. And she left behind a 
daughter and her name is Faith, and I’ve been fortunate to see 
Faith grow up to be a lovely young woman. She just started 
high school this year and a very talented dancer and a really 
smart girl and really a nice girl, a pleasant girl to be around. But 
she’s had to grow up without a mother, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and so the victims of violence is a broad reach. Many people are 
affected by this. 
 
Certainly the whole justice procedure now with bringing the 
accused to trial has been almost a revictimization. The family, 
in many ways they’ve been dragged through a long, tedious 
court process. Certainly the accused is entitled to his day in 
court and his rights to be tried appropriately are necessary in the 
justice system that we currently have, and it’s one that I think is 
required by law, but the victimization of people continues. And 
then this is just one example of when Daleen was murdered, her 
body was desecrated and left in a garbage dump basically, and 
it took four years to find her body. But as I say, it was through 
the incredible police work that they did and sort of got a 
confession and actually were led to the location of the body. 
 
I attended her funeral at the Onion Lake First Nation — boy, 
that’s already about six years ago now — and the pain in the 
community was evident. And her parents are amazing people, 
Herb and Pauline Muskego, leaders in their community. And 
Daleen was a university student when she went missing. So I 
think a lot of times we don’t hear the stories about these women 
who have gone missing and the women that have been 
murdered. 
 
And it’s a serious, serious issue in this day and age when we 
think we should be protecting people even better than before. 



6060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

And we know that Aboriginal women are still going missing, 
that they’re still being murdered. And it’s hard for me to 
understand how this can happen, and what is it in the 
perpetrators’ minds when they conduct this kind of violent 
action against a woman? 
 
And we know Aboriginal women are being singled out. They’re 
marginalized more than any other group in our society, and 
they’re the most vulnerable as well. Many of them are engaging 
in lifestyles that leave them even more vulnerable, and that’s 
certainly I think something that we need to take more 
responsibility for as a society and one that we need to step up to 
the plate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And certainly these kinds of legislative actions are one step 
forward, but I feel that when it comes to this kind of violence, 
interpersonal violence, sometimes legislation is like trying to 
thread a needle with a bat. Like, we are trying to use the tool of 
legislation as best we can, but I believe this situation actually 
goes beyond what we can do in legislative assemblies. It’s 
about how we raise our children. It’s about our attitudes 
towards women and marginalized women. And certainly the 
fact that men think they can do this is to me terrifying and 
appalling. And it continues, and we don’t seem to be able to 
stop it. 
 
We can have inquiries and I think inquiries are important 
vehicles for us as a society to react to issues, but we have had 
inquiries on this and still the violence continues. So we’re 
missing something somewhere. And I know that as far as the 
Legislative Assembly is concerned, we are limited with what 
we can do in the Legislative Assembly. But I just think this is 
one of the big tragedies of our day when we live in what we 
consider free society and yet women are being terrorized, 
victimized, violated in the worst imaginable ways. 
 
And the stories just keep coming up. Another young woman last 
month in Manitoba, they found her body in the river. We have 
stories like popular entertainers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We all 
know the story of the former host of the radio show Q, Jian 
Ghomeshi, who has just today dropped his lawsuit against his 
employer, CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. Women 
coming forward with allegations of incredibly violent actions 
on the part of Mr. Ghomeshi. Again, he hasn’t been tried in a 
court nor has he admitted guilt with these things, so we have to 
be careful when we talk about it. 
 
But that’s part of the problem when it comes to the reporting of 
these kinds of interpersonal violent encounters that people are 
experiencing. And as we know, almost all of these experiences 
are women at the hands of men. There are certainly men against 
men and women against men, but by and large the large part of 
violent encounters in our society is the acts of violent 
aggression by men against women. 
 
We have the story again in the news this week, the sentencing 
of Clint McLaughlin who pled guilty to kidnapping basically 
his ex-fiancée when she returned her engagement ring. He took 
her away for three days, beat her, took her into the woods, and 
it was through her own stamina that she survived and beat him 
at what he was trying to do. And she escaped and he eventually 
succumbed to dehydration, but she escaped and managed to 
find safety. Again, this was someone who loved her. And it’s 

always a mystery to me how love can turn into violence in that 
context. 
 
We hear new allegations against the famous comedian, Bill 
Cosby. I was listening to a radio program the other day about 
stories that everyone knew. Everyone knew that there were 
these women who were experiencing violence at the hands of 
Mr. Cosby through date-rape drugs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
the whole notion that a man of his stature, a beloved comedian 
that was respected by people all over the world, you know, that 
he was resorting to, according to the allegations of course, he 
was resorting to the use of date-rape drugs to have sexual 
encounters with women, it’s almost beyond understanding. And 
I don’t know where we’ve gone wrong in our society where 
men think that that’s okay.  
 
I just want to refer a little bit to an article that was in the, I think 
it was on CBC’s web page. And this was on November 4th, 
2014 and it was in response to the allegations that were coming 
forward against Jian Ghomeshi from CBC. They interviewed a 
woman that I want to talk about a little bit. This is one of my 
very, very good friends. Her name is Heather Pocock and she is 
the assistant director of the Saskatoon Sexual Assault Centre. 
I’ve known Heather for I think 26 years now. We’ve been 
friends for a long, long time, and Heather has always been 
involved in work that circles around women’s rights and 
protections of women. And she worked for a long time at the 
Interval House in Saskatoon, which is where women can go 
when they are in a dangerous situation and need to leave their 
homes. So she’s been involved in the Sexual Assault Centre for 
many, in various capacities, for many years. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And currently Heather works with a program that I think is 
something very, she can be very proud of and certainly has been 
an invaluable tool for educators in the Saskatoon school system. 
And what they’ve done is they’ve developed a puppet show for 
grade 4 students and the . . . I’m trying to think of the name of 
the puppet show. But it’s about three young children as puppets 
who discover that each of them are experiencing things that 
aren’t right. And I think it’s either called It’s Free to Be Me or 
It’s Okay to Be Me. And what the puppet show does is it tells 
grade 4 children that if someone is doing something that makes 
you uncomfortable, touching you in the wrong way, telling you 
not to tell anyone, to hide it from your parents, hide it from 
people that care about you, that it’s okay to say this is wrong 
and to actually disclose it. 
 
This school program has been in existence for probably five or 
six years now, and I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
have been disclosures of abuse from young children as a result 
of this puppet show. And it’s also educating teachers as well 
because teachers don’t really know how to handle it when their 
young charges are in these kinds of circumstances. So the work 
of this puppet show is incredible and I think is something, it’s in 
huge demand now. They go back to a lot of schools and they 
have volunteers who go in and act as the puppets and produce 
this show in the schools. So I think that kind of work is, maybe 
will help turn the tide to the kind of horrible, horrific things that 
are happening to women in our society, in our modern, civilized 
society. It just blows me away. 
 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6061 

Heather also talked about what has happened as a result of the 
allegations coming forward against Jian Ghomeshi, and what 
she said is that has triggered a lot of other women to come 
forward. And certainly there’s been a lot of news stories about 
this since the allegations started. A lot of women are now 
coming forward with these stories and part of the problem we 
have . . . And people say, well why don’t women just come 
forward? It’s because they don’t think they’ll be believed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I heard one prosecutor from the United States talking about a 
case where a woman had alleged violations by Bill Cosby, and 
he wasn’t able to bring the prosecution forward because there 
wasn’t any evidence other than her word. And when you’re . . . 
You know, there’s been a lot of talk about the celebrity types of 
abuses that are going on. These people feel like they’re 
untouchable. And they want to bring forward or they want to 
take advantage of women. And again it’s beyond me why 
anyone would want to use a date-rape drug to drug a woman 
and then take advantage of her sexually. It’s just sort of beyond 
belief, but I know it happens. 
 
And again back to my friend Heather. She deals with the calls 
that come in at the Sexual Assault Centre. This happens on a 
regular basis where young women find themselves at a party 
and they wake up with their clothes off and they don’t know 
what happened. And it’s horrifying and it’s disgusting, and I 
can’t believe it still happens. But Heather and the work that 
they do at the Sexual Assault Centre is amazing. They help 
these women go to the hospital. They work with doctors. They 
work with police officers. 
 
They talk about date-rape kits where the proper evidence can be 
gathered when these things happen. Of course the evidence is 
very time sensitive, but we know that we can use DNA 
[deoxyribonucleic acid] now to actually identify the 
perpetrators. And there’s more tools available now for women 
who suffer from those kinds of horrific assaults. 
 
So I really want to pay kudos to folks like Heather Pocock who 
works at the Sexual Assault Centre and all the other dedicated 
volunteers and employees from that agency, and of course the 
police agencies as well and the hospitals and the doctors in the 
emergency centres. When they have a rape case that comes 
forward, that work is incredibly important, and we certainly 
need to support it. 
 
So what this bill actually does in terms of the technical 
substantive law portion of it, it makes a few changes. And I 
think these are again reflective of our time, some of the changes 
that are being made. And certainly the change of the name from 
domestic violence to interpersonal is very appropriate. We are 
adding in the definition of interpersonal violence a few new 
aspects of what it means. 
 
So previously interpersonal violence would mean “any 
intentional or reckless act or omission that causes bodily harm 
or damage to property,” and of course we’re not talking about 
strictly sexual assaults anymore. Under this bill it’s all forms of 
violence including hitting and physical violence, but it also 
includes acts or threatened acts that cause a reasonable fear of 
bodily harm, forced confinement where people are not allowed 
to leave, sexual abuse, obviously, but the new definition that’s 

being added is harassment or deprivation of necessities. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, you can well imagine those kinds of 
circumstances where a woman is being violated against just by 
being deprived of the necessities of life. And this is something I 
think Heather could tell you story after story about. So I think 
that’s appropriate to add those new clauses to the definition. 
 
We see that subsections (1) to (3) of section 3 are being 
changed, and in particular these deal with emergency 
intervention orders where an individual can go to a court 
without having had a trial saying, that person assaulted me. You 
can get intervention orders when you are fearful. And I know 
this was the innovation in 1994 that came in. Before, the 
assaulter would have had to have been found guilty before you 
could get an order protecting you. But in this case, you can go 
to a judge and get this emergency intervention order. 
 
It’s been a useful tool, although limited in certain applications 
because many of the violators don’t give a dang whether or not 
you can get an order against him or not. I mean they’ll go 
ahead. And I think Clint McLaughlin is an example of that, 
where I don’t think the idea that he could get an intervention 
order would have even entered his brain at that point. But it is a 
tool and it’s available. So what the amendments are now is, 
they’re adding some things that the Justice of the Peace can 
consider when ordering one of these orders. 
 
He can also now consider the exposure of a child to 
interpersonal violence and, Mr. Speaker, that’s a huge issue 
because, you know — and I think Heather could tell you many 
stories about this — most men who commit interpersonal 
violence were victims of interpersonal violence as children. 
And that’s a known fact. And it’s one where children, if 
children see that behaviour when they’re small, the likelihood 
of them committing that kind of activity is much greater. So this 
type of order will prevent, will allow a person to be removed 
from that violent situation if children are being exposed. 
 
There’s also other factors: recent change in circumstances for 
the respondent such as loss of employment or release from 
incarceration. So I think that’s a good addition to the list. And I 
mean really, often when somebody loses their job, they’re much 
more emotional and distraught. And if it’s a respondent who has 
a history of a violent connection with another person, then that 
might be a time when an order is necessary. 
 
They’ve also added a controlling behaviour by the respondent 
and a particular vulnerability of the victim. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
you can again imagine circumstances where that would happen. 
I think of newcomers to Canada where language is a barrier for 
many people who are victims of interpersonal violence. And so 
I think this type of order where we can, the judge can order 
intervention and remove the respondent from the situation is . . . 
These are good additions to the list. 
 
There’s a new section 2 that’s being created here, section (2.1) 
in section 3, and it’s saying when the Justice of the Peace is 
deciding whether or not an emergency intervention order should 
be made, he is allowed, he must not be precluded by making the 
order in a number of circumstances, for example, whether the 
respondent is temporarily absent from the residence at the time 
of application for an order. And I can see where this could be a 



6062 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

problem for somebody who needs an intervention order. If for 
whatever reason the respondent is away for a couple of days, 
maybe that’s the perfect time to get the order, and not when 
there’s an immediate threat. But it gives the victim some time to 
sort of protect themselves from the respondent. 
 
“Whether the victim is temporarily residing in an emergency 
shelter or other safe place.” If the victim has left the home or 
left the residence because of the violence, that shouldn’t prevent 
a judge from considering making an order. 
 
“Whether criminal charges have been or may be laid against the 
respondent; whether the victim has a history of returning to the 
relationship or of cohabiting with the respondent after 
occurrences of interpersonal violence.” Mr. Speaker, this is an 
incredibly important part of the cycle of violence. Very often 
victims go back to the place where the violence occurred. 
There’s reams of social science about why that happens. And 
what this bill is saying is that that shouldn’t be held against 
them. That isn’t a reason to not give them an order to protect 
them if the Justice of the Peace feels that it’s appropriate to 
provide that order. It’s certainly something I think that causes 
consternation with the people that deal with these. 
 
And I know even at Interval House, I remember Heather talking 
about women who had been back three, four times after having 
been beaten by their partner, and the same partner. And the 
questions arises, why does she go back? Why is this happening 
again? And much has to do with the cycle of violence. And 
again the victims are also part of the cycle. I mean they’ve been 
the recipients of violence, but they may have also seen it as 
children going back. And I don’t think we can confuse that with 
feelings of attachment to someone. And certainly if you have 
children together, if you’re economically tied to that person, 
you want to make it work and women go back for various 
reasons. 
 
So I think that’s really important that that is included and I 
think this new addition of subsection (2.1) to section 3 is a 
valuable tool for justices of the peace, as limited as these orders 
can be. 
 
The other change that’s made in subsection (3) was to include 
electronic communication as a form of prohibited 
communication. So very specifically now we are saying in the 
bill that they are restrained from communicating even through 
electronics. And you can imagine nowadays with all we’ve 
heard about violence, like Rehtaeh Parsons from Nova Scotia 
who was bullied through the Internet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
was through the Facebook comments. And I mean that kind of 
thing is very likely to happen in the situation where you have a 
victim and a respondent where texting — they have each 
other’s cell number — that can happen, or Facebook or emails 
and that kind of violence, and that kind of continuation of the 
violence can occur through these electronic communications. I 
think it’s a very important addition to this particular clause. 
 
There’s a new clause in subsection (3), and this is interesting. It 
says, “An emergency intervention order may contain any or all 
of the following provisions.” And this is: 
 

(e) a provision restraining the respondent from attending at 
or near or entering any specified place that is attended 

regularly by the victim or other family members, including 
the residence, property, business, school or place of 
employment of the victim or other family members. 

 
So now not only is the respondent prohibited from going to the 
residence of the victim, but also where the victim and his or her 
family members attend. And I think that’s another tool of 
intimidation that respondents have used, where they would go 
to the school where the children are or maybe the church and 
they would continue the harassment and the violence through 
attending at these places. So I think this is a good addition to 
the bill as well. 
 
There is a few minor changes in subsection 7(1). The process 
that’s being followed here is the entire section is being repealed 
and a new version is being substituted. But really, the changes 
are quite minor to that subsection. Again I don’t know why but 
the drafters have decided the word where is inappropriate and 
they’ve changed it to if. So that’s one of the substitutions. They 
also include electronic contact in subsection (c) of 7(1) which 
is, as I indicated earlier, I think something that is appropriate. 
 
And there’s a change to subsection (g) which grants . . . This is 
a subsection where the victims can get an order for assistance so 
it can make the respondent pay for some of their expenses. It 
can allow them to be accompanied to go back to the residence 
to gather their things. And in this case, they can give possession 
of things like a vehicle, a chequebook, bank cards, children’s 
clothing, medical insurance cards, identification documents, 
keys, other necessary personal effects. And the change that’s 
being added here is, “or other banking instruments.” So not just 
bank cards but other banking instruments. So I would imagine 
safety box keys, perhaps credit cards, or maybe chequebooks, I 
would assume. So I’m not exactly sure what the other banking 
instruments would be but there was obviously a request for that 
kind of addition to the section. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the issue of violence 
against women is one of the most difficult and threatening 
issues facing women in Canada and across the world, of course. 
But where we think we’re a civilized and modern nation and we 
still have women going missing and getting murdered just 
because they’re women, it’s disturbing. And I think it’s 
something that, I’m appreciative of the minister bringing this 
bill forward. I think, you know as I said, legislation only goes 
part of the way. And we need to find ways to actually cause a 
change of thinking or something. I don’t know what it would 
take to have men stop beating on women. 
 
I struggle with that and I give great kudos to the folks like my 
friend Heather in the sexual assault services in Saskatoon, 
certainly all of the shelters that are now being provided. And I 
know in Melfort a new shelter was opened last year. I think it’s 
a great addition to the services that women have access to. And 
I, like you know, I can’t say enough about providing women a 
safe space. Many women feel helpless. They feel nobody will 
listen. They feel that nobody will believe them when they talk 
about these things that are happening to them. We see that 
coming out in the news. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to continue to fix it. I 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6063 

don’t know how else to describe it. At that point I think, I know 
my other colleagues are going to want to comment on this as 
well, and so I would like to adjourn debate at this point on Bill 
No. 144, An Act to amend The Victims of Domestic Violence Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 152 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m just going to rise now to speak to Bill No. 152. As we 
know, a number of these bills that are being brought forward 
that are being amended affect other bills. And in this case we 
see that it wasn’t able to be included in the bill I just spoke to, 
Bill 140. 
 
I’m not sure about the numbering of this because we were going 
from 144 to 152. Normally these bills follow, so I don’t know if 
something happened and maybe in the Ministry of Justice there 
was a realization later . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Maybe it 
was the Finance minister. That could be. Although we know the 
Finance minister’s pretty busy these days with the mid-term 
report that we’re anxiously waiting to see how we’re doing. If it 
ever comes, of course. We’re not sure when the mid-term report 
will be made available. I think it comes usually sooner than 
now, so it’s definitely overdue. 
 
But in terms of this, the amendment to The Victims of Domestic 
Violence Amendment Act, what we see is that there’s a bilingual 
law that’s being impacted by this, and that is The Queen’s 
Bench Act of 1998 or, in French, Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 
Banc de la Reine. And of course because it’s in a bilingual 
format, we know that a separate bill needs to be created to deal 
with the bilingual nature of that. And all that it’s doing is 
amending section 2 of The Queen’s Bench Act which is 
referring to the previous bill that I spoke to, and the title is 
changing. So rather than the victims of domestic violence, we 
are talking about the victims of interpersonal violence in that 
Act. 
 
Again I just can’t help but make one comment on the 
importance of this issue and the fact that we are using 
legislation to deal with it as best we can. I think it behooves all 
of us to go beyond the actual legislative tools that are available 

to us and work with groups like Sexual Assault Services of 
Saskatchewan. And victims of crime, I mean generally there’s 
good agencies out there. There’s some good NGOs 
[non-governmental organization] out there that are really 
working hard to make lives better for people who are suffering 
from this type of behaviour. 
 
As I said, it’s a systemic problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s one 
that comes from being children that are exposed to violence. So 
if we can somehow protect children, I think maybe eventually 
the adults will stop displaying and continuing with this type of 
behaviour. And maybe that’s it. It’s getting at the children. I 
know I have friends who work with Social Services that have to 
apprehend children and put them in safe places, and it’s a 
disturbing piece of work that has to be done. 
 
But at this point I know we want to get through some more 
debate here today, so I think I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 145 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank 
you for allowing me to enter here this afternoon into debate on 
Bill No. 145. I’ve read both the minister’s comments and I’ve 
also spent significant time reading the member for Nutana’s 
comments respective to Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. 
 
And in fact I noticed that the member from Nutana had an 
awful lot to say on this matter and some awfully thoughtful 
items. And you know, I thought it was good, because certainly 
the premise of this bill or the objective that’s set out by the 
minister seems to be an important one, which is to improve 
access to the justice system for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I thought, though, that the member for Nutana sort of put the 
broader context into this whole piece which is that, you know, 
while those are important pieces and we need to make sure we 
understand what’s specifically being put forward by 
government, that there is more meaningful actions in a 
coordinated fashion around poverty in general and making sure 
that individuals aren’t in these marginalized, very difficult 
positions that make the legal system not accessible, but also life 
very difficult and in many ways not healthy for so many people. 
So I thought those comments around poverty were important 
ones. 



6064 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

And I know it’s important too that, you know, there was 
mention of a poverty reduction strategy in the Throne Speech, 
something I was actually pleased to see, but somewhat skeptical 
of, Mr. Speaker. And certainly what we’re looking for now on 
that front is the meat on the bones as it relates to that plan, and 
then the actions that really can’t be delayed for many families 
that are marginalized, many families that are vulnerable. 
 
And I think of the justice system in general. Certainly it is very 
important for us to find ways of making sure that it’s accessible 
to all, because in the end that’s your ability to have your own 
sets of rights. It’s about dignity. It’s about freedoms, and very 
critical for all people to have access to that system. And the 
reality right now is that’s simply not the case. So certainly if 
this bill, because the bill is not very clear right now on the 
specific actions that are being taken, but if this bill makes 
improvements on that front, that’s a good thing. 
 
But what we’d like to see is, you know, a broader discussion 
and movement around poverty. That’s important. But we’d also, 
on this bill specifically, we’ll be engaging with stakeholders 
within the legal community to ensure that this opportunity to 
open up this Act has allowed government to be as meaningful 
as they can be in making the changes. 
 
So what else was considered? What are some of the other 
approaches that could have been taken? What are other 
provinces doing on these fronts? And were all those aspects 
considered in bringing forth this piece of legislation? Certainly 
far too often we see this government simply ramming forward 
with their own legislative agenda, their own ideas, and then 
having to recognize that they didn’t understand the 
consequences of some of those decisions, not working with 
those who are directly involved. 
 
So it’s our expectation that the Law Reform Commission was 
involved in this. It’s our expectation that the legal community, 
it’s our expectation that those that represent those that are 
dealing with poverty, those that are marginalized, those that are 
vulnerable, those that need better access to the courts would 
have been engaged in this process. 
 
We see some of those consequences of legislation that’s derived 
but without consultation here today, where we see the Minister 
of Education now having to retract a promise that they had 
made around . . . in education, because they hadn’t bothered to 
check with teachers or school boards or the education sector as 
to the consequences of that. And so they’re making some 
changes there. 
 
Certainly, you know, on this front, I was surprised that the 
government didn’t also fix the big mistake that they made in 
going forward and monkeying around with the school day and 
hours of work and creating a bunch of disparities for educators 
across Saskatchewan, instead of working in a collectively 
bargained fashion with the educators of this province, and 
instead of having the more meaningful discussion about 
engagement as a whole. But that’s another point, but it speaks 
directly to the importance of front-end consultation to get right 
legislation that’s put forward. 
 
Certainly when we’re talking about accessibility of the justice 
system, there’s many organizations, many people that support 

that accessibility. And I think of, certainly Legal Aid plays a 
very important role in Saskatchewan. I know CLASSIC 
[Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner 
City Inc.] plays a very important role. I know Pro Bono Law 
society and Nicole Sarauer and the leadership they provide to so 
many is very critical and very important. And of course many 
of these endeavours are enabled and supported by both the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan, Law Society of Canada, and many, 
many lawyers in private practice across Saskatchewan who give 
of their time to ensure some accessibility to many. 
 
But certainly the access to the legal system isn’t sufficient as it 
stands. It needs to be improved. There’s changes that are 
brought forward here, but we need to make sure that they’re 
right. It’s going to be very important to understand very 
specifically what the regulations are on this front, because they 
haven’t been spelled out by the minister. That’s going to be an 
important piece that we’ll be tracking, and doing so with 
stakeholders to make sure we get this right for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And it’s also important that an element of flexibility is left 
within the justice system and to make sure that what’s put in 
place isn’t too prescriptive and preventing common sense in 
special circumstances to be considered. 
 
So those will be the pieces that we’ll be tracking as we move 
forward, and we’ll be certainly engaging in consultation with 
the legal community. Certainly we support the premise of 
making the legal system more accessible, because right now it’s 
highly unfair. But you know, I just don’t . . . you know, in 
judging from the comments from the member from Nutana in 
understanding some of the circumstances that many are facing. 
I’m not sure that this bill provides the kind of accessibility that 
Saskatchewan people truly deserve, recognizing how important 
access to the justice system is to families across our province 
and to those that are vulnerable. 
 
And I heard the member from Nutana speaking directly to 
domestic violence as one example, and certainly it’s an example 
of a circumstance into . . . that victims of domestic violence 
certainly need to have a very accessible justice system that’s 
responsive to their needs. And we need to do a better job of 
removing those barriers to access that justice system. 
 
But at this point in time I’ll adjourn debate on Bill No. 145, 
certainly looking forward to engagement with the legal 
community and stakeholders and partners, and time as well for 
some specificity from the minister through committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 145, the fee waiver 
amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. It now being very 
near the time of recess, I think this Assembly will recess until 7 
p.m. this evening. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6033 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6034 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6034 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6034 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6034 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6034 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Immigrants of Distinction Awards 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6035 
 Agribition Is for Everyone 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6035 
 Streamlining of Student Loan Process 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6035 
 Celebrating Saskatchewan Film 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6036 
 SaskEnergy Service Achievement and Employee Awards 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6036 
 Police Officers Keep Our Communities Safe 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6036 
 Quality of Long-Term Care 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6036 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Long-Term Care for Seniors 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6037 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6037 
 Support for Seniors in Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6039 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6039 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6040 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6040 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6041 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6042 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6042 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6043 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6044 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6045 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers  
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6050 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6050 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6054 



 

 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6056 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6057 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6058 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6059 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence  
 Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6063 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6063 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


