






















































Hansard: October 22, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 72A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7433 
 October 22, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
today to introduce Ms. Dania Alkhani from the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Dania is a fourth-year dentistry student at the University of 
Saskatchewan who is using an innovative approach to fight oral 
cancer. Dania was raised in Ottawa, Ontario and completed her 
four-year undergraduate degree in biopharmaceutical sciences 
with honours in medicinal chemistry at the University of 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she has combined her background in medicinal 
chemistry with her ongoing education in dentistry. She has 
focused her two-year research project at the College of 
Dentistry at the University of Saskatchewan on finding new, 
non-evasive methods to kill oral cancer cells. Her research 
created a compound that is 10 times more effective at killing 
cancer cells than the anti-cancer drug that’s currently available 
on the market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll have much more to hear on Ms. Alkhani’s research, Mr. 
Speaker, in a member’s statement from the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. But I would like all members to join me in 
welcoming Ms. Dania Alkhani to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the Minister for Advanced Education in welcoming 
Ms. Dania Alkhani to the Legislative Assembly, and to say 
thank you to Ms. Alkhani for the work that’s she’s done around 
advancing what we know and how we can better fight oral 
cancer. 
 
And it again highlights the importance of institutions such as 
the University of Saskatchewan and what they add to our 
knowledge base, but the very real difference that knowledge 
and the pursuit of knowledge makes in the lives of citizens in 
Saskatchewan each and every day. So again I’d just like to join 
with the Minister for Advanced Education in welcoming Ms. 
Alkhani to the Legislative Assembly and thanking her for her 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and all the members, a group of students from Victoria 
Campus, located in the constituency of Regina Dewdney 
obviously, 13 students and their teachers. Accompanying them 
are Ms. Karen McIver — she’s very diligent in bringing 

students to the legislature, and we appreciate that — Gail 
Kleisinger as well. And the educational assistants are Danica 
Ennis and Maril Moore. I look forward to having a chat with 
them after routine proceedings today. I ask all members to help 
me welcome them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to stand in my place to present a petition 
regarding cellphone coverage in the small northern 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake and to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities. This would provide 
support to our northern industries as well as mitigate 
safety concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, people have signed this petition from all 
throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page the 
people that have signed this petition are from Lloydminster, Big 
River, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care here in Saskatchewan. The petitioners point out that we are 
hearing an increasing number of stories about the adverse 
effects of chronic understaffing in seniors’ care facilities, much 
like we heard yesterday in question period, Mr. Speaker, and 
the fact that the provincial government’s response to the 
seniors’ care crisis has been inadequate. 
 
This is what the petitioners have to say, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 
including creating more spaces and more choices for 
seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 
facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 
appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 
providing more support to help seniors remain 
independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 
Norquay. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the leader . . . excuse me, I 
recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Always 



7434 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

good to be recognized in this Assembly. I rise to present a 
petition by residents in the province of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the high cost of post-secondary education, 
particularly as relates to the ever-rising cost of tuition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that a report released by Statistics 
Canada labelled Saskatchewan as the province with the highest 
increase in tuition, with tuition for the 2014-15 year having 
increased by 4 per cent in the province for undergraduate 
students and over 5 per cent for graduate students. They also 
point out that the average Canadian student in 2014 graduated 
with debt of over $27,000, not including credit card and other 
private debt. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition, while other petitions have 
been presented from around the province, this particular petition 
is signed by citizens from the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. Among other things that 
are of concern in Saskatchewan to these petitioners is the fact 
that the condition of many of our schools is rundown, unsafe, or 
uninspected, and the government refuses to release information 
on the 1.5 billion of known repairs that are needed in our 
schools. There’s a government plan to rent schools from private 
corporations; this is expensive and reckless. None of this is 
acceptable, given the record of the government as far as the 
amount of revenue that they’ve had over the last while. So the 
prayer reads: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Warman, Rosetown, Cudworth, and 
Swift Current and Cabri. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Remembering Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant 
Officer Patrice Vincent 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was one year ago today 
in Ottawa that an armed gunman stormed Parliament Hill in an 
attack that captured the attention and hearts of our entire nation. 

Canadian Armed Forces member, Corporal Nathan Cirillo, was 
killed in this senseless act while standing guard at the Tomb of 
the Unknown Soldier. He was killed while doing his duty, 
standing on guard to protect our house of democracy and 
ensuring that the memory of those who have sacrificed their 
lives for our freedom is never forgotten. 
 
Parliamentary security, police forces, and the Sergeant-at-Arms, 
Kevin Vickers, especially all deserve to be recognized for their 
bravery, selflessness, and heroism that day. Their actions surely 
saved many, many lives. 
 
We also remember Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent who was 
murdered while off duty in Quebec. 
 
Canadians from coast to coast to coast came together in this 
time of sorrow despite their differences and reaffirmed our 
commitment to Canadian values, democracy, multiculturalism, 
freedom, tolerance, and respect for our differences. Our great 
motto, “from many peoples, strength,” should always serve to 
inform what we do inside and outside of this Assembly. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in recognizing the service and sacrifices of Corporal 
Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and in 
committing to working together to build a stronger, more 
inclusive democracy here in Saskatchewan and across our great 
nation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One year ago 
today we all watched on television as our nation’s capital city 
was locked down while uncertainty gripped our hearts as we 
waited for details. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we pay tribute to Corporal Nathan Cirillo and 
Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent. One year ago, only two days 
apart, we saw these two uniformed Canadian soldiers killed on 
our own soil simply for serving our country. The attack in 
Ottawa saw a gunman storm the National War Memorial where 
Corporal Cirillo was standing sentry. Then the gunman rushed 
Parliament Hill where he continued to wreak havoc, attacking 
not just the building but the very core of our democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the midst of the cowardice of the attack, we saw 
a truly Canadian demonstration of bravery, whether the 
bystanders who rushed to try and save Corporal Cirillo after the 
attack or the security personnel and police who put themselves 
in harm’s way or the actions of Sergeant-at-Arms Kevin 
Vickers. 
 
We cannot forget that it takes courage for someone to don our 
nation’s uniform, and it is deserving to honour all those who, 
past and present, have served to protect our freedom. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join with people 
from across our nation to honour Corporal Cirillo and Warrant 
Officer Vincent for their sacrifice and to thank all those security 
personnel who help keep us safe every day. Freedom comes 
with a price, and we will not forget. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7435 

Fun Run Supports Student Wellness Initiative 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
attention to the great work done by SWITCH, the student 
wellness initiative toward community health in Saskatoon. 
SWITCH provides training for future health professionals while 
improving the wellness of Saskatoon’s core communities. They 
envision Saskatoon as a city where all residents “have equal 
access to health care, nutrition, education, and employability 
skills.” 
 
This past weekend, I had the honour and enjoyment of 
participating along with my daughter Ophelia in SWITCH’s 
seventh annual fun run. This is the second year the run has had 
an interesting twist, and we found ourselves zigzagging 
throughout the course to avoid being caught by zombies. My 
daughter and I had our work cut out for us, escaping the living 
dead who chased us through two of the city’s nicest parks, I 
might add — Holiday Park and Victoria Park — which happen 
to be in Saskatoon Riversdale. Despite the potential trauma 
inflicted upon my 7-year-old and maybe some bad dreams, we 
did have fun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SWITCH provides innovative work pairing the 
resources students have to offer with the needs of those in our 
core communities. They also acknowledge the strength and the 
resiliency in Saskatoon’s core neighbourhoods. Mr. Speaker, at 
times this organization has struggled to ensure they have 
adequate funding to continue the important work they do. I urge 
the members of the Assembly to learn more about the work of 
this student-run initiative and to continue to support their efforts 
in the community of Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Record Aboriginal and International Student Enrolment at 

the University of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the University of Saskatchewan released its 
enrolment numbers. There are now more than 21,000 students 
attending the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s terrific news regarding Aboriginal student 
enrolment and international student recruitment. 
 
Official fall enrolment numbers confirm that 2,236 students at 
the University of Saskatchewan are Aboriginal learners. This is 
a 5.5 per cent increase from last year and the highest number of 
Aboriginal students to ever attend the U of S. Almost 11 per 
cent of the total student population now identifies as 
Aboriginal. In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, the number of 
international students enrolled at the U of S has also set a 
record. More than 2,540 international students are attending 
class this autumn, up 3 per cent from last year. 
 
Contributing to our growing population, Saskatchewan has an 
increasing Aboriginal population and many people are also 
coming to our province from around the world. It’s encouraging 
to see the value families and communities put on 
post-secondary education. Numbers like these reflect and 
reinforce that Saskatchewan is the best place to live, to work, to 
raise a family, and to succeed in studies. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating the University of Saskatchewan on its success, 
especially regarding its enrolment for Aboriginal students in 
Saskatchewan and for broadening the horizons of international 
students visiting our province for the first time. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Dentistry Student Recognized for Research Project 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with the 
Minister of Advanced Education, I would like to welcome a 
guest in our gallery today, Dania Alkhani. She’s a fourth-year 
dentistry student at the University of Saskatchewan who is 
using an innovative approach to fight oral cancer. Her research 
could lead to less invasive and more effective treatment, 
potentially helping to save countless lives from this horrible 
disease. 
 
Combining her background in chemistry with her ongoing 
education in dentistry, she focused her two-year research 
project on finding a non-invasive way to kill oral cancer cells. 
Her research created a compound that is 10 times more effective 
at killing some cancer cells than the anti-cancer drug currently 
used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her research placed first provincially and then won 
the national competition held by the Canadian Dental 
Association, beating out the students from nine other dental 
schools in Canada. This is the second year in a row that the 
University of Saskatchewan has won this competition. 
 
Dania is presenting her research at the American Dental 
Association conference in Washington, DC [District of 
Columbia] in November. I would ask all members to join with 
me in wishing her the best of luck moving forward with this 
exciting research. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Southwest Integrated Healthcare Facility Opens 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow I, along 
with the ministers of Health and Rural and Remote Health, will 
join area residents in the community of Maple Creek to 
celebrate the grand opening of the Southwest Integrated 
Healthcare Facility. Residents in the deep southwest will now 
have access to acute, emergency, and long-term care services 
under one roof. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Southwest Integrated Healthcare Facility has a 
total of 24 acute care beds and 48 long-term care beds. It has 
replaced both the 21-bed Maple Creek Hospital and the 28-bed 
Cypress Lodge nursing home. This project wouldn’t have been 
possible without the hard work and dedication of the steering 
committee members, the town of Maple Creek, surrounding 
rural municipalities, and the residents of the region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving health 



7436 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

care infrastructure in this province. In 2009 we announced plans 
to replace 13 outdated health facilities in Saskatchewan, and our 
government has delivered on that commitment. The Southwest 
Integrated Healthcare Facility is the 11th of those 13 projects to 
be completed, with a project in Kelvington in the construction 
phase and a project in Meadow Lake in the planning phase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to deliver on our 
promise to put patients first, and we remain committed to 
improving the health care system as well as health infrastructure 
in our province. Please join me in congratulating the 
community of Maple Creek on this exciting achievement. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Jubilee Residences Hold Oktoberfest Fundraiser 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to talk about an event that 
I attended in Saskatoon recently, sponsored by two of our 
wonderful long-term care facilities in Saskatoon. 
 
Spontaneity, autonomy, and the ability to give and receive care 
are part of daily life at Jubilee Residences. Jubilee Residences 
hold a variety of special events to raise funds for projects and 
recreation programs that benefit the quality of life of residents. 
 
This year they held an Oktoberfest to fundraise for the 
construction of sunrooms for residents of the Stensrud and 
Porteous lodges. Mr. Speaker, residents and guests enjoyed a 
traditional German Oktoberfest dinner, fantastic comedy from 
Saskatoon’s own stand-up comedian Dez Reed, a Bavarian 
oompah band, beer sampling, and a silent auction. We also 
enjoyed a video which highlighted the many activities and 
projects going on at Jubilee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that the staff at Jubilee care very 
much for those in their care. Their passion, generosity, and hard 
work was evident throughout the evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard a lot in this Assembly about 
long-term care for seniors in our province. It is important that 
we recognize the fantastic care our seniors do receive. I’d like 
to offer congratulations to Jubilee Residences, Stensrud and 
Porteous lodges for hosting such a wonderful event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to recognize staff for their 
dedication and hard work in all of our senior homes across the 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Can the Premier please explain why the 
number of surgeries offered here in the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region is being significantly cut this year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. The member will know that, some years ago, the 
Government of Saskatchewan embarked on a plan to reduce the 
wait times for surgery in Saskatchewan. We inherited a 
situation from the NDP [New Democratic Party] where we had 
the longest wait times in the nation, in all of Canada, for 
surgeries. And so, Mr. Speaker, we deployed private clinics, the 
use of private surgery clinics within the public system, within 
the single-payer system to deal with the backlog. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the House that the object of 
that, the goal of that initiative has been achieved, that we have 
significantly reduced surgical wait times in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They were once the longest under the NDP, 
under the social democrats, and now they’re the shortest in 
Canada. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would say to my hon. friend 
that as we make progress in terms of the number of surgeries, 
the backlog we inherited, there may well be from time to time 
in certain regions a reduction in the number of surgeries done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can confirm for the House though that the resources for 
surgeries and for health care in general with respect to more 
nurses and more doctors, those resources are much higher than 
they’ve ever been. And they’ll continue to be higher than they 
were under members opposite because, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to continue to make those long-term investments in our 
health care system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region has a massive budgetary hole to fill, mostly because of 
Sask Party enforced so-called efficiency measures over the last 
several years. Of course most people would call those exactly 
what they are, which are deep cuts. So to help deal with this 
significant financial shortfall, Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region is reducing surgeries in order to cut $8 million in costs. 
So to the Premier: how many fewer surgeries will be performed 
as a result of this $8 million cut? What is the number? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are significant more 
resources that this side of the House, this government has put 
into the health care system specifically to deal with the wait 
times for surgery that we inherited from members opposite, the 
longest in the country. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think this is going to be a very 
good debate this morning. Because that member, when he was 
the Health critic — and he’s never changed his position since 
becoming the Leader of the NDP — has said that if the people 
of this province ever elect them into office again, they will 
eliminate the surgical wait times initiative. They will remove all 
of the private clinics operating today within the public system, 
Mr. Speaker, from the system. And I want him to share with the 
House today . . . We’re just a few months from an election, and 
it’s his job to point out things that are problematic, certainly. 
It’s now increasingly his job to say what they would do in 
power. 
 
Today under this government’s surgical wait times initiative, 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7437 

Mr. Speaker, 91 per cent of Saskatchewan people are getting 
their surgery within three months — 91 per cent. They’re not 
waiting 18 months anymore. They’re not waiting 20 months for 
surgery. It’s happening partly because we’re using private 
clinics, partly because we’ve introduced more resources. And 
it’s now time for him to stand in this place and tell the people of 
the province why in the world he would eliminate those private 
clinics within the public system that are delivering results for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no answer from the Premier about 
how many fewer surgeries would be in place because of this $8 
million cut. I asked how many, and we didn’t hear it from the 
Premier. So either, Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t know the 
answer or he doesn’t want Saskatchewan people to know the 
answer. 
 
But here’s what we do know, Mr. Speaker: surgeries here in our 
capital city are being scaled back significantly in order to cut $8 
million in costs. At the same time as the government is cutting 
surgeries, the need for surgeries is going up. That’s what the 
internal documents show, Mr. Speaker. The internal documents 
show that the need is going up, but they’re cutting back 
surgeries here in Regina. My question to the Premier: how can 
he possibly justify cutting surgeries when the need for surgeries 
is on the rise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to work our way 
through the NDP backlog in terms of surgeries . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well that’s the fact. Members opposite are 
laughing. The Leader of the Opposition laughs at that. Is this 
funny, Mr. Speaker, that in 1999 under the NDP the wait-list 
was 18 months for joint replacement surgery? The Leader of the 
Opposition laughs at this. Does he laugh at the fact that Dr. 
Mark Ogrady, the head of surgery of the Regina Health District, 
said, these numbers don’t surprise me? He said, critical cases 
are handled quickly, but others may wait up to three years for 
surgery. Is that funny, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I’ll tell you, part of the reason why we’re making progress in 
terms of surgeries in this province, part of the reason why 91 
per cent of Saskatchewan people who need surgery now get it 
within three months is because of the surgical wait times 
initiative that has $48 million dollars, more dollars, put into it in 
this very budget. That’s the answer to the member’s question. 
He still needs to answer the question: why in the world would 
he eviscerate, why would he take apart the surgical wait times 
plan? Why would he rule out private clinics in the public 
system when it’s delivering results for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, lots of volume, but no answers 
there, Mr. Speaker. A clear question: an $8 million cut in 
surgeries, how many fewer surgeries will that mean in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region at a time where internal 
documents show that the need is going up? 
 
They’re not just cutting surgeries, Mr. Speaker. They are also 

cutting a bunch of full-time health care jobs. In fact, they are 
cutting 152 full-time equivalent positions. 152 full-time health 
care jobs gone, Mr. Speaker. Those deep cuts, Mr. Speaker, to 
health care staffing are bound to have a major ripple effect 
through our entire health care system — longer waits in ERs 
[emergency room], longer waits for specialists, Mr. Speaker, 
not to mention a reduced quality of care. And this is what the 
internal documents show, Mr. Speaker, very clearly. After a 
decade of prosperity, this is where health care is at under the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, because of Sask Party neglect and 
because of Sask Party cuts. 
 
Doesn’t it concern the Premier, Mr. Speaker, that he is 
presiding over the elimination of 152 full-time health care jobs 
just in Regina and area? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of the 
House, if we’re presiding over anything, we’re presiding over 
this reality: that we have now 3,000 more nurses working in our 
health care system, of every designation, than were working 
under the system under the NDP. And when the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses told those folks opposite when they were 
government that we were short 1,000 nurses and they should 
ought to at least set a target for recruiting more nurses and 
hiring more, they said, well we’re really not interested in targets 
because we probably won’t hit those targets anyway. 
 
If this side of the House has presided over anything, they 
presided over 500 more doctors practising in the province of 
Saskatchewan. These are the facts. And again to my hon. friend, 
my hon. friend wants to talk about the volume of surgery. The 
capacity is much greater now than it ever was when members 
opposite were in office. And when he was researcher at the 
SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association], he would know 
from his research that we had the longest wait times for surgery 
in all of Canada. 
 
You know, when members continue to heckle . . . I mean the 
Leader of the Opposition asks a serious question, and you’d 
think that the members would want to hear the answer. Because 
the answer is this: though we inherited the longest wait times 
from the social democrats, the NDP, for surgery, we now have 
the shortest wait times in all of Canada. 91 per cent of the 
people getting their surgery within three months because of 
private clinics in the public system, because of more public 
resources as well. What’s his plan? What’s his plan for the 
surgical wait initiative? Four months away from election, the 
people of the province deserve to know. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatoon Health 
Region asked for 450 care aids saying that’s what they needed 
to provide proper care, do you know what this government gave 
them, Mr. Speaker? Nineteen. And now we have, Mr. Speaker, 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, from their very own 
documents, Mr. Speaker, showing that they’re eliminating 152 
full-time equivalent health care workers in this region, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we know that surgeries are being cut significantly here in 



7438 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

Regina. We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are 152 health care 
jobs being eliminated in Regina. It’s a cut of $13 million in 
salaries, Mr. Speaker. These cuts are happening after a decade 
of unprecedented prosperity and years of record revenues that 
this government has had. And these cuts are also happening, 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when the Sask Party is still dumping 
untold millions into their misplaced priorities. Look at the over 
$17 million each and every year just to the lean kaizen 
promotion offices. It’s absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve to know the full 
extent of the cuts in health care throughout our entire province. 
Will the Premier release all of that information today? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. Since our 
party was elected to office, since we took over from the NDP, 
funding for the Regina Qu’Appelle Health District is up 52 per 
cent since 2007. There are more resources. There are more 
nurses of every designation. There are more doctors. There are 
more specialists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look back to what was the case under the 
NDP when Dr. Jeff McKerrell, the head of orthopedics for the 
Saskatoon Health District, said, “The problem is that there are 
not enough operating rooms and hospital resources in general.” 
He said what they needed from the members opposite was 
money, foresight, and planning on behalf of the government. 
But they didn’t have a plan then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve implemented our plan and we’ve seen surgery wait times 
come down. They didn’t have a plan then, and now four months 
away from a general election in the province of Saskatchewan, 
this Leader of the Opposition — who spends almost every 
question period moment on health care — has no plan for health 
care. It’s his job certainly to point out challenges, but 
increasingly it is also his job and his duty to the people of the 
province to say what he would do. 
 
And I ask today through you, Mr. Speaker, what would he do? 
Would he cancel the surgical wait times initiative? Would he 
kick out the private clinics operating in the public system that 
are delivering results? What is his plan for Saskatchewan health 
care, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is the Premier’s duty to the 
people of Saskatchewan, the patients of Saskatchewan, the 
health care workers of Saskatchewan, to be transparent about 
the cuts that they are making and to be open and clear about 
this, Mr. Speaker. We see very clearly we’ve heard a lot of 
volume, a lot of bluster, Mr. Speaker, but we don’t have any 
answers. We have no explanation, Mr. Speaker, about the 
number of surgeries that will be reduced because of an $8 
million cut just in Regina here alone, Mr. Speaker. No 
explanation, Mr. Speaker, about how this government could 
eliminate 152 full-time equivalent health care workers here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We know, Mr. Speaker, this is happening in other parts of the 
province as well. But how bad, Mr. Speaker, are those cuts in 
Saskatoon, in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, in Moose 
Jaw, in North Battleford? How bad are these cuts, Mr. Speaker, 
in northern Saskatchewan? What about the rest of the province? 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to know. They have a right to 
know, Mr. Speaker, about the cuts that are happening under this 
Sask Party government. My question to the Premier: why won’t 
he be transparent about that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the number of surgeries are 
coming down in certain districts, it’s because we’re making our 
way through the NDP backlog. They ask the same question over 
and over again. They should be interested in, I hope, some of 
the answers. 
 
The answer is, we took over a major challenge from members 
opposite when they left power in 2007. That challenge was this. 
Now we’re not talking about FTEs [full-time equivalent] or 
positions in health. We’re talking about surgical care for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Under the NDP . . . While the members opposite keep heckling 
and laughing about the issue, I would just say this to members 
opposite. The situation they left Saskatchewan people in in 
terms of surgeries, notwithstanding full-time equivalents, was 
that this province, the birthplace of medicare, had the longest 
surgical wait times in all of Canada. That’s their record. The old 
Health, the former Health minister is sitting right behind the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took office. We implemented the surgical wait 
times initiative. We allowed private clinics to operate in the 
public system. And we are working our way through the 
backlog to the point where Saskatchewan people now wait three 
months, only three months — 91 per cent of them wait three 
months — for surgery. Part of the reason for that are more 
resources we’ve put into the system. Part of the reason for the 
question today is that we’ve seen we are making our way 
through the backlog. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the hon. member to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan what he would do. Would he scrap the 
surgical wait times initiative of this side of the House? Would 
he kick out the private clinics operating in the public system 
delivering better health care? That was his position. 
 
Unless he can tell us something different now, here’s what we 
know. We know that under the Saskatchewan Party there are 
better results for Saskatchewan people who need surgery. Under 
the NDP there were not very good results at all — last in the 
country. And unless he’s going to change his position, that 
contrast will not change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Does the Premier dispute the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region saying the demand for surgery, the 
need for surgeries is going up? 
 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7439 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently the members opposite think that 
this is funny. The member from Elphinstone thinks that this is 
funny. 
 
The fact, Mr. Speaker, is that when they were the government, 
when they were the government, there were over 10,000 people 
. . . In fact, in 2010 when the surgical initiative started, there 
were 15,291 people waiting longer than three months for 
surgery. Today that number is just over 2,200, an 85 per cent 
reduction. 
 
When you look at the people waiting 18 months and longer for 
surgery, it’s down 100 per cent. In fact, we just heard a quote 
from the Premier that talked about, in 2001, people were 
waiting 18 months, as long as three months for joint 
replacement, in this province. A shameful record. A shameful 
legacy from the NDP, the members opposite.  
 
The numbers waiting 18 months or longer, down 100 per cent. 
Waiting a year or longer, down 98 per cent. Waiting six 
months, down 95 per cent. Waiting three months, down 85 per 
cent. It’s progress being made on this side, the best record in 
Canada when it comes to surgical waits. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will defend that every single day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Maintenance Agreement for Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister in 
charge of the P3 [public-private partnership] rental schemes was 
either unable or unwilling to give a breakdown of the $680 
million that this government is giving to a Paris corporation as 
part of the so-called bypass deal. And remember, this $680 
million is over and above the already inflated estimated 
construction costs of $1.2 billion. 
 
I hope the minister will be able to answer the question today 
because certainly Saskatchewan people deserve transparency. 
To the minister: can he break down the $680 million that 
they’re sending to a Paris company? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer that 
question as the Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a very transparent process. Mr. Speaker, we 
follow Canadian best practices when it comes to P3s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The number that the member refers to deals not only with 
maintenance, Mr. Speaker, it deals with rehabilitation. It deals 
with risk transfer. It deals with all the other elements associated 
with this contract, Mr. Speaker, a lot of that information being 
commercially sensitive. And those members, when they were 
government, wouldn’t release commercially sensitive 
information when it came to other contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that our auditor has said that we 

have effective practices for evaluating P3s, Mr. Speaker. Our 
independent financial advisers, Ernst & Young, have confirmed 
that we’ll be saving $380 million on this project, Mr. Speaker, 
over a traditional bill . . . [inaudible] . . . maintenance, Mr. 
Speaker. And our independent fairness advisers have said that 
we’ve adhered to the principles of transparency and fairness 
when it comes to this particular project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more than one way to skin a cat. If the 
opposition was to sit there and suggest to us that we shouldn’t 
be looking at alternatives when it comes to the development of 
critical infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
wrong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what a bunch of 
nonsensical bafflegab from that minister, Mr. Speaker. Not an 
ounce of transparency from a government that voted against an 
independent audit of this deal before they signed this deal, and 
to pretend that the auditor is saying something. The auditor also 
said that when it relates to their P3 plan, “It’s full of estimates. 
It’s full of assumptions.” 
 
And there’s more that she says. There was no answer in that 
response. We know that government’s broken out some of these 
costs with the Swift Current long-term care facility. There’s no 
reason that that minister can’t be clear with the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan as it relates to the cost of this $680 million to this 
Paris company, or the over $2 billion in total. So we have this 
government giving $680 million of the hard-earned dollars of 
Saskatchewan people to a Paris company. And that’s over and 
above those massive costs. My question to the minister: what is 
the breakdown for maintenance and all other aspects of those 
dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, as part of this process, and 
the opposition member knows, we will be releasing a fairness 
opinion. We’ll be releasing the value-for-money report in 
accordance with the recommendations that have been made by 
the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve offered him a technical briefing with respect to the 
value-of-money report on the Swift Current long-term care 
facility, Mr. Speaker. His answer to me was, we don’t need to 
know the details, Mr. Speaker. If he wants to sit . . . He wants to 
understand how this process works, Mr. Speaker. He should 
take us up on our offer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t need to look very far. He doesn’t 
need to look very far to see other jurisdictions across this 
country that are employing P3s and are using exactly the same 
process that we are. He only has to talk to his cousins in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. The New Democratic government in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, has announced the construction of the 
south Calgary bypass using a P3, Mr. Speaker. He should talk 
to them to get the answers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 



7440 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, half of what that minister 
has to say just clearly isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. The rest of it 
doesn’t make any sense. You’d expect more from your Justice 
minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s bizarre, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about $680 
million, something that’s ballooned from 400 million to over $2 
billion, with the dollars and the profits flowing back to a Paris 
company. Saskatchewan people deserve to know how much 
we’re paying this Paris corporation for a bypass and for 
maintenance for over 30 years, for a plan that frankly defies 
common sense. Does the minister know the answer but is just 
refusing to share it, or does he actually not know what this deal 
will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear on 
what this project will cost the taxpayers of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Two years ago we estimated the cost to build the 
bypass at $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. The addition of two 
additional facilities, one at Hill Avenue and one at 9th Avenue, 
the estimated cost to build this bypass is still $1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. And that member knows that the additional costs 
associated with maintaining the facility, maintaining the 
facility, rehabilitating this facility over a 30-year period, is 
going to cost the balance of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know the record of the opposition when 
it comes to maintenance of infrastructure in this province. 
We’re building a facility, Mr. Speaker, that will stand the test of 
time. In 30 years this project will be as if it was new, Mr. 
Speaker, and there’s value in that to the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. 
All the information will be made public in the value-for-money 
report, which is consistent with Canadian best practices on P3s, 
Mr. Speaker. This information will be made available, including 
the contract documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing from a lot of 
Saskatchewan people who are flabbergasted to hear about the 
Sask Party’s maintenance plan for this so-called Regina bypass. 
It just defies common sense. 
 
This plan will actually force government-owned snowplows to 
lift their snowplows when they reach the bypass, drive down the 
bypass without clearing any snow, and then allow them to start 
cleaning snow once again when they get to the other side. And I 
guess the minister texts at that time, il neige [Translation: it’s 
snowing], to the Paris company to let them know it’s snowing 
in Saskatchewan, all because of this secret deal with this 
corporation from Paris. 
 
To the minister: why won’t the Sask Party be transparent with 
Saskatchewan people? How much are we paying to this Paris 
company for this nonsensical maintenance plan for the bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

refuses to listen to the answer. He’s prepared to sit and make up 
his own facts, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t add to the discourse at 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, we’re following Canadian best 
practices, Mr. Speaker. And if he wants to make some 
comments about the Paris company that’s involved with this, 
Mr. Speaker, he again needs to talk to his cousins in Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker, because that same company has been shortlisted 
as one of the proponent teams on the south Calgary bypass. 
 
Now apparently, Mr. Speaker, that particular company isn’t 
good enough for Saskatchewan but it’s good enough for their 
cousins in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And he should talk to them to 
see what their discussions have been with regard to that project, 
Mr. Speaker. We have had extensive discussions with all the 
opinions that we get, all the expert opinions that we get with 
respect to this bypass. Ernst & Young, Mr. Speaker, has 
confirmed that we’ll be saving $380 million on this project over 
the term of the contract, Mr. Speaker. If he wants to question 
the integrity of Ernst & Young on this, Mr. Speaker, he should 
go outside the House and do it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This coming from the government that 
actually voted against and are unwilling to have an independent 
audit of this very deal, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s clear too 
that the minister of rental schemes doesn’t get what the auditor 
actually says about this government and . . .  
 
The Speaker: — The members of the House know that you are 
to refer to the other member either by their title or their 
constituency name, not some other fabrication. So I would 
caution members on both sides — they’re a little argy-bargy 
today; I know we’re heading into the weekend — to choose 
their words carefully. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister seems to really not 
understand what the auditor has actually said. The auditor has 
said this about the Sask Party’s P3 approach: “It’s full of 
estimates. It’s full of assumptions.” She also said, “Not making 
information available in writing or maintaining key empirical 
data makes it difficult to substantiate or scrutinize decisions.” 
 
[10:45] 
 
Now these aren’t the glowing assessments that the minister 
claims or pretends that the auditor gave, Mr. Speaker. The fact 
is that Saskatchewan people deserve to know the full costs. We 
have a right to see how much we’re paying to this Paris 
corporation, what we’re paying them for, so that we can 
properly scrutinize those decisions and ensure value for money. 
 
To the minister: what doesn’t the Sask Party want 
Saskatchewan people to see? What are they hiding, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister already has 
highlighted that the independent fairness advisers have said of 
the process, “The principles of fairness, openness, consistency, 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7441 

and transparency have, in our opinion, been maintained 
throughout the procurement process.” The Provincial Auditor 
says she confirms SaskBuilds has effective processes for 
analyzing the business case for P3s. 
 
There’s only one ideologically hidebound group of women and 
men in all of the Dominion of Canada that have completely 
ruled out P3s, and that’s the men and women sitting on that side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan NDP are 
opposed to P3s notwithstanding the fact that the NDP in Alberta 
are using them to build bypasses. We’re using them to finally 
build needed schools. We’re using P3s to finally build, rebuild 
the psychiatric hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and 
health care projects right across this province. They’re the only 
ones that are opposed to them.  
 
Early on we found out the Leader of the Opposition is still 
opposed to using private clinics in the public system, even 
though it delivers better results for people. The critic for Parks a 
couple of days ago said she was opposed, the NDP are opposed 
to even private investment in the parks for seasonal 
campgrounds, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Yesterday it was Back to the Future Day, Mr. Speaker. I think 
the members opposite have climbed into the member from 
Lakeview’s specially equipped Suburban and they’ve travelled 
back to 1944, where the people of the province are going to 
keep them for a very long time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 975 through 978. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered?  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I couldn’t hear what the Government 
House Leader had to say. And I couldn’t even hear what the 
Clerk-at-the-Table had to say, and he’s only 10 feet in front of 
me. Will the Government House Leader please repeat himself. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 975 through 978. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has ordered 
questions 975 to 978. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 979. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled response to 
question 979. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 980. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 

response to question 980. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to join 
in a 75-minute debate here this afternoon. Of course we just 
saw a lot of pomp and bluster and politics from the Premier 
here today, Mr. Speaker. You know, we get used to that, and I 
think Saskatchewan people have been used to that. You know, 
he’s sort of been the king of the grandstand, Mr. Speaker, but 
not great, Mr. Speaker, at getting the job done where it matters. 
And I guess, you know, it’s kind of in the . . . You know, we 
hear, you know, he elevates himself into large debates, Mr. 
Speaker, but often makes promises that he can’t keep, Mr. 
Speaker, but often doesn’t get the job done where it matters. 
And you know, it’s some of those fine details and good 
management and protection of public dollars, taxpayers’ dollars 
that actually matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m pleased to enter into debate here today, putting forward 
a motion here today as it relates to what we need from this 
government is a more urgent response to the tragic, unsafe 
conditions on Highway 1 East, Mr. Speaker, and for this 
government to provide some accountability on this deal before 
they put taxpayers into a boondoggle of a deal, Mr. Speaker, to 
build a bypass within the city of Regina instead of getting a 
bypass route that actually works. With a convoluted scheme 
that this government’s entering into, this rental-type scheme, 
Mr. Speaker, that guarantees, guarantees profits for a Paris 
company, Mr. Speaker, but certainly doesn’t deliver value or 
common sense to the people of the province. 
 
Members can heckle all they want. They’d be wise to start 
listening to the communities out on Highway No. 1 East. 
They’d be wise to wake up to the realities and needs of 
taxpayers all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Now certainly this is an interesting project, Mr. Speaker. This is 
a government that’s delayed action, meaningful action that’s 
been needed on this fatally unsafe artery, Mr. Speaker, for a 
long period of time. They’ve been unwilling to meet with 
community members for many different community meetings, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to say to those members of those 
communities — whether they’re in Emerald Park, whether 
they’re in Pilot Butte, whether they’re in White City, whether 
they’re in Balgonie, Mr. Speaker — I want to commend so 
many within those communities for continuing to push and for 
pushing for a long period of time, Mr. Speaker, against a very 
stubborn government, the need for urgent action on Highway 
No. 1 East, Mr. Speaker. What this government has done has 
delayed meaningful action on this front and has now created 
this complex, convoluted, rent-an-infrastructure scheme 
choosing a bypass route that’s inside the city limits that seems 
to defy common sense, Mr. Speaker, with costs that are 
absolutely shooting through the roof. 
 
Now what kind of government, Mr. Speaker, worth their salt 
would simply sign on to an overrun that’s well in excess of $1 
billion without batting an eye, Mr. Speaker? At a time where 



7442 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

there’s many priorities in Saskatchewan, or at any time for that 
matter, Mr. Speaker, it’s critically important that you expect 
your government to deliver where it matters, to get projects 
right; in this case, to make sure that the bypass route works, to 
make sure we have a bypass that actually works, and to make 
sure that the numbers work for taxpayers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just a little bit of history over just the past couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker, on this file. This is a government that was saying a 
couple of years ago that they had studied this project to death, 
Mr. Speaker. They had said they studied it to death. They put 
that onto the record many times. And they said, oh it was going 
to be $400 million, Mr. Speaker, this project. Oh, and then they 
said, whoops, they announced a little later they missed it. It 
doubled, Mr. Speaker. It went from 400 million . . . They 
missed that, it’s actually $800 million, Mr. Speaker. This is all 
in the course of the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then a few months after that, they said, oh we screwed up 
again. The amount isn’t $800 million, it’s actually $1.2 billion. 
So from 400 million to $1.2 billion. And then, in the middle of 
this summer, Mr. Speaker, the government comes out and says, 
you know, we really had this wrong. We really missed this one. 
It’s actually $2 billion not including all the land costs; still not 
satisfying most, Mr. Speaker, that the route is the right route. 
 
Now we’ve been pressing this government for urgent action 
when it comes to the actual safety concerns for a long period of 
time on Highway No. 1. We’ve worked with communities. 
We’ve had them in this Assembly well over a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, pushing for the needs for traffic lights, the need to 
advance overpasses, all while this government’s been delaying 
action and these complex and convoluted processes with this 
boondoggle of a contract with this Paris company, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of getting traffic lights up at the intersections that are 
needed, and instead of working in a common sense way that 
Saskatchewan people know quite well, rolling up their sleeves 
to get those overpasses built on Highway No. 1 East, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is a fatally dangerous artery that causes stress and 
uncertainty to everyone that’s getting onto it day after day — 
families, Mr. Speaker, that are getting in and out from work; 
those that are getting on and trying to connect back and forth. I 
know members opposite know this artery from first-hand 
experiencer. So you would think, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government would have taken this serious a long time ago. 
They’ve delayed action, and now they’re presiding over a real 
mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We continue to push this government to put up the traffic lights 
that are needed to stop or to reduce, I should say, the highly 
fatal right-angle and left-angle collisions that are occurring, Mr. 
Speaker, those that are tragically taking loved ones from 
families in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The statistics of this own government and the reports of this 
own government have pushed forward and called for the need 
for traffic lights. That’s their own studies, Mr. Speaker, over a 
couple of years ago. The actual studies that are informing this 
government, if you look at those studies, there’s actually a 
dramatic reduction of right-angle collisions, of left-angle 
collisions, Mr. Speaker, and an overall, and an overall reduction 

of accidents. There’s concern as well about a potential of, 
despite an overall reduction of accidents, that it may increase a 
portion of accidents, which would be rear-end collisions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But certainly other jurisdictions have dealt with this before. 
Certainly there’s many measures that this government could be 
taking to make sure that individuals are clearly aware of these 
highly dangerous intersections. And I think, you know, it’s past 
time that people’s lives and the safety and security concerns 
facing those on this artery take precedent over the fast 
movement of freight, Mr. Speaker. And so we continue to push 
on that front. 
 
We also call on this government, who are now caught up in 
these complex, convoluted, lawyered-up processes with this 
Paris company, Mr. Speaker, to do the common sense thing, to 
recognize that there’s three intersections that critically need 
overpasses out there as soon as possible. And what they need is 
for this government to stop delaying that action, in having this 
caught up in this complex, convoluted contract, Mr. Speaker, 
and to advance the building of those overpasses. 
 
Now road builders, and I think government’s own documents, 
would suggest that each of those overpasses would be in the 
range potentially of 40 to 50, at the high end possibly $60 
million a year. Those overpasses are needed for communities. 
It’s past time that this government stop delaying action and 
playing games with lawyers and consultants and sending money 
to a Paris company, and they start delivering for Saskatchewan 
people here in this province. 
 
You know, the plan of this government defies common sense on 
this front. We need urgent actions for safety for those utilizing 
this artery. We need a long-term plan that actually works for 
taxpayers and a long-term plan that works for the bypass. We 
need a bypass that works. Not one, Mr. Speaker, that’s built in 
the wrong location. Not one that doesn’t effectively get truck 
traffic off of it. Not one, Mr. Speaker, that costs taxpayers 
hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars, I guess beyond $1 
billion more than it needs to. So let’s get a bypass that works. 
Let’s act urgently on safety. And the actions of this government 
have been deplorable on this front. 
 
You know, I think of some of the groups I’ve met with on this 
front. You know, I’ve had delegations come into my office. I’ve 
heard from many. I remember being out at Greenall School in 
Balgonie with a packed room — and I understand that members 
opposite, MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
opposite, which is the area that they represent, Mr. Speaker, 
weren’t able to get to that meeting, Mr. Speaker — but in that 
room well over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, listening to families 
that have lost loved ones, listening to students making the case 
about the tragic circumstances.  
 
We have a government that’s delayed action and is now 
forfeiting this responsibility to desks in Paris, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of those that are on the ground and know the realities 
full well every day, leaving this highly fatal, highly dangerous 
corridor without the action that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re calling on this government to stop delaying the 
meaningful action around safety. We’re calling for them to 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7443 

work with the community to get traffic lights and a system of 
proper notice of those traffic lights that are going to work for 
the communities on Highway No. 1 East. We’re pushing this 
government, as we have been, to not get caught up in a 
convoluted, delayed process with lawyers and consultants and 
Paris companies, with a boondoggle that continues to grow in 
cost, Mr. Speaker, but to actually advance those overpasses that 
are needed in the common sense way we know how. And you 
know what? We’ve got a bunch of Saskatchewan road builders 
who would be exceptional in helping advance those actual 
projects as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
And we ask this government to do the right thing, to recognize 
that details matter when it comes to a project like this, to make 
sure that we get the route right, to re-evaluate why is this route, 
why are they so adamant in placing this within city limits? Why 
are they rejecting plans that, it would seem, would more 
effectively get truck traffic outside the city and off of this 
dangerous artery? Why are they not looking at routes, Mr. 
Speaker, that would actually get the trucks closer to where 
they’re going? The route itself right now still heavily congests 
in Victoria East, Mr. Speaker, as you look at where so many of 
the trucks are going, if you actually look at the truck traffic 
statistics and the realities in Regina and area. 
 
Trucks are going up into Ross Industrial area. This plan does 
not work well for Ross Industrial in Regina. Trucks are utilizing 
the refinery, Mr. Speaker, the refinery complex. This bypass 
does not work well to connect trucks to that bypass, the route 
that they’re choosing. 
 
You think of Evraz, Mr. Speaker, you think of all of that 
activity, as opposed to what this government’s doing is sticking 
a bypass within city limits, going to keep the congestion and 
danger on those roads, building what I understand are going to 
be potentially pretty dangerous overpasses for the type of 
configuration that they’re forced to do. Doing so in an area, I 
understand, that’s really costly, going over utilities and 
pipelines and services and the requirement of service roads that 
wouldn’t be required in those, to the same extent in those other, 
with the other route options, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know it’s incumbent on us, and each and every one of us 
that are elected regardless of the party we represent, to stand up 
once in a while, Mr. Speaker, to say what’s right and to make 
sure that we get it right for the taxpayers of this province, and to 
make sure we get it right on safety. We have a circumstance 
where this government has done nothing but delay meaningful 
action as it relates to safety for those utilizing this artery. That 
has to stop, Mr. Speaker. And those actions and those delays 
rightfully should be condemned by this government, Mr. 
Speaker. We should also make sure that when we’re planning a 
project this big that we get it right, that the route works. What 
we don’t need, Mr. Speaker, is to be 5 years, 8 years, 10 years 
down the road driving on a bypass that then becomes 
commonplace to be understood that was built in a place that 
didn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we also owe it to taxpayers who worked damned hard 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, for the dollars . . . [inaudible 
interjections] . . . Darned hard; I retract that word. Who worked 

incredibly hard, Mr. Speaker, in this province, and they deserve 
us to do our earnest best to scrutinize and make sure that we’re 
delivering value for those hard-earned tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it is the kind of issue, Mr. Speaker, that shouldn’t have 
members all caught up in the political lines of this party or that 
party. It’s the kind of boondoggle, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is signing them on to that members of that side 
should be standing up for. They should be standing up and 
saying enough is enough. We have to act for safety more 
urgently, and they should have been doing that a long time ago. 
You should have members on that side of the Assembly saying, 
you know, when it come to an overrun of over a billion dollars, 
if we can build a better route, a safer route, a route that works 
better for the long term and could save us a billion dollars, 
you’d expect it of every single one of those members over there 
to be urging that approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I call on each and every one of those members over there not 
just to get behind the nonsensical actions that we see of this 
government on this front, but to stand up as independent 
members of this Assembly to call for the urgent action on safety 
measures, traffic lights, overpasses being broken out and built 
as fast as possible out on Highway No. 1 East, Mr. Speaker, and 
to ensure a route, re-evaluate the route, and ensure a route that 
actually works for Saskatchewan people and actually get value 
for taxpayers. It makes no sense, this whole debacle with this 
Paris company. But, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I will 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to put up 
interim safety measures, including traffic lights, and build 
the needed overpasses along Highway 1 East immediately, 
using local construction firms whenever possible; and 
further 
 
That the government take the necessary steps to avoid a 
multi-billion-dollar bypass boondoggle by re-evaluating 
both the route and the use of the P3 rent-a-road approach 
with the conglomerate from France. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to put up 
interim safety measures, including traffic lights, and build 
the needed overpasses along Highway 1 East immediately, 
using local construction firms whenever possible; and 
further 
 
That the government take the necessary steps to avoid a 
multi-billion-dollar bypass boondoggle by re-evaluating 
both the route and the use of the P3 rent-a-road approach 
with the conglomerate from France. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter 
into this debate today, and I would like to break my 
presentation into two parts, first the timelines on this project 



7444 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

and the maintenance issue. I also would like to present the facts 
on this side of the House and the fiction on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project started some 20 years ago. It was 
started by the NDP but, as usual, no action. In fact it was started 
so long ago that the member from Carrot River had hair. So it 
has been a long time in the making. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government will finish this project. It 
will not study it anymore. It will not engineer it anymore. They 
will carry on with the project. This is Saskatchewan’s largest 
infrastructure project and will be completed by a Sask Party 
government. This project is backed by solid engineering, not 
myths like members opposite. For instance, the member from 
Athabasca last year went for a ride and after his ride he was 
convinced that that is the route that the bypass should take. But 
I see now that he has changed his position in life. After 
yesterday, he is the new self-endorsed Ag critic. And so maybe 
he has moved on from that, so that’s good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project has transparency and consultations. 
The member from Rosemont talked about there was no 
consultation. Well 24 separate open houses and consultation 
events; one-on-one meetings with businesses, impacted 
landowners, and other stakeholders; municipal governments 
actively involved in all steering committees; unredacted 
engineering studies available on Ministry of Highways website. 
And, Mr. Speaker, from the Provincial Auditor 2014 report 
volume 2, the auditor had this to say: 
 

We found that the ministry actively sought input from the 
public and stakeholders throughout the process . . . We did 
not find evidence of undue influence or third parties (e.g., 
landowners) during this selection process. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again just to correct the facts, even the 
Provincial Auditor supports this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about the users of this. 
The members opposite would have us believe that only 15 per 
cent of the truck traffic will be diverted on this road. From Al 
Rosseker, executive director of the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association: 
 

The bypass is a 20-year dream come true. The Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan trucking associations say that 75 per 
cent of trucks approaching Regina from the east will 
continue on the bypass rather than coming through the 
city. Twelve hundred trucks approach Regina from that 
direction every day, including 200 multi-trailer trucks. We 
estimate truck traffic will grow to 6,400 trucks per day on 
Highway 1 near Balgonie by 2040. Thirty-one hundred of 
these trucks are expected to use the new Regina bypass 
instead of travelling into the city and on to Victoria 
Avenue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just take a moment and talk about 
supporters of this project. A couple of quotes: 
 

“I’ve been on council for 15 years and the city spent 
longer than that waiting. It looks like the government will 
move it through. We are extremely pleased with that.” 
Mayor Michael Fougere. 

“The White Butte regional partners have spent a great deal 
of time pushing for this development to happen as soon as 
possible and we unanimously support this project as a P3.” 
Lain Lovelace, White Butte regional planning committee 
Chair. 

 
Mr. Speaker, town councils in Balgonie, Pilot Butte, the village 
and RM [rural municipality] of Edenwold, Regina, and the RM 
of Sherwood and White City all support the bypass as planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been some accusations by the members 
opposite that the route is dated and that it does not plan for the 
future. I would just like to say that the route was approved in 
2014. The study was endorsed by all municipalities and a 
design for traffic patterns and volumes expected into 2040. The 
city of Regina, the towns of Pilot Butte, Balgonie, and White 
City, and the RMs of Edenwold and Sherwood were consulted 
extensively through the development plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few more quotes, Regina bypass quotes: 
 

“We are totally satisfied with the location.” Mayor 
Michael Fougere, Leader-Post, December 12, 2014. 
 
“We support the project as designed.” Bruce Evans, mayor 
of White City, August 21st, 2015 in a scrum. 
 
“Putting it on pause would add further delays and likely 
additional costs.” Bruce Evans, mayor of White City, 
August 21st, 2015. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are recent quotes. This is not outdated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just talk a moment here on 
maintenance. The member from Rosemont attended the 
highway briefing, had a few questions. All his questions were 
answered. When he left, then he says that he didn’t get any 
answers. It seems to me that his main concern, as I’ve heard in 
the House again here today, is about the plowing and the grass 
cutting on the bypass. Does he think that that’s the only place in 
the province where it’s going to snow or the grass is going to 
grow? Well we can assure him that for 34 years under this 
contract, it’ll be looked after, and our capable highway 
personnel can look after the rest of the province. So I would just 
like him to understand that. We can assure him that this is a full 
maintenance project, like plowing, grass cutting, patching, 
resurfacing, and will be turned back to the province after 34 
years in like-new condition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maintenance is something the NDP just had no 
idea about. When we formed government, there was a 
billion-dollar pothole. And the member from Athabasca, he’s 
smiling over there and everything, but he knows all about it 
because he was the Highways minister. And he left it, and he 
did a great job. In fact they were so aware of maintenance that 
they basically told residents of Saskatchewan, patch your own 
potholes. That was by the missing link. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact the maintenance might have been the 
reason why members opposite closed 52 hospitals, 176 schools 
in our province, might be the reason why because they just 
didn’t know anything about maintenance and they let their 
buildings run down. Mr. Speaker, thank goodness there was a 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7445 

provincial election or they might have closed the Trans-Canada 
Highway too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear more and more all the time, from the 
member from Rosemont especially, about no local companies 
under P3s. Totally false again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to report that on the Regina bypass, so 
far, five local companies. On the multi-school project, 24 local 
companies. On the Saskatchewan Hospital in The Battlefords, 
something that they talked about for years and years and years 
and did nothing about it except when it came to the election all 
of a sudden they threw out . . . I believe it was Mr. Taylor at 
that point threw out a number of 58 million and he was going to 
build a new hospital for that. But there’s eight local companies 
involved in that project at this point. And, Mr. Speaker, in Swift 
Current at the long-term care facility, 26 local companies. So 
that kind of sets the stage for all of that. 
 
Some of the companies on this bypass project in Regina here: 
Broda Construction, Clifton Associates, Urban Systems, 
Graham. Now these aren’t companies that are from France. 
These are local companies, and they are doing the job and they 
will do it well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont, I don’t know where 
he’s coming from sometimes when he talks about the P3s and 
maintenance and whatever. It’s very obvious what that 
government did when they were in power. The first thing they 
cut in every budget was maintenance. They had no maintenance 
on highways, schools, hospitals. It was all gone. They did 
nothing, absolutely nothing. But we can assure you on this 
project alone, just this project, 34 years of full maintenance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward . . . I’m sure I’ll be getting lots 
of questions from the members opposite, and I look forward to 
those questions. I will gladly talk about this project any day of 
the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to congratulate the 
Ministry of Highways and all the engineering companies that 
have brought this project to fruition. And I look forward to the 
question period. Thank you. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 
pleased to join in the debate around the bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
And it should be stated right at the front, Mr. Speaker, that one 
of the things that’s really important to this side of the Assembly 
is that it is important that people out there understand, when it 
comes to the Regina bypass, the NDP are in full support of 
having the bypass built, Mr. Speaker, to ensure safety and 
certainly to help the economy and put the proper infrastructure 
in place for years and years to come, Mr. Speaker. We’ve said 
that on numerous occasions. We’ll continue saying that, that the 
bypass must be built, Mr. Speaker, and that bypass must be 
built as soon as possible, Mr. Speaker, and it’s got to be built 
with the right arguments in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And this is why, this is why I say to the people that are being 
impacted by this, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a lot of arguments 
and a lot of public debates on this, and I want to kind of draw a 
picture for the people that might be listening and not certain 
what the argument is. But our argument on the NDP side are 
twofold. One is the Regina bypass must be built. That’s what 
we’re arguing here, Mr. Speaker. The second argument is a 
bypass should be very clearly bypassing the city, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s one of the biggest fundamental arguments around 
building a bypass. 
 
And what we’ve seen from this government, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’re doing the bypass as the NDP had originally designed. 
And the member is right. The NDP began the project and began 
the north, the north, northwest portion of the bypass, Mr. 
Speaker. But then as you get closer to the eastern side of the 
city, the Regina east area, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the 
bypass juts right back into the city. What many people in the 
Tower Road location, many people are argumentative about, 
Mr. Speaker, is they say it doesn’t bypass the city; it goes back 
into the city. 
 
So the basic, fundamental argument behind the Regina bypass 
project is that it should bypass the city. That’s the bottom line 
that we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. So we’re able to divert 
traffic, especially the heavy traffic, away from the city, Mr. 
Speaker, which really is a safety concern and a safety matter. 
And as well it’s good for the economy that we have a vibrant 
global transportation system, Mr. Speaker, because moving our 
goods to market is something that has to be improved on a 
continual basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you hear of the quotes of the mayors of 
Balgonie, the Regina mayor, the White City mayor, the 
Emerald Park leadership, and of course the reeves and the RM 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, their fundamental argument is, these 
overpasses should be built in their communities to ensure 
safety, Mr. Speaker. They’re not arguing the fact that . . . over 
the general location. 
 
If I was the mayor of Balgonie or White City, I’d want the 
overpasses built as soon as possible. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because it’s a good investment. Why? Because it encourages 
safety for the residents. And why? It also helps the regional 
economy of each of these cities. 
 
Now what you’re not going to do is have, I don’t think, the 
mayors saying, well you look at the option for the bypass; we 
really want to make sure that the overpasses are built properly. 
And the NDP support that position. We think that they should 
have those overpasses in those three centres because of the 
volume of traffic and because all the No. 1 traffic coming from 
all parts of Canada certainly complicates the flow and the safety 
of the bypass or the traffic overall. 
 
So we’re not arguing the fact (a) the bypass should be built. 
We’re not arguing with the fact that these overpasses should be 
constructed as the first order of business, Mr. Speaker. But 
we’re also arguing about the point is, where is it, in common 
sense and logic, as to why Tower Road? That’s the biggest 
argument they have. People of Saskatchewan, people in that 
area, are all basically telling the government, why Tower Road? 
 



7446 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other argument that they’re also pointing 
out is, the fact of the matter is that as you look at the costs 
overall, they have ballooned from an original cost of 450 
million when we were in government. And the government is 
absolutely right, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party caucus: the NDP 
did start the project. But I can tell you today there’d be a lot 
more thought and a lot more process involved, as opposed to 
coming down Tower Road, because quite frankly, why Tower 
Road, Mr. Speaker? We’ll never understand why Tower Road. 
 
But I’ll say this today to the mayor of Balgonie, the mayor of 
White City, and the mayor of Emerald Park, or the reeve or the 
RM, whatever area is being impacted, that the overpasses that 
are required to provide safety for your citizens should be built. 
We’re not arguing that here. The biggest point that we’re 
arguing is where the bypass should go. We think, on this side, 
that the bypass ought to bypass the city, Mr. Speaker. And there 
is tons of arguments and there’s some very logical people, Mr. 
Speaker, that have explained time and time again how this is a 
boondoggle, how the Saskatchewan Party has made a complete 
mess of this. And, Mr. Speaker, people are starting to quickly 
realize that they are not listening, and quite frankly the bypass 
does not bypass the city. And that in itself is problematic. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was going to point out as well that the 
whole notion of $1 billion cost overrun, Mr. Speaker, this is 
also problematic for many, many people. Five years from now, 
10 years from now, people are going to say, we spent almost $2 
billion on this bypass that doesn’t bypass the city. And I can tell 
the people today that is a result of some of the speakers here 
this afternoon that are speaking against our motion, they are the 
ones that are defending this particular decision to not bypass the 
city. And they ought to be on record. They ought to be 
recognized for their defence of the current location. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve heard and said time and time again in this 
Assembly, the Regina bypass should bypass the city. 
 
The provincial NDP want to see the bypass built. We want to 
see the overpasses built, Mr. Speaker. We want to see the safe 
flow of traffic. We want to see the safe and quick delivery of 
goods and services through our transportation system. All that 
is logical argument. But what is totally beyond us is how the 
Saskatchewan Party has completely messed the process up. 
Why Tower Road, Mr. Speaker? And why are we all of a 
sudden talking about a $1 billion cost overrun? And this is 
compliments of the Saskatchewan Party, and that money, by the 
way, is going to a company in France called Vinci, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we have had a lot of argument and a lot of debates on this, 
but I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan one 
simple thing. How is it that the Saskatchewan Party could mess 
up a very basic principle or a very basic idea? Building a bypass 
is a great idea. Building the overpasses in these communities is 
necessary. So why didn’t the Saskatchewan Party bypass the 
city? Why are they coming back into the city and calling it a 
bypass, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So as you see the costs balloon, it’s not meeting the objective 
that we originally identified as the reason for the importance of 
the bypass, and that is of course safety and that is of course to 
help the economy of the region. So every mayor and every 
reeve in this particular area is going to support investment in 

highways, is going to support the creation of overpasses so the 
citizens can move around safely and freely, and that traffic and 
again the transportation of goods can happen at a safe level 
without impeding our economy overall. Everybody understands 
that. So that’s why the mayors of these particular cities and 
communities are saying that the bypass needs to happen. It’s a 
great idea. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, how many of those particular mayors are 
supporting Tower Road location? We’re hearing a lot of 
concern from a lot of people in that area that the Tower Road 
location, it’s short-sighted. It is not necessary. It’s going to cost 
a heck of a lot more money, Mr. Speaker, than originally 
planned. 
 
The other thing I would point out in my closing comments is 
this, and I hope they quote me in five, six, seven years from 
now when this whole boondoggle occurs. I would tell the 
Saskatchewan Party that they are being played, to be very, very 
careful on what the end objective here is. Because if you find 
out in a few years from now, you will know what we were 
talking about on this side of the Assembly.  
 
When you see a $1 billion price tag over what you originally 
began with, Mr. Speaker, and that the fact that it doesn’t bypass 
the city, that all these issues and all these concerns are out there 
that they’re completely ignoring and they’re putting the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer on the hook for 30 years . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And the member from, wherever he’s from, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s indicated that the member from Carrot River 
had hair when this process began. I can tell you it won’t be . . . I 
won’t have hair by the time that the bill is being paid, Mr. 
Speaker, for all the rich contracts that they’ve given to this 
company from France. We will still be paying 30-plus years 
from now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s amazing to me is how come they couldn’t give 
security of a long-term contract with the working men and 
women of this province, but they’re willing to do that to a 
company in France. That is another fundamental argument. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I stand today to argue for the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, and to argue for the debate and to tell the people of 
Regina, we support the bypass. We support the overpasses. But 
let’s not use Tower Road. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people 
of Regina are starting to realize that very quickly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
a pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly today and join the 
debate regarding the Regina bypass project. Mr. Speaker, I sat 
here listening to two speeches from the members opposite, and 
it was absolutely embarrassing to hear them talk. I think first 
and foremost our first thing we need to be concerned about is 
the safety of families throughout the province. Safety is our first 
issue, and getting this project done faster and lower cost is 
imperative on this side of the House, to get it done for the 
people of White City, Emerald Park, Balgonie. 
 
And the members opposite say, we’ve talked to the people. We 
talk to people. Well I have a letter dated September the 2nd, 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7447 

2015 from Balgonie, Pilot Butte, the village and RM of 
Edenwold, Regina, RM of Sherwood, and White City. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to read some of the letter we received into the 
record: 
 

Our council has been working for decades towards the day 
when overpasses would be sited and improved along the 
No. 1 Highway between Balgonie and Regina. The 
councils of White City, the RM of Edenwold, the village 
of Edenwold, the town of Balgonie, the town of Pilot 
Butte, together with the RM of Sherwood and the city of 
Regina have all endorsed the approved Regina bypass 
project. Notwithstanding the fact that no one in the region 
was able to be 100 per cent satisfied of what every 
landowner, developer, or interested party asked for, as a 
whole we are satisfied that the project as designed will 
serve the region well for years to come. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s something that the other side 
has never taken into account. You’re never going to be able to 
satisfy everyone 100 per cent. That’s a fact of life. When you’re 
in government, you have to make decisions. That’s something 
those members over there never did. We’ll study something. 
We’ll go through a review process. We’ll talk about it. We’ll 
talk about it. Like the member from Athabasca said, we’ve 
talked about this since the early ’90s. Well talk is cheap. It is. 
When you actually want to commit money to infrastructure and 
commit to making a priority and building a project that’s going 
to make safer communities for everyone across the province, 
that’s what is important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think they can laugh on that side because 
really they don’t have the knowledge of building. They’ve 
never built anything in their life. The member from Rosemont’s 
never built anything better than a sandbox probably, Mr. 
Speaker. And what he did today, he stands up in this House, he 
talked about all the people he went out and he consulted with. 
He didn’t mention one name, and he’s done this before. 
 
The member from Rosemont talked about the bypass yesterday. 
We had stakeholders in the galleries. When he was asking 
questions about lifting up your snowplow, not mowing around 
the bypass, they were laughing at him, laughing at the member 
from Rosemont asking these ridiculous questions. Because 
really he’s taking a very important issue for people of Regina 
and your communities and he’s making a joke of it which is . . . 
I like the member from Rosemont. I think he’s a good guy, but 
he’s doing himself a disservice by the ridiculous questions he’s 
asking in question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A few things I’d like to talk about and why. When I go around 
and I door knock in Walsh Acres, I’ll talk on behalf of the 
Regina bypass because I think it’s something that’s going to 
serve all of Regina residents very, very well, Mr. Speaker. And 
the south route . . . I’m going to give you a true or false . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the member for Canora-Pelly and 
the member for Athabasca want to talk, why don’t they get 
together and do that instead of hollering across the floor? I 
recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

[11:30] 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to hear my 
colleagues want to take part in this debate because it is a very 
important conversation to have for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So the Regina bypass is going to be built in just four years 
versus 10 years of a traditional build. I think that’s a good thing, 
built six years sooner using a P3 model — better. We’ll 
maintain like new. So the one great thing about a P3 is the 
maintenance portion of it, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that the 
whole rent-a-scheme, basically myth that the member from 
Rosemont is trying to tell — oh, you’re going to rent the road; 
oh, you’re going to rent the school — well it’s just 
fearmongering. 
 
The government owns these projects. The government owns 
these assets. He’s just trying to spread some misinformation. I’ll 
choose my words carefully because generally it makes me feel 
very uncomfortable when he gets up and stands because 
sometimes the facts might get in the way of a good story, and 
he does enjoy a good story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the lower cost to taxpayers, taxpayers are saving $380 
million over the lifetime of this contract. And like the Minister 
for SaskBuilds said during question period, if he wants to 
question the reputation of Ernest & Young who did this 
value-for-money. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Ernst & Young. 
Sorry, sorry member from Rosemont. That’s the first thing you 
got right in the House today. Thank you. 
 
The project is on budget. We estimated it at $1.2 billion and 
that’s accurate. The member from Rosemont wants to talk about 
the $400 million and the $800 million. What he doesn’t 
understand, because he’s never been in government, is projects 
change. The scope of a project can change, member from 
Rosemont. Every now and then when you say you’re going to 
do something, you’re going to change a project to make it work 
better for the citizens of the province. 
 
The project he’s talking about, the 400 million project, doesn’t 
exist. It’s gone, Mr. Speaker. That project is gone. There’s a 
new project. He has to move on, but that’s something NDP 
members don’t do very well. They generally don’t move on. 
They’re stuck in the past. And that’s one of the reasons why 
they will never ever agree to a P3 because they’re ideologically 
opposed to these P3s because it doesn’t fit into their little box of 
how something should be done, and they won’t do any 
innovative ideas to get some infrastructure for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He’s in the education sector. It’s amazing that he’s probably the 
only person in the education sector against P3 schools. It’s 
unbelievable. They want to build more projects, more schools 
for the students of Saskatchewan, and he’s against it. No, they 
don’t need more schools. And then the member from Lakeview 
will jump and go, well we need more education infrastructure. 
Well if neither of them are against P3 schools, so how do you 
want more education infrastructure and then be diametrically 
opposed to P3s? 
 
Mr. Speaker, more about the Regina bypass because I could talk 



7448 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

about this project all day. It’s the largest infrastructure project 
in the history of Saskatchewan, the largest infrastructure project 
in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a project that’s 
going to be able to have the citizens of White City, Balgonie 
travel safer back and forth to work. 
 
And one thing, Mr. Speaker, which I find amazing is that the 
member from Rosemont quotes numbers all the time but never 
attributes them to anyone. He’s like, oh it’s only going to take 
off 15 per cent of the truck traffic. Show me that number. Show 
me who gave you that number, member from Rosemont, 
because our traffic engineers whose job it is to make sure 
structures are safe, to make sure that projects are safe for 
citizens, live out in White City, live out in Emerald Park. They 
want to make it as safe as possible, and it’s their job to do that. 
And they gave us a number that it will take 60 to 70 per cent of 
the traffic off of that road. So I’d love to see the member from 
Rosemont bring forward some documents from their engineers 
because they use a lot of numbers but they’re never backed up 
by a study, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s interesting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Never backed 
up by facts, the minister says. That’s true. They never really 
back up any of their numbers with facts. And we went out and 
consulted with 21 different meetings with stakeholders all 
across those communities, and he says we didn’t talk . . . The 
member from Rosemont says we didn’t talk to anyone. Another 
myth from the member from Rosemont. You know, it’s getting 
close to election time. It’s getting close to election time. April 
4th, we’re going to the polls, Mr. Speaker, and this member was 
on his feet for 15 minutes with his gafflebag, which is a great 
word he had during question period. It’s not really a word, so I 
don’t really don’t know the connotation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But not once did he mention his proposal. The NDP wrote a 
proposal. This is the first time that we’ve actually been able to 
have a real debate about issues in this Assembly because they 
actually have a proposal on the bypass in Regina. And their 
proposal is, scrap it all. Scrap it all and start over. It’s 
unbelievable. They want to scrap it all. Scrap the 30-year 
contract, start over, which will put this project four years 
behind. That’s what he wants to do. Four years behind where 
we are right now. And then he wants to say, oh well, probably 
you scrap a contract with a company that you had a contract for 
30 years, it won’t cost you any money. He’s not going to put 
that into account. 
 
So their project they have put forward in a press release said it 
will take four years longer and cost a billion dollars more, and 
they’re worried about the money of taxpayers. He used 
unparliamentary language in here to talk about how hard 
taxpayers work for their money. Well we all know how hard 
taxpayers work for their money, and they want to put another 
billion dollars into the bypass because they want to do a 
traditional build because they will not even think about a new, 
innovative way to build infrastructure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when they stand up and spread 
misinformation, fearmongering, absolute garbage from that side 
of the House on a debate, when he doesn’t have the decency to 
even talk about the proposal that they put forward, I will go to 
the streets and talk about our project over their project any day. 
And I’ll be supporting our project, not the motion. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always sort of interesting listening to members opposite make 
their case, and certainly sometimes it’s also sort of 
groundbreaking in terms of, you know, new words for the 
English language. So that speech just past, Mr. Speaker, we 
heard gafflebag being introduced into the common usage. And I 
guess, you know, building on question period where the 
minister was referencing, you know, the ways to skin a cat, so I 
guess, you know, here we are now. The cat must be out of the 
gafflebag in terms of where they’re going with this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But it’s pretty interesting. I guess language also plays a lot, as I 
was very interested to listen to my colleague, the member from 
Rosemont or Deputy Leader, talking about the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh, and you can always hear the member from 
Canora-Pelly clear as a bell, Mr. Speaker. There is never any 
sort of question about that. But it was interesting listening to the 
exchange earlier in question period wherein, you know, when 
the facts aren’t working for you, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
debate in this legislature, you see something else happen. So we 
had a fine example of that very dynamic earlier in question 
period where, you know, when it came to answering the 
question straight up, we heard some very interesting things 
coming from the Minister for SaskBuilds that, you know, were 
more than a little passing strange, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just wanted to get a few things on the record in terms of 
this debate. You know, interestingly enough, yesterday we had 
the Back to the Future Day, and certainly 30 years ago the way 
that launched forward to this very day in the future. But that 
was of course back in 1985, Mr. Speaker, and so 30 years ago 
of course there was a group of men and women that had the 
privilege to serve as the government of Saskatchewan that made 
a bunch of choices at that time that we arguably went to pay on 
for the next 30 years. And in terms of the way that that, you 
know . . . I’d certainly came of age. I was able to cast my first 
vote in the 1991 election. And the way that we spent the ’90s 
paying for the ’80s in this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
interesting to see how this government has gone back to the 
future with P3s in terms of the 30 years that they want to put 
that load on future generations to come. 
 
And it’s interesting. When they first came to government, Mr. 
Speaker, they had, you know, roughly $2 billion to burn 
through in terms of cash on hand. They very rapidly 
accomplished that, Mr. Speaker. But then and along at the same 
time when it came to the question of P3s, well you know at that 
point in time, they took a look and said no, that’s not a good 
approach to take, Mr. Speaker. And so, you know, the time 
passes by. The finances tighten up. We’re going to be very 
interested to see how the public accounts read for the current 
year, Mr. Speaker, because arguably the fact that they dressed 
up $700 million in borrowing at the time of the last budget and 
said, you know, deficit . . . What deficit? Nothing to see here, 
and just keep on moving. 
 
Well that was a very interesting approach and it was also again 
kind of back to the future in terms of what happened in this 
province in the 1980s in terms of the way that decisions were 
made and presented. And you know, finances that were 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7449 

presented as rosy for one budget, later on found out, you know, 
to have a billion-dollar deficit attached. So how this is going to 
wind up, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ll see, but in some ways 
we’ve seen this movie before. We’ve seen Back to the Future 
here in this province before. And we see with this government 
moving decisions to the out years that will have a big impact on 
the finances of the province, and essentially kicking it down the 
line for, you know, the next generation to pay and the 
generation after that, which again is in keeping very much with 
the historic approach of this government. 
 
In terms of the project itself, Mr. Speaker, let there be no 
mistake. We want to see a bypass built around the capital city. 
We want to see it built right. We want to see it in the right 
location, and we want to see it for the right price. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something that’s been particularly 
challenging in terms of keeping track of the moving target that 
this Sask Party government has presented as to what the real 
cost of the project is. And you know, that it’s into a P3 and that 
somehow the way that they’re going to enter into a bunch of 
undertakings for the people of Saskatchewan, but that they can’t 
be straight-up with the people of Saskatchewan as to what the 
details of those are, what the dollars and cents involved are, Mr. 
Speaker, is troubling. And then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, 
where you’ve seen this project go by leaps and bounds up to 
$1.88 billion is, I would submit, cause for great concern. And 
that of course doesn’t even include the cost attached to land 
assemblage. 
 
So why are we here with a P3? Well because it’s interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. This of course comes out of the Build Canada 
Fund, and P3 was one of the conditions put in place by the 
federal government to get access to federal dollars for the 
infrastructure project. And there are other projects that, you 
know, have been raised in this very Chamber, Mr. Speaker, that 
that was certainly the condition put in place by the federal 
Conservative government. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
to dwell on the events of the week too much, but that 
government of course was just thrown out on its ear. 
 
And I’ll be very interested to see what sort of projects come 
forward from the federal government and whether or not they’ll 
have this hold-the-partners-hostage condition as regards you’ve 
got to buy into a privatization scheme or you don’t get any 
federal dollars. We’ll be very interested to see whether or not 
that’s the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the deal that they bought into, even in that case, 
Mr. Speaker, if you’ve got all the details on the table, if you’ve 
got all the information out there and it’s somehow worth it to 
take up that federal involvement for the project and that makes 
the trade-off worthwhile, that is worth consideration. But the 
problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that of course we don’t have 
all the information on the table. And we’ve had further 
demonstration of that here today in terms of the Minister for 
SaskBuilds not being completely forthright with the case that 
this government is trying to, that this government is labouring 
mightily around in terms of P3s and their approach to 
infrastructure, following again on the way that the federal 
Conservative Stephen Harper government held the provincial 
partners and municipal partners hostage to P3-contingent 
programs. So whether or not it was worth that, we’ll see. But in 
the interim, Mr. Speaker, we want to see real progress on the 

bypass. 
 
But there are some things that this government could do right 
away that you’d think would be relatively short order, but this 
government has dug in its heels and refuses to listen to the 
community. And we’ve heard reference to the community from 
members opposite, and I’d . . . You know, I don’t know what 
they have to say to the families of those who have to navigate 
this dangerous stretch of road every day in terms of the way that 
they’ve made it very clear that they want to see traffic lights on 
that stretch of highway, Mr. Speaker. And you know, there’s no 
recognition of the concerns that those folks are bringing 
forward, and the way that it’s a matter of life and death for 
many of those families, Mr. Speaker. But instead you get a lot 
of again, you know, ideological spin in terms of the virtues of 
P3 approaches to public infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some things that this government could 
and should be doing immediately to improve the situation 
around safety on that stretch of the highway, and they don’t do 
it, which is a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
There are things that this government could be doing in terms of 
providing the information on the full deal, to put all the facts on 
the table for Saskatchewan people to take a good hard look at 
and see whether or not this all adds up. And they don’t do it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a very selective reading of the Provincial Auditor’s 
report on the P3 approach of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
where they like to, they like to say, you know, one thing about 
. . . They like to pick and choose from what the auditor’s having 
to say, but they don’t provide the fuller quotation of what the 
Provincial Auditor has to say. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve seen that dynamic at play with this government before, 
up to and including when the Provincial Auditor of course 
rejected the books in one budget, much to the embarrassment of 
that government and which they went in the future to fix. But 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, those were the lengths that the auditor 
had to go to to get a fair reckoning of the province’s finances 
from that government, to fail the audit of the province’s books. 
Again, an historic development in the history of this province’s 
finances. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very much in favour of this 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
the debate about a very important issue for the people of Regina 
and of course the constituents that I represent on the east side of 
our Queen City. 
 
It’s interesting and a little bit unfortunate, I think, the NDP 
choose to play politics with such a serious issue. I wonder why 
now though. I mean this is, as the member from Cut Knife 
mentioned, this has been 20 years in the making. It’s been 
talked about. It’s been studied. It’s been re-studied. It’s been 
studied again. And of course they never got the job done. And 
but now, just to get a few headlines, I think, they’re bringing it 
up in debate today, which is fine. That’s fine. We’ve talked 
about it. It was brought up in question period as well. 



7450 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

I think we have to realize that none of us in this room are 
professionals. We’re not experts. We’re not masters of 
engineering. Somebody that’s been with the Ministry of 
Highways for 20 or 30 years, which is what many of the folks 
in the ministry have, they’re experts in this area, and we rely on 
advice from them. 
 
And it’s also important to mention that all the stakeholders 
involved, the only people that aren’t onside are those across the 
way, the nine across the way. And all the cities in favour of it, 
all the communities in the White Butte region east of Regina are 
onside. They just want to get this done, Mr. Speaker. All the 
stakeholders are onside with the project as is. 
 
I’ve heard some concerns from the members opposite about the 
location of the bypass. I was going to talk a little bit about that 
today. They say, why have it within city limits? Why not 30 
kilometres outside the city to avoid the city? Well I think you 
still want, and we see this in other major jurisdictions across 
Western Canada . . . I think of Stoney Trail in Calgary. I’ve 
driven on that road before. It allows you to not have to go 
through No. 1 right through the city of Calgary with all the 
lights, similar to the situation we have on Victoria Avenue East 
here in Regina in my constituency. But those roads, they’ve 
been done in several stages. 
 
And it was referenced here today as well that the NDP are 
onside with using a P3 approach. And it’s a very similar project 
to what we have here in Regina, the Stoney Trail project, 
Anthony Henday Drive in Edmonton. Those are all perimeter 
roads being done by P3s. And they’ve been endorsed by 
auditors and experts in the field. 
 
But those are within city limits, within those city limits. It 
allows traffic within the city to access that perimeter highway. 
If you have it 30, 40 kilometres outside the city, local traffic 
won’t be able to use that. 
 
I know at 8 o’clock in the morning, 5 o’clock in the afternoon 
coming back east, there’s a lot of residents in southeast Regina. 
That area of the city is growing rapidly. I live out there, and 
there’s new projects being considered for that area of the city, 
new residential housing, thousands of more commuters. 
 
When you go at 8 in the morning as I mentioned earlier, there is 
a lot of traffic on Arcola Avenue. There’s a lot of traffic. 
There’s a lot of traffic on Victoria Avenue East, okay. So going 
into the city, going west, it is a traffic jam. In Saskatchewan we 
would consider it a traffic jam. Now coming back east at 5 
o’clock, there is a lot of traffic on Arcola, okay. 
 
So now with the bypass location that is chosen now, if 
somebody in the morning at 8 o’clock isn’t going downtown, 
they don’t have to take Arcola. They can use the bypass to go to 
the airport, to the west side of the city. So that will help 
alleviate local traffic, okay. That’s done in other cities. That’s 
one of the reasons why the location is on the east side, south of 
the No. 1 Highway near Tower Road. So the other reason is 
utility moves. You’ll be able to avoid having to go over another 
set of railway tracks. 
 
Now the members opposite, they want to use Highway 46. And 
I thought it was interesting in committee earlier this year, the 

member from Athabasca, he said the day before — I think he’s 
reasonably well versed in his portfolio — but he said he went 
out for a drive the day before and looked around and he said, 
yes, 46 is where it should be. Ignore all the experts in the 
ministry, all the professionals involved, the, you know, 
high-paid professionals that are within the ministry that have 
been experts for many years. He just took a drive around and 
said, that’s the one we got to go, based on I’m not sure what. 
And I would ask them if the members opposite have an 
independent set of engineers that have looked at this, costed it 
out, figured that maybe that is the right route. 
 
And I think everybody acknowledges that, of course, there’s no 
perfect route. There’s no perfect route. People are going to be 
not too happy with it whatever route was chosen, okay. Now 
46, there’s lots of roadblocks in that way if you’ve been out 
there that way. There’s golf courses. There’s the correctional 
facility, the city dump, the refinery, Evraz Place. Now, you 
know, how would you snake through that area? There would 
still be landowners not happy. There would be a lot of 
roadblocks that way. And he’d end up with two parallel roads 
that do the same thing. You’d still need overpasses on No. 1 
East. You’d still need those overpasses on No. 1 East even if 
the NDP route, Highway 46, was considered. 
 
Now earlier in the year we heard from the member from 
Rosemont that he wanted to stop the project. He wanted to 
pause the project but still do the overpasses on No. 1 East. So 
he wants to stop the project but still do the overpasses. Does 
that . . . I don’t know if that makes sense. That’s what the 
project is. That’s what the project is. So stop the whole process. 
I don’t know if I agree with that line of reasoning. That’s their 
plan, or I don’t know. They’re not real good on plans but maybe 
their random thoughts on the situation . . . It would cost way 
more money. You’d have to build passes, overpasses on No. 1 
and 46. And again let’s remember, this is first and foremost a 
safety issue. Rip up contracts, having to retender things, as my 
colleague from Walsh Acres mentioned, adding more time to 
the project. 
 
We have all sorts of stakeholder groups here, and I’ll just 
mention one from Lain Lovelace, in her letter, and I’ll quote 
here: “In our view, any delay in order to retender is not 
acceptable and could result in further loss of life as well as 
added expense to taxpayers.” That’s how it is. Here’s the 
residents. Here’s the experts. And on the other side we have the 
NDP playing politics, which is certainly unfortunate. 
 
I know the member from Rosemont talks a lot about, he’s 
worried about a French conglomerate. Of course we’ve seen in 
other P3 projects, over three-quarters of the contracts, the 
subcontracts go to local firms. So that’s money going here. It’s 
not going to Paris. It’s not going wherever. It’s happening right 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, this project . . . There’s a lot more I wish 
I could have talked about. Stakeholder groups have come on 
board that . . . This is the project; let’s finally get it done. We 
wish the NDP would get on board. We want to get this project 
done for the safety of residents and those travelling on the No. 1 
Highway through Saskatchewan. Let’s just finally get it done, 
and we’re doing it. 
 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7451 

The Speaker: — Oral questions. I recognize the Opposition 
House Leader. Sorry, just wait . . . This should be the 
government side that asks first. I recognize the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We held a 
technical briefing specifically for the NDP on the safety of the 
bypass two weeks ago. Our most senior engineers explained 
fully to the NDP that traffic light installation on this area is not 
appropriate for this stretch of highway. After this meeting, the 
NDP walked out, gave a press release on the need for traffic 
lights on Highway 1. Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina 
Rosemont: why does the NDP think they know more than the 
province’s senior engineers, and why are they playing politics 
with this very important issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — There were many questions that 
certainly I brought forward in that briefing which weren’t 
answered. Part of it were questions around the actual part of 
them which weren’t . . . were relating directly to the traffic 
studies and around accidents. 
 
One of the studies that government’s been referencing, they’ve 
been saying that there’s an increase in rear end collisions. What 
they failed to tell Saskatchewan people is that there’s an overall 
decrease in accidents and a massive reduction in right-angle and 
left-angle collisions in properly utilizing traffic lights, which are 
utilized frankly right across this country on Highway No. 1 and 
certainly right through into Alberta as well. 
 
Those families have had delayed action to get the overpasses 
they deserve. They deserve safety. And as an interim measure, 
traffic lights are important to them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member from Dewdney, the families and the communities that 
are up and down that stretch of highway and that have had to 
deal with death and some pretty serious collisions along that 
stretch want to see traffic safety lights installed there. So my 
question to the member from Regina Dewdney: why is he 
against installing traffic safety lights on that stretch of highway, 
and why is he against listening to the people that have had to 
deal with that danger there day in and day out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. Of course a 
serious issue. We listened to the engineers, the experts in the 
area. But what we really need is bypasses. And the NDP plan or 
their random thoughts on it are just to have more delays, more 
studies. Let’s look at it longer. Let’s look . . . You know, we 
want to get this done. They looked at it when they were in 
government for 16 years. Never got it done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re getting it done. I think everybody agrees. All the 
stakeholders agree that the best solution long term is to get the 
overpasses done as soon as possible. The plan we’ve got going, 
the P3 plan, is the best way. The NDP wants to pause, delay. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to go that way. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. Safety is our . . . Mr. Speaker, safety is the 
top priority for our government. We believe the bypass is a 
long-term solution to improve safety on Highway 1 east of 
Regina. After working with expert, independent engineers and a 
study done by AECOM in 2011, it was determined that the 
interchange on Highway 1 were the safest method, safer than 
the NDP’s proposed project that would set back construction of 
the bypass by two years, putting safety, putting Saskatchewan 
lives at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Elphinstone, why 
would you insist on your proposed bypass plan which would 
delay construction and put Saskatchewan lives at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
guess we’re bringing forward the positions that we’re arguing 
for in this House precisely because we are listening to the 
communities and to the families that have been affected by 
collisions along this very dangerous stretch of the highway. We 
want to see action, you know, right darn quick in terms of 
bypasses and overpasses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
But we also wanted to see action on the speed limit in that part 
of the world. That was something that that government finally 
listened to after being dragged there kicking and screaming. 
And we’d like them to see, exhibit that same spirit of listening 
when it comes to installing traffic lights. 
 
Again it’s not that this is any sort of particular . . . something 
that the opposition has pulled out of thin air, Mr. Speaker. This 
is coming directly from the families and the communities that 
are affected by this. They are calling for those traffic lights and 
calling for them today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is going to be to the member from Walsh Acres. And 
it’s really important to note, I noticed the member from 
Dewdney mentioned the 16 years the NDP government was in 
power. Mr. Speaker, for the record, it took us 14 years of the 16 
years to clean up the last Tory mess because of the 
billion-dollar boondoggles of his provincial counterparts in the 
1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s incumbent upon us today to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, this boondoggle is now five times the original 
amount. And, Mr. Speaker, our basic argument is, there are 
certain components of the Regina bypass we can put in place 
immediately, Mr. Speaker. Immediately we can put them in 
place, Mr. Speaker. We’re not arguing that. What we’re arguing 
about, the fact that this is five times what its original cost was. 
 



7452 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

My question to the member from Walsh Acres is, what’s his 
interpretation of a bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s an interesting question coming from the member from 
Athabasca. And first and foremost, I think I want to tell him 
that he brings up the ’80s a whole bunch and I don’t really 
remember that that much because I was two years old. 
 
But let’s talk about the Regina bypass, and this right now is that 
the fact that . . . It’s not a billion-dollar boondoggle, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a project that’s going to save the lives of people all 
across our province and it’s an important project for the safety 
of citizens across the province. And for him to be playing silly 
politics with it . . . We take the advice of the experts on what we 
should be doing on these projects, and we feel that the safety of 
the citizens is most important. And this will not be a 
billion-dollar boondoggle, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be a 
project that’s going to save the lives of citizens across the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 
building the bypass faster, better, and at a lower cost. If the 
members opposite had it their way, the bypass would take at 
least an extra two years and it would not allow any 
opportunities to drive innovation. It would also cost an extra 
billion dollars, a billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, to the member 
from Rosemont: when will you stop playing politics and admit 
that your proposal would cost more in time, dollars, and 
especially safety? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the people across 
Saskatchewan and those within those communities would see 
that question for the utter nonsense that it is. We’ve been 
pushing with Saskatchewan people in those communities for 
meaningful action and an urgent response for a long time to 
make sure that that very dangerous corridor is safe. They need 
traffic lights. They need overpasses as quick as possible. 
 
Instead, this government has delayed and dismissed those 
concerns, delayed action. And now we’re caught up in a 
complex, convoluted boondoggle of a route that is coming in in 
a very, very strange location inside the city instead of delivering 
for Saskatchewan people, wasting money in the process and 
wasting a lot of time that could have been spent responding in 
an urgent way to the safety concerns of those communities in 
this province. 
 
We need to get this right. We need a bypass that works. And it 
doesn’t make sense to be caught up in this complex deal with 
this Paris outfit that’s gone from $400 million to $2 billion. 
Let’s get traffic lights. Let’s get overpasses. And let’s get a 
route that works. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And again 
we see some highly selective quoting from members opposite 
when it comes to the Provincial Auditor’s thoughts on the way 
this government is stacking up P3s onto the backs of future 
generations for them to pay for. But I guess a question, Mr. 
Speaker: the auditor, Judy Ferguson, said in June that the 
government’s approach to P3 justification is “full of estimates. 
It’s full of assumptions.” With the minister unable to answer 
even the most basic questions on costing, does the member 
from Regina Dewdney agree with the Provincial Auditor that 
their estimates are full of estimates and full of assumptions, 
which is a polite way to say, you know, you can’t count on 
them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, the minister mentioned or 
talked about this earlier. The value-for-money report will be 
released, full transparency. Mr. Speaker, I know the NDP don’t 
like P3s. They’re ideologically against it. They’re used to not 
getting things done. It will take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed for 75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bond 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Draude.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very excited 
to get up again. This is, I think, my second time to talk on social 
impact bonds. And more importantly, there’s many aspects to 
the social impact bonds, but mostly about how our government 
is taking new and innovative ways to be able to solve problems 
that are existing here, current today. We’re not looking 
backwards. We’re not doing the same old thing that the NDP 
did. We’re actually moving forward, talking to people, talking 
to the private sector, and finding out how we can solve these 
problems in a better way, a more efficient way, and involving 
private dollars to be able to help out with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to be able to talk about a few things. I want to talk about 
what are social impact bonds, just so everybody understands 
that. I want to talk about who is involved, because this isn’t just 
a government driven objective. There’s lots of other people 
involved, from Egadz to Conexus Credit Union. I want to talk 
about Sweet Dreams, the project that we’re specifically talking 
about, the first social impact bond that was brought into Canada 
by the former minister of Social Services, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, and carried forward by the current 
Minister of Social Services to be able to look at things in a 
different way. 
 
I’m going to talk about the accountability of this, because this is 
something that the opposition is very much on, is the 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7453 

accountability. And we have several checks and balances into 
our social impact bond agreement with Sweet Dreams, to be 
able to make sure that our goals are being met, the goals of the 
investors are being met, but most importantly that the goals of 
the clients and the people that are participating in the Sweet 
Dreams, that they are moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to talk about a few other things. I want to talk about 
the private sector and exactly how we as the government and as 
governments across Canada are engaging the private sector to 
be able to work with the government to achieve the goals of the 
government, but more importantly to achieve the goals of the 
community in and around that. 
 
So I’m going to start off with, Mr. Speaker, about the history of 
social impact bonds and talk a little bit about that. It’s been 
mentioned in this House before that the social impact bonds 
started in the United Kingdom. It expanded to Australia, the 
United States, and since 2010 there have been more than 20 
social impact bonds used in these countries. Now these are 
countries that are very progressive in trying to move the people 
forward that are having difficult times. 
 
The specific social impact bond is about Sweet Dreams, Mr. 
Speaker. That is about helping single moms to be able to 
achieve their goals while still maintaining a relationship and 
having their children with them. And the dollars that we save in 
not having to put these children in foster care is important, Mr. 
Speaker, but the most important thing is that the relationship of 
the family is still there and that the people who are participating 
in this feel comfortable, feel safe, and they feel like they are 
valued, that they can try to be able to move their lives forward. 
And I have some specific quotes about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we decided to do the Sweet Dreams project, 
this wasn’t something that just came out of left field as the 
opposition always likes to think that these things are just 
created by us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Their ideas come from left field. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well their ideas do come from left field, but 
the social impact bond is a very important component to be able 
to move women and children, and these are vulnerable women 
that are very much at risk. And we want to make sure that their 
risk is minimized by being included in a safe environment. 
Everybody wants to feel safe, Mr. Speaker. Everybody wants to 
feel that they have an opportunity to move themselves forward. 
 
Now moving themselves forward sometimes is slowing the 
movement backwards. It’s not always leaps and bounds that we 
move forward, Mr. Speaker, but sometimes we have to slow the 
progression going backwards. First we deal with that; then we 
create an environment to be able to move people forward, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s exactly what we’re doing. We’re moving 
young women that are mothers forward in life to be able to 
complete their education, to be able to maintain a job. 
 
And most importantly, more than the economic side of it is, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the family side of it. The family side is by far the 
most important, so those young children that are part of the 
Sweet Dreams project are able to know their mother and be able 
to live in a safe environment with their mother. 

Now I’m going to talk a little bit about who’s involved because 
again this wasn’t something that the government went out and 
said, we have to do this. This was something that the private 
industry came to us and said, we want to help. We want to be 
able to help people that are vulnerable within our own 
community. We have champions out there. We have our side of 
it. We have the public servants. We have the ministry officials. 
We had the minister, the former minister all trying to move this 
forward, Mr. Speaker. But we had the private sector. We have 
champions in the community of Saskatoon like Colleen and 
Wally Mah. 
 
Now Colleen and Wally Mah have built a . . . started with a 
very small business and have created a large housing business 
program that they help building houses in Saskatoon and 
Regina as well as Martensville and some of the bedroom 
communities in and around Saskatoon. They have accumulated 
a very great amount of respect for the community and for 
people that are helping. They want to be able to give back. They 
approached, said, how can we help out? How can we help 
vulnerable women and their families move forward? 
 
We also have people like, a pillar in the community-based 
organization like Egadz. Egadz and Don Meikle, they are 
absolutely pillars of the community, respected by certainly this 
government, also respected by the community-based 
organizations in Saskatoon and across Saskatchewan, nationally 
as well. They are the ones that run the program. 
 
We recognize as government that there are people that are 
experts in the industry. We just heard the debate earlier about 
the Regina bypass. We rely on experts in the industry. The 
experts in this industry just happen to be Egadz and their 
program to be able to move these vulnerable women and 
children into a safe environment. 
 
We also have some private, some corporate, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker. We have the Conexus Credit Union. They stepped up 
to the plate and CEO [chief executive officer] Eric Dillon. And 
I have some quotes from him later on, Mr. Speaker, to be able 
to say why they got involved, why they thought that this was 
the best opportunity for them to invest their clients’ money. No 
different than we as government. We are investing taxpayer 
dollars in this. We’re accountable for that. The credit union is 
accountable to their clients and to their boards. 
 
And I just heard this morning, Mr. Speaker, from the former 
minister of Social Services, how they took a video of what they 
were doing at Sweet Dreams, how they took what they were 
doing on a local level within Saskatoon and they showed it to 
their national board. They had a YouTube video, Mr. Speaker, 
on what it is exactly they’re doing, why are they investing this. 
This was received with overwhelming support from the board 
and from the members of the Conexus Credit Union because 
they want to make sure that their money is being invested in a 
responsible way, no different than this government wants to see 
that the taxpayer dollars are being invested in a responsible 
way, Mr. Speaker. So when we partner with other corporate 
entities as well as the community-based organizations, that’s the 
critical financial part of it. But what we’re doing it for as I’ve 
said before, Mr. Speaker, is we’re doing it for the families. 
 
Now I’ve got a quote here from The StarPhoenix on May 13th, 



7454 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

2014 and this is by Chantal McLaren. This is why we’re doing 
this, Mr. Speaker. This is why Conexus Credit Union is doing 
this. This is why Egadz is doing this. This sums it up. Chantal 
said, “Sweet Dreams will give other young mothers the same 
opportunity. They’ll be able to keep their children and excel in 
life, have a . . . better future.” I couldn’t have said it better 
myself, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the women and children making 
a better life for themselves, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it’s all 
about. 
 
We can talk about the economics. We can talk about whether 
you philosophically agree with social impact bonds or not, but 
what this government is doing, Mr. Speaker, is we are finding 
new and innovative ways to be able to help people out. Now 
that just doesn’t apply to social impact bonds. That goes back to 
what we were talking about in question period about surgical 
wait lists. We were talking about the Regina bypass. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Our government isn’t afraid to look at opportunities, to also 
consult with the private sector to be able to find out what they 
think we should be doing as government and balance that off 
what we’re hearing from the general population, Mr. Speaker, 
and try to find new and different ways to be able to move the 
whole province forward, Mr. Speaker. And the whole province 
moves forward starting with a young woman and her child. 
That’s how things are moved forward, Mr. Speaker. It is on the 
small steps that we make as a government and as a community 
to be able to move people forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to talk a little bit about Sweet Dreams. I’ve talked 
about the participants, who’s in there, who’s involved — the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Egadz, as well as the credit 
union. Certainly Colleen and Wally Mah are critically important 
to this project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what is important to me as an elected official, Mr. Speaker, 
is the accountability, the accountability from many levels. 
We’re accountable to obviously the taxpayers on this side. We 
have the credit union that is accountable to their investors, their 
board members, and all of the members of the credit union. We 
have Colleen and Wally Mah who are accountable to their 
company and their stakeholders. But the important part is the 
accountability that is actually built into this from our 
perspective. This isn’t just putting money in. Because we’ve 
seen what happens when you just . . . you have a different 
opinion of how to solve a problem. Like the opposition has, Mr. 
Speaker, is always throwing more money at it. 
 
Well throwing more money at the problem hasn’t fixed 
anything. It certainly didn’t fix anything when they had the 
honour of sitting on this side for 16 long, dark years. They were 
throwing more money at the problem, not fixing anything, but 
just throwing money at the problem, Mr. Speaker. We are 
looking at how we are accountable to the taxpayers, how we are 
accountable, most importantly, to the clients. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the accountability that’s built into 
this because there are goals, Mr. Speaker. There are goals for 
the participants in this to be able to move themselves forward. 
We have specific goals. We’ve agreed to this, the investors have 
agreed to it, and the participants have agreed to it. 

Some of the goals that the participants have to hold themselves 
accountable for, Mr. Speaker, is all 14 mothers enrolled in 
education to complete grade 12 or secondary education. 
Because we know, Mr. Speaker, in order to be able to move 
yourself forward, there has to be an educational base that you 
have, Mr. Speaker. You just can’t leap and bound through the 
world on a hope and a prayer. You have to have a minimum of 
a grade 12 education and then be able to enhance that by 
post-secondary, now whatever that post-secondary is. But the 
plan, Mr. Speaker, is to keep them moving forward in life and 
keep achieving new goals. 
 
They also have to complete an early childhood development 
diploma program with two participants having secured 
employment in daycares as one of the educational assistants on 
reserve. Four people have successfully continued to 
independent living. Now this is people that have been on the 
program and are starting to move forward, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
already seeing the successes of this. Why wouldn’t we as a 
government and as a community, and as private investors want 
to be in support of this, Mr. Speaker? Again the accountability 
is not just with the Government of Saskatchewan; it is with the 
individuals that are participating. It is also with the investors, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to touch base on a couple of the goals that Egadz, as 
we consider them experts in this industry, some of the goals that 
they wanted to be able to see the participants move forward. 
They want to complete their education — number one, as I said, 
secure employment. Now again, Mr. Speaker, with an 
educational base, the employment side of it, the opportunities 
open up. Now we’re not just looking at making sure that they’re 
securing temporary employment, we want them to have a 
career, Mr. Speaker. And a career is critically important for the 
long-term success of the participants of the program. 
 
They have to have some life skills. They have to have activities 
such as life skills training and parenting classes. As yourself, 
Mr. Speaker, as a father and myself as a father, we didn’t get 
any book to tell us how to raise our kids. I got a huge, huge 
book on how to run my phone and how to run my television, 
but I didn’t get anything to tell me on how to be a father. I 
would have loved to have had some parenting classes back then 
to be able to improve my skills because I think we can always 
be improving our skills as a parent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Conexus Credit 
Union. Relatively new to Saskatchewan, the Conexus Credit 
Union, and I’ve had an opportunity to meet with the CEO 
several times, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Dillon is a class act and wants 
to be able to give back into his community, wants to be able to 
say, how can we help because they understand also if they help 
the people that are in the community, that enhances their 
community overall and enhances their clients overall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I want to do is talk a little bit about how the social bond is 
set up, Mr. Speaker. It is based on results, and that’s what I 
firmly believe that this government is about. We’re setting our 
goals and we’re basing our success on the results of that. So 
some of the results is that the bond payouts will be calculated 
based on degree or desired outcome is achieved from a sliding 
scale of 100 per cent down to 75 per cent. So for example, Mr. 



October 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7455 

Speaker, if 100 per cent of the desired outcome — 22 children 
— is achieved, investors will receive 100 per cent of the bond 
payout. They’ve met their goals; we meet our obligations on the 
financial side of things. If 75 per cent of the desired outcome — 
for example, 17 children — is achieved, repayment to the 
investors will be 75 per cent. 
 
So there’s some financial motivation in there to be able to make 
the . . . to help the participants, not make them, Mr. Speaker, to 
help the participants be successful. But I can tell you, in talking 
to Colleen and Wally Mah and Eric, Mr. Dillon from Conexus 
Credit Union, they’re not doing it for the financial reasons, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not their goal. Obviously they have some 
financial impact on this, and it’s good to see different people 
and different organizations put some skin in the game, Mr. 
Speaker, because their personal goal is to help women succeed 
and help their children succeed. 
 
I want to talk about a couple of other things, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know I’m standing in between us and lunch, Mr. Speaker, 
which is never a good spot to be, and also an adjournment till 
Monday. So I promised my House Leader and the House 
Leader across that I wouldn’t carry the debate forever, but I do 
want to touch base on a couple of things. 
 
I want to talk a little bit — and this is going to be on a little bit 
of the political side, Mr. Speaker — I want to talk about 
different things, the difference between an innovative idea and 
just a bad idea. Now the innovative ideas that we’ve done as 
government are certainly, first and foremost, working with the 
people. Surgical wait times: worst when they were in 
government; best when we’re in government, the best ones in 
. . . [inaudible]. We’re building, these are innovative ideas: P3 
schools, P3 bypasses, how we can get them built faster. We can 
get them built cheaper, and they’re safe for the people that are 
using them.  
 
Now I’m going to talk — there’s some innovative ideas, Mr. 
Speaker — but I’m going to talk about, a little bit about bad 
ideas. And I know this list has been read out in the House many, 
many times, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s worth reminding 
everybody out there about what had happened in the past and 
what is happening now. This does not get brought up enough, 
Mr. Speaker, and it certainly doesn’t get touched on by the 
media enough, what the opposition did while they had the 
honour of sitting inside this House. They talk about 
accountability in question period. They talk about how 
transparent things should be. I think they need to have a little 
look backwards, Mr. Speaker, when they had the honour of 
sitting on this side of the House and what they did. 
 
Nobody knew about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]. SPUDCO came out of left field. And I 
think the last dollar amount that I have on SPUDCO was $35 
million that they lost. Idea — bad idea, not an innovative idea. 
Again, $90 million lost on Navigata. That’s one of those things 
that people just don’t remember. 
 
We want people to continue to make sure that they are always 
looking . . . holding their government accountable, always 
looking for new and innovative ideas to make sure that we are 
doing things right, Mr. Speaker. Certainly not throwing money 
away in bingos. 

And I can’t stress this enough. I have a total. I can go through 
the long list. Some of my colleagues were here, and they had 
. . . They were sitting in opposition at the time while the 
government of the day was just writing cheques and just 
freewheeling, Mr. Speaker. We don’t do that, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a total that they lost of $303 million over the . . . 
[inaudible]. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is why when we make an investment — 
back to the social impact bonds — we have partners. We’re just 
not freewheeling government money out there, spending like a 
certain kind of sailor. And I won’t say it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
want to be unparliamentary. 
 
We just didn’t cut cheques. We are making sure that we have 
the experts in the industry working with us, like Egadz. We 
have corporate Saskatchewan with Conexus Credit Union, 
being able to help us out financially. And most important, Mr. 
Speaker, again back to my original thought of what I started this 
out with, this is about the families, the mothers and their 
children being successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would really like to be able to talk about this for another 34 
minutes, Mr. Speaker, and if my colleagues will indulge, I 
might just. What I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is there’s a 
few things: back to the innovative ideas, Mr. Speaker, back to 
where how we’re looking at making sure that we are moving 
everybody in the province forward, back to our economic plan. 
We haven’t heard a plan from the opposition, but we are able to 
invest in programs like social impact bonds with the taxpayer 
dollars by having a strong economy, Mr. Speaker. And if we 
don’t have a strong economy, then we can’t do this. 
 
We cannot continue to just spend money and shuffle it down the 
road and spend it. It just doesn’t make any sense whatsoever. I 
fundamentally don’t understand how we can . . . The concept of 
what they’re talking about on the bypass and several other 
projects is just wait and wait and wait. Well they waited. They 
talked about what they wanted to do. They talked about the 
health science building. They talked about the children’s 
hospital. I’m sure at some point they talked about social impact 
bonds. 
 
The difference is the rubber never ever hit the road with them 
over there, Mr. Speaker. The rubber never hit the road. And 
when we stand up, we are making sure that the rubber is hitting 
the road, but we’re listening. We’re consulting; we’re moving 
forward with what the people of Saskatchewan want us to do. 
They want us to build a children’s hospital. They wanted the 
health science building. They wanted the lowest surgical 
wait-lists in Canada. We didn’t want to be the poor little 
Saskatchewan anymore. We wanted to show everybody in the 
country our potential. And we are leaders, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s why we led on social impact bonds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We took this back. We want to be leading the country. We 
don’t want to have to be, as opposition did when they were 
here, running to Ottawa with their hand out and say, oh can you 
help us out? No, we want to lead. We want to take charge of 
what we’re doing in our own province, and we want to be able 
to show the rest of the provinces, because this is something that 
we can make other provinces interested in. 
 



7456 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2015 

We’re doing this right. We’re holding the investors 
accountable. The people are holding us, the opposition should 
be holding us accountable on this, because I would love for 
them to be able to have this discussion in a year from now when 
we’ve had more successes, when we’ve had more women that 
have gone through Sweet Dreams, and they are moving forward 
in life. They’re holding sustainable education. They’re part of 
our economy, and they’re moving forward. 
 
Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? The best lesson they can 
ever teach their children and the best lesson that any of us could 
teach, is try to succeed. Reach your potential. And we’re 
helping these women and vicariously through the women down 
to their children, we’re helping them reach their potential. 
We’re not throwing them into the foster care system and just 
throwing more money at foster care, Mr. Speaker. Because we 
understand that the foster care system is critically important, but 
if we can take kids and not have them in that system, ever into 
that system, and they can stay with their family and have a 
complete family unit, Mr. Speaker, that is the most important 
success that we will ever have. Take out the financial side of 
things, the best success is that — you know what? — we have 
one generation that we’re helping, and we’re already moving on 
to the next generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that my time is getting somewhat 
limited, and I want to make sure that I get the motion on record. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to emphasize to anybody who’s 
watching this, that this government is making sure that we are 
successful. And the reason that we’re successful is for the 
people of Saskatchewan, not just a certain segment of the 
people of Saskatchewan, but all the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the only way that we can do that, Mr. Speaker, is by 
having a strong economy so we can invest in this program. 
Because having a strong economy shows a confidence to 
Colleen and Wally Mah to say yes, we’re investing in a strong 
economy, and we’re making sure that the government is 
investing in us. 
 
[12:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will read the motion. It says, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of social impact 
bonds to leverage private funding in order to provide 
specific services for our province’s most vulnerable. 
Furthermore, this is a new type of social innovation, will 
break down barriers between ministries, and provide 
tangible benefits for human services. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and at this 
point I will move adjournment. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on private member’s motion no. 2. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: —This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:31.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7433 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7433 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7433 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7433 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7433 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7433 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7434 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7434 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7434 
 Fun Run Supports Student Wellness Initiative 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7435 
 Record Aboriginal and International Student Enrolment at the University of Saskatchewan 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7435 
 Dentistry Student Recognized for Research Project 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7435 
 Southwest Integrated Healthcare Facility Opens 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7435 
 Jubilee Residences Hold Oktoberfest Fundraiser 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7436 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7436 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7436 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7439 
 Maintenance Agreement for Regina Bypass 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7439 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7439 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7440 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7441 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7441, 7451 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7443 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7445, 7451 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7446, 7452 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7448, 7451 
  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 7449, 7451 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7451 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7451 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7452 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bond 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7452 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


