




















































Hansard: April 14, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 14, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6905 

 April 14, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of 

this House to make a statement of a personal nature. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has asked 

for leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Withdrawal of Statement and Apology 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to both sides of the House for granting leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a statement that I made yesterday when sharing a 

concern raised by a Saskatchewan citizen was called into 

question, and the Premier has clarified that it was not accurate. 

So I wish to withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Introduction of guests. 

 

Oh sorry. Just wait. Before you get to that point, I have 

something I want to say here as well. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Question of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: — Under the provisions of rule 12(1) of the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, I received notice of a question of privilege this 

morning, Tuesday, April 14th, 2015 at 11:25 a.m. Upon receipt 

of the notice, in accordance with rule 12(3) I immediately 

informed both House leaders of the details of the case and the 

proposed question of privilege. 

 

At page 267 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, 

2nd Edition, in the section “Where a Member is the subject of a 

question of privilege,” it is stated, “An apology by the 

offending Member will invariably close the matter without the 

necessity of putting the motion to a vote.” 

 

In each of the cases cited, an apology ended the matter. This has 

also been the custom of this and other Assemblies as outlined 

by the precedents cited. In consequence of the apology of the 

member, it is my decision that this case need not go further. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct pleasure to introduce and 

welcome a group of very special guests today, citizens who 

embody the spirit of selfless service to their province. And I am 

speaking of course of our most recent eight recipients of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, which celebrates its 20th 

anniversary this year. Launched in 1995, the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal gives Saskatchewan people a formal way of 

recognizing the contributions of our province’s wonderful 

volunteers. 

 

This morning at Government House during National Volunteer 

Week, which runs this year from April 12th to April 18th, I had 

the privilege of witnessing our Lieutenant Governor present this 

provincial honour to these newest and most deserving recipients 

who work tirelessly and give so much of themselves to their 

communities. Shortly each of these recipients will be 

recognized by members representing these individuals’ towns 

and cities so that their names are read into the official record of 

their Assembly. 

 

On behalf of the Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan, 

I would like to congratulate and thank them for making our 

province a better place. I would ask that all members of this 

Assembly join with me in welcoming these very special 

volunteers from across our great province to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I’d like to join with the Deputy Premier in 

welcoming these distinguished and fine guests to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know we live in a very diverse province. We 

come from different corners, different backgrounds, different 

interests, and different beliefs. We have our differences, but we 

have a lot that brings us together, and that’s the love that we 

have for our province and a willingness to help out our 

neighbours to make our communities as strong and as great as 

we want them to be and as we believe that they can be. 

 

I think that’s shared by all residents in the province, but today 

in the Assembly the eight recipients that we have with us are 

perhaps some of the finest examples that we have in 

Saskatchewan of that true Saskatchewan spirit of contributing, 

of sacrifice, and of really thinking about others ahead of 

themselves. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to 

extend my deep gratitude to the recipients for all that they have 

accomplished in their volunteer careers and also look forward to 

their many accomplishments in the years ahead. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 



6906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2015 

is my privilege to introduce Mr. John Barton from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Southeast who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

privilege to introduce Ms. Tina Bird from the constituency of 

Estevan who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

is my privilege to introduce Mrs. Marnie Eistetter from the 

constituency of Regina South who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Senator Ray Fox from the constituency of The Battlefords who 

today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Chief Warrant Officer (retired) Don McDonald from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Centre who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Lieutenant (retired) 

Harold Ross from the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Ms. 

Edith Slatnik from the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose who 

today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

introduce Mr. Darren Whitehead from the constituency of 

Prince Albert Carlton who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two people who are up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: 

Dave Trann, the mayor of Nipawin; and Chris Hudyma who is 

the economic development officer for Nipawin. And they are 

here on business today, Mr. Speaker, and wanted to come down 

and watch the proceedings. So I’d like all members to please 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater support for better schools here in 

Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our classrooms 

are overcrowded and under resourced and that the Sask Party 

government has eliminated hundreds of educational assistant 

positions. And we know that students often don’t get the 

one-on-one attention they need and that the condition of many 

of our schools are rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and that 

this government refuses to release information on the $1.5 

billion of known repairs that are needed in our schools, and that 

this government’s plan to rent schools from private corporations 

is expensive and reckless. Now none of this is acceptable, given 

the record revenues this government has had over the last eight 

years. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 

schools and start prioritizing students by capping 

classroom sizes, increasing supports for students, and 

developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 

schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to call on this government to act to address the 

unsafe conditions they’ve created on Dewdney Avenue. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 

other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 

basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 

harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 

especially families, seniors, women, and children who face 



April 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6907 

abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 

rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 

government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 

Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 

in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present a petition again today in support of safe staffing levels 

in long-term care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of 

long-term care are deteriorating under this government. The 

petitioners talk about that the Government of Saskatchewan 

need to recognize the need for safe staffing levels to provide 

hands-on care to residents. They point out that the government 

has removed the regulations requiring a minimum standard of 

care for seniors, which has resulted in neglect; and that chronic 

understaffing in long-term care facilities results in unacceptable 

conditions, including unanswered calls for help, infrequent 

bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst residents. The 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. This government 

has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and they have moved all of 

these open-custody youth to Kilburn Hall, which is a secure 

custody unit, to accommodate the residents of Yarrow. The 

provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared he 

can’t endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens could 

be influenced and pressured by close proximity to high-risk 

youth who may be involved in serious crimes or gangs, and 

that Kilburn Hall has a more institutional environment that 

could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed 

minor offences. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a 

caring home environment for youth who have committed 

minor offences, and provide support to help these young 

people redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Ile a la Crosse, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Dalmeny, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

College of Arts and Science Alumni of Influence 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Friday, March 13th, I had the pleasure to attend the sixth annual 

University of Saskatchewan College of Arts and Science 

Alumni of Influence Dean’s Gala and Award Ceremony at TCU 

Place. As always, it’s a wonderful event and it’s important to 

see Saskatchewan people recognized for their contributions 

across our province, our country, and around the world. 

 

This year’s recipients come from all walks of life — from 

academia, the arts, business, and the community activists. The 

diversity and breadth of their accomplishments speak to the 

quality and disciplinary excellence that we have in our 

programming and instruction at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This year’s recipients included Federated Co-op CEO [chief 

executive officer], Scott Banda; former Saskatoon police 

officer, Keith Briant; CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio personalities, Piya Chattopadhyay and 

Robert Enright; renowned scientist and business leader, Heather 

Koshinsky; visual artist, Zachari Logan; Idle No More founder, 

Sheelah McLean; Chinese businessman, Bob Xiaoping Xu; and 

well-known Saskatoon-based poet, playwright, and author, 

Donald Kerr. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating this year’s award 

recipients and also join with me in recognizing important 

contributions that the University of Saskatchewan makes to our 

province’s cultural, intellectual, and community well-being. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Be Kind to Lawyers Day 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this Assembly 

we often have the opportunity to give statements to recognize 

Saskatchewan people who have made real differences in their 

communities. Today I rise to recognize a day overlooked by 

nearly all Canadians, Be Kind to Lawyers Day, and two 

gentlemen . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Seriously, Mr. 

Speaker, and two gentlemen from Saskatchewan who 

personified good practice. They are truly making a difference in 



6908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2015 

the global campaign for democracy. 

 

Mr. Alan McIntyre, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel], a partner at 

McKercher in Regina, and Justice Ted Zarzeczny of the Court 

of Queen’s Bench were part of a Canadian delegation of legal 

experts assisting Ukraine in improving its justice system. The 

Judicial Education for Economic Growth project worked to 

increase core efficiency and fairness, especially for commercial 

disputes. This enables a stronger economic environment for 

Ukrainians. Their efforts will help the Ukraine in meeting 

standards set by the European Union for a strong and 

independent judiciary. This could pave the way for the country 

to achieve membership status. 

 

The pair’s primary focus was on ways to help parties settle legal 

matters without resorting to a full-blown trial. In Saskatchewan, 

the vast majority of civil cases are resolved before trial. In the 

Ukraine, Alan reported that the settlement rate is about 1 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their contributions to the international community 

not only speak to the generosity of Saskatchewan people but 

also the quality of our justice system. I would ask all my 

colleagues in this House to join me in applauding the work of 

Mr. McIntyre and Justice Ted Zarzeczny. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Video Released by Saskatoon Firm 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today to 

recognize a group of Saskatoon entrepreneurs who have really 

got Saskatchewan talking with their latest project. Huw Evans 

and his sons Douglas and Dylan started Eyecatcher Video three 

years ago and produced advertisements, music videos, and short 

films. Huw has worked for more than 30 years as a graphic 

designer and cartoonist in Saskatoon, and one of his recent 

video productions has people all across our province taking a 

look. 

 

Evans says his forte would be his ideas: “a little edgier, a little 

weirder, a little cheesier, a little more retro.” 

 

Eyecatcher’s ad for Saskatoon-based market research firm 

Insightrix is entitled “SaskatcheWHAT?!” and it has gone viral. 

More than 285,000 people from all over the world have 

watched it on YouTube. I’m sure many members here in the 

Assembly have seen the video I’m talking about, which is full 

of subtitled Saskatchewanisms like “The grid on that back 40 is 

brutal”; “I almost hit the rhubarb”; “I bust open a 2-4 of Pil that 

I had just got at the LB.” 

 

I’m sure all members here have received a puzzled look from 

someone who isn’t from Saskatchewan when talking about a 

bunny hug or a matrimonial cake, but I’m glad that Huw and his 

team put this video together to share some of the things that 

make our province unique and different. And this was 

Eyecatcher’s first commercial. I understand that they’re now 

planning the next made-in-Sask instalment, which I’m looking 

forward to. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing Huw and all of the 

people at Eyecatcher and Insightrix whose hard work and 

dedication have captured a lighthearted but important part of 

our province’s cultural and linguistic heritage. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Sutherland Curling Club Exemplifies Community 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday I 

had the great opportunity to bring greetings at the Sutherland 

Curling Club’s annual wind-up banquet. This year’s banquet 

was also the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the curling 

club in its current location and over 100 years in operation. The 

slogan of the Sutherland’s Curling Club is 50 Years in Place 

Planted in 100 Years of Tradition. 

 

Curling is our province’s official sport and one of 

Saskatchewan’s greatest traditions. This tradition remains 

strong, with Saskatchewan curlers achieving great success in 

competitions and communities around the province regularly 

hosting major national and international curling events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sutherland Curling Club exemplifies one of 

the great things about our province — community. Curling 

clubs like Sutherland bring our communities together for 

bonspiels, curling leagues, volunteer opportunities, and 

socializing. Thanks to the local curling rinks, people of all ages 

and abilities can be part of a team and engage in physical 

activity and healthy living. The Sutherland is one of 637 ice 

surfaces to have received the community rink affordability grant 

this year. In recognition of the importance of our rinks in our 

province, our government offers this grant to help ensure that 

the curling clubs and hockey rinks remain in the proper part of 

the community to enjoy for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the Sutherland Curling Club on their 50 years of tradition and 

their windup this last Saturday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Recipients of Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 

Recognized 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this morning in a 

ceremony at Government House, Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor presented the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal to eight 

deserving recipients. This honour is a way to express to 

volunteers the gratitude of their community and to present role 

models for the people of our province. 

 

This year marks the 20th anniversary of the provincial honour 

which was first established in 1995. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

has the highest level of volunteerism in Canada. Following 

today’s ceremony, 174 people have now received this honour 

over the past 20 years. 

 

This year’s recipients are John Barton of Saskatoon, Tina Bird 

of Estevan, Marnie Eistetter of Regina, Ray Fox of North 



April 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6909 

Battleford, Don McDonald of Saskatoon, Harold Ross of Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Edith Slatnik of Outlook, and Darren Whitehead, a 

constituent from Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize Darren Whitehead for 

his 30 outstanding years of volunteer commitment to Special 

Olympics in Saskatchewan. Darren has served as role model, 

leader, mentor, board member, program volunteer, referee, and 

coach to athletes with an intellectual disability during his many 

years volunteering with the Special Olympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

eight of this year’s recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal and in recognizing their exceptional community 

involvement and outstanding commitment as volunteers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Remembering Elmer Lach 

 

Mr. Brkich: — The town of Nokomis in my constituency has 

always been a hotbed for great hockey players. This has 

included Jordan Henry who recently won a Stanley Cup with 

the Chicago Blackhawks. 

 

Yet Nokomis is most famously known as the home of Elmer 

Lach. Mr. Speaker, on April 4th the great Elmer Lach passed 

away in Montreal at the age of 97. Elmer was born in Nokomis, 

Saskatchewan, considered to be one of the best NHL [National 

Hockey League] players of his era. 

 

This small-town Saskatchewan boy really did stay true to his 

roots. Lach twice led the NHL in scoring and was named as the 

league’s most valuable player. At one point he was the NHL’s 

all-time leading scorer and had his name engraved three times 

on the Stanley Cup. Being a well-rounded player, Lach was a 

smooth skater and tough in the corners, making him a valuable 

member for the Canadiens. When Lach’s teammate Rocket 

Richard famously scored 50 goals in 50 games, Lach assisted 

on most of them, including the 50th. 

 

Although Elmer has not lived in Saskatchewan for a number of 

years, there is no doubt the time spent learning the game on his 

parents’ frozen slough growing up made him one of the greats. 

In fact one of the first persons to notice Lach’s talent was a 

town doctor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in joining me in 

recognizing one of the great hockey players to come out of 

Saskatchewan. Elmer Lach will be greatly missed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Saskatchewan Woman Honoured for Heroism 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to inform the 

House of the lifetime achievements of Margaret Brooke and her 

recent exciting announcement. Mrs. Brooke was born in Ardath, 

a village 70 kilometres southwest of Saskatoon. Margaret 

turned 100 years old on Saturday, and she is being honoured 

once again for her heroic actions while on board the SS 

[steamship] Caribou on October 13th in 1942. 

The SS Caribou was torpedoed and sank off the coast of 

Newfoundland. Submerged in the icy waters off the coast of 

Newfoundland, Mrs. Brooke clung to a capsized lifeboat for 

over two hours. In that time she also spotted her friend and 

fellow nurse, Sub-Lieutenant Agnes Wilkie. Margaret held on 

to her friend to keep her from drowning, unfortunately not 

enough to prevent her death from the cold waters. 

 

Margaret’s heroic actions earned her the Order of the British 

Empire. Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Brooke is the only Canadian nurse 

to receive such an honour during the Second World War. Yet in 

addition to this, the Canadian government has announced a 

Canadian Arctic patrol ship will bear her name, the HMCS [Her 

Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Margaret Brooke. 

 

Margaret is truly a Canadian hero and lived her life to the 

fullest since then, including earning a doctorate from the 

University of Saskatchewan. I’d ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Mrs. Margaret Brooke in yet another 

accomplishment, as well as wish her a very happy belated 

birthday. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provision of Seniors’ Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Mike Seon is here today because 

he’s very concerned about the quality of seniors’ care in our 

province. For the last few years his mother has lived in Pioneer 

Village here in Regina. Members will recall that this is the same 

facility that served bologna to the residents on Christmas Day. 

Mike visits his mom almost every single day, and he says this: 

“This is a very scary place that needs to be investigated.” 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to Mike and look into 

these concerns or will the government once again try to 

minimize this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take the question on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an 

opportunity to tour this particular facility. I will perhaps put on 

the record that there was a full turkey meal that was served for 

Christmas, with cold cuts that were served as a lighter meal, 

Mr. Speaker, which happens not just in long-term care facilities 

but I think in homes all across Saskatchewan on Christmas Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to this facility, this is one that we 

know that Regina Qu’Appelle is actively looking at in terms of 

their replacement strategy for long-term care in this region, in 

the city, in the capital city as well as in the rural areas. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve provided dollars for the planning for the 

replacement of long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, in the city 

of Regina. That work does continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re always looking for ways to make 

improvement in seniors’ care, whether that be on replacing 

existing facilities, whether that be on adding dollars for 

equipment, maintenance, Mr. Speaker, as well as for front-line 



6910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2015 

staff. That’s the case not just in the city of Regina but all across 

the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately when families have 

come to the legislature and shared their stories, this government 

hasn’t listened. This government hasn’t recognized their 

concerns, and instead they trumpet, Mr. Speaker, and try to 

minimize the concerns brought forward. 

 

Mike’s mom, Bernal, moved into Pioneer Village in 2011. She 

went from walking, alert, and healthy to malnourished and in a 

wheelchair in just three weeks. She was placed on 

anti-psychotic medication despite not having psychosis. This 

made her zone out, have less of an appetite, and have 

swallowing problems. Mike’s mom went from 105 pounds to 

just 83 pounds, losing 20 per cent of her body weight because 

she could not eat properly and because the front-line workers 

did not have the time to feed her. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

that Mike says that this is a very scary place and that it needs to 

be investigated. 

 

My question to the Premier: does it not alarm the Premier to 

hear care facilities described as scary places? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

certainly I would be very happy to meet with Mike after 

question period to hear first-hand of his concerns of his 

mother’s care, Mr. Speaker. I know that Pioneer Village under 

this government has seen . . . not just in terms of some capital 

replacement dollars for the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

That was in last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. And they continue 

forward with looking at the replacement of long-term capital 

within the city as well as in the rural areas. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know that that facility itself has had an over 

50 per cent increase in their budget over the last seven years, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen a significant increase in some of their 

positions, particularly on the LPN [licensed practical nurse] 

side, Mr. Speaker, that is despite the fact that the number of 

beds, the number of residents in that facility have not changed. 

 

We also have added some other supports, Mr. Speaker, within 

the system — not just long-term care, but the system at large, 

Mr. Speaker. For example, registered dietitians working within 

the health care system are up 40 per cent over the last seven 

years. We know that Regina Qu’Appelle for instance is doing 

some good work when it comes to dietary needs for their 

residents, Mr. Speaker. They have some dollars through the 

Urgent Issues Action Fund, but we’re always looking for more 

ways to make improvements in long-term care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I guess this doesn’t alarm him 

because we hear the exact same dismissive tone coming from 

this government. Mike was absolutely horrified by what he saw 

happening to his mom so he started bringing meals in for her 

every day, which takes about 45 to 90 minutes per meal to be 

feeding her. And he spends a lot of time at the Pioneer facility 

to make sure that his mom’s basic needs are being met. 

 

Now Bernal is very fortunate to have her son around, but not 

every senior in care has that. There are many seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, that are drugged up unnecessarily, not getting fed 

properly, and no one is there to advocate for them. Mike says 

this: “The care at Pioneer Village is far from acceptable, but I 

think the problem goes right up to the ministry.” And Mike 

wonders what it will take for this government to finally get 

serious about fixing seniors’ care. What is the Premier’s 

response to that? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, and again, Mr. Speaker, in the 

absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly we are monitoring, as a Ministry of 

Health working with our regional health authorities and our 

facilities, on a number of key indicators when it comes to the 

quality of the care of seniors. That would include using 

medication without a diagnosis, Mr. Speaker. That would 

include using restraints, falls that take place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ve some good work that has been done in long-term 

care. Not to say that the number is zero today, Mr. Speaker, but 

we have seen some progress and I’d like to note that progress. I 

think people working in the system, trying to make these 

improvements, need to be recognized for their work. 

 

The number of falls in long-term care is down from 13.95 per 

cent, down to under 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. But there is more 

work to be done. The use of daily restraints in long-term care is 

down from nearly 16 per cent, down to 12.7 per cent last year, 

Mr. Speaker. Obviously we need to keep working and getting 

that lower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has always said that there is more 

work to be done in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. But from 

where we’ve come from, Mr. Speaker, the same number of 

residents in care in the last seven years, over nearly 800 

full-time equivalents in care aids, in LPNs, in RNs [registered 

nurses] and other support staffs working in the long-term care 

system, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think that that 

demonstrates that this government wants to make improvements 

when it comes to the long-term care and the seniors’ system for 

those seniors living in care. But as well, Mr. Speaker, for those 

seniors that aren’t in long-term care, may never be in long-term 

care, we need to also keep them in mind. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government that 

removed the minimum regulated care standards that were in 

place, Mr. Speaker. If this government was taking seniors’ care 

in the right direction, we would not be having family after 

family coming forward sharing their heartbreaking stories. 

 

Mike is here today, Mr. Speaker, because he wants this 

government to get serious about fixing seniors’ care here in the 



April 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6911 

province. He wants regulated minimum care standards. He 

wants accountability for when those standards are not met, and 

he wants a seniors’ advocate to help seniors and to help families 

investigate problems when they are identified. My question to 

the Premier: why is he so stubborn on this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again in the 

absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 

Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, again as I’ve said 

in the past, over the last seven years and including in this year, 

Mr. Speaker, we are making improvements and enhancements 

in long-term care, on front-line staff, Mr. Speaker, nearly 800 

full-time equivalents. 

 

From when the members opposite were the government of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, to today, there are more front-line staff 

working in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. There’s more 

investments being made in equipment, in the basic equipment 

that we need in long-term care — mattresses, slings, tubs, etc., 

Mr. Speaker. The Urgent Issues Action Fund identified $10 

million, Mr. Speaker. Most of those dollars have gone out to the 

health regions for equipment that they never had in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. They have now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, we are in the midst of significant capital 

replacement: 13 long-term care facilities, a $250 million 

investment in this province — largely in rural Saskatchewan, 

but not entirely in rural Saskatchewan — as well as the 

changes, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon with an additional number 

of beds in Saskatoon and Swift Current long-term care facility. 

This demonstrates our commitment to seniors in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know the one-time payment 

that this government brought forward, Mr. Speaker, was simply 

a drop in the bucket when we look at the needs that are actually 

there and what health regions themselves are identifying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you speak with front-line providers, if you 

speak with families, they also say you need to look at the actual 

number of people on shifts when we talk about the hands-on, 

front-line care provided. We’ve had care aids come to this 

Assembly and talk about the incredible ratios that they are 

working under, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve had family after family come to the legislature and share 

their concerns about the quality of seniors’ care in this province. 

At last count, the Ombudsman reports that her office has 

received 79 formal complaints about the quality of care in this 

province — not going in the right direction, Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister wants to suggest — 79 formal complaints. That means 

since her last update at the end of January, she’s received an 

additional 44 complaints. The Ombudsman said these 

complaints come from all over the province. 

 

Here’s what is said: “. . . poor quality of care, low 

staff-to-resident ratios, a poor organizational culture within 

facilities, lack of communications with families and residents, 

and a long-term care system lacking in accountability.” Mr. 

Speaker, that doesn’t sound like a seniors’ care system that is 

meeting the needs of Saskatchewan’s seniors in this province. 

 

My question to the Premier: how could he possibly keep 

pretending that there is not a crisis in seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

can indicate to the House and to the member, member opposite, 

members of this House, that in terms of the staff ratio that we 

have working in long-term care — this is for sure, Mr. Speaker 

— it is better, much better, than it was when the members 

opposite left government in 2007. 

 

A 13 per cent increase in staff, front-line staff in long-term care, 

Mr. Speaker, when the number of residents haven’t changed. 

And in fact, the numbers that we have in terms of the average 

case mix index, Mr. Speaker — and CIHI [Canadian Institute of 

Health Information] verified this number and I was able to 

share this in estimates a week and a half ago, Mr. Speaker — 

has remained relatively level in the last seven years. And we 

know that acuity for certain residents is higher, Mr. Speaker, 

but the overall case mix index hasn’t changed. In fact it’s a little 

bit lower today than it was in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more staff working in long-term care. 

Mr. Speaker, we welcome the Ombudsman’s work. There are 

nearly 8,000 residents in our care, in long-term care. We need to 

be working each and every day to provide care that is in a 

compassionate way, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the commitment of 

this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Costs Associated With Smart Meter Program 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

government released the SaskPower annual report today. It 

shows the highest debt ratio in more than 20 years, and it shows 

an extremely low return on investment, down 6 per cent from 

last year. Meanwhile, this government is literally giving away 

millions upon millions of dollars to the failed American 

manufacturer of the smart meters. How can the SaskPower 

minister keep justifying this massive gift of public money to 

this failed American manufacturer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it became apparent that 

there were problems with the smart meters here in 

Saskatchewan, our government ordered their removal and we 

ordered a number of things that would be done with respect to 

it, including the independent review of the entire program. It 

looked into three areas. PricewaterhouseCoopers was 

responsible for assessing the due diligence, the procurement, 

and contract management practices of SaskPower. Robertson 

Stromberg reviewed the contracts between SaskPower and 

various vendors, and Ritenburg & Associates was selected to 

provide an independent assessment of the causes of the fires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, our government negotiated 

through SaskPower with Sensus, the manufacturer. They 



6912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2015 

received $24 million cash refund, $18 million of credit for 

future purchases if they are not able to come up with a meter 

that meets the standards here in Saskatchewan, and $5 million 

for research to provide a meter that could stand the various 

rigorous climatic conditions that we experience here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I noticed the minister 

conveniently left out that he ignored the direct warnings that 

came his way a full two years before he pushed forward with 

this dangerous, costly program. 

 

In fact it’s astonishing that this government’s approach is to, 

with the SaskPower smart meters, continue to put the bottom 

line of this failed manufacturer ahead of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. In addition to the massive total cost of this 

government’s smart meter mess, which continues to be hidden 

by government, nothing in its annual report shows any action to 

recover the 20-some-million dollars of ratepayers’ money that’s 

currently in Sensus’s bank account. Why should Saskatchewan 

families have to pay for this Sask Party government’s fire-prone 

smart meter debacle? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 

member opposite presents is just simply not true. Indeed what 

happened was, is there was a $24 million cash settlement. 

There’s $18 million of future credit if Sensus is able to come up 

. . . If they’re not able to come up with a meter that meets 

Saskatchewan’s standards, we would receive those $18 million 

back. And there’s $5 million more with respect to a research 

program to make sure that that happens. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note 

that the SaskPower officials took full responsibility of it. The 

Government of Saskatchewan apologized to the people of 

Saskatchewan and took full responsibility of it as well, which is 

in sharp contrast to anything that the members opposite ever did 

when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. When you look 

down the list of failures that that NDP [New Democratic Party] 

administration had, time after time after time they never once 

gave any kind of an indication to the people of Saskatchewan 

that they were sorry for their actions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pretty rich, Mr. Speaker, coming from a 

minister who ignored a direct warning, put people’s lives at 

risk, Mr. Speaker, put property at risk and wasted millions upon 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan families have repeatedly seen their power bills 

go up and go up and go up under this Sask Party government. 

So when we see the SaskPower annual report that shows the 

highest debt ratio in more than 20 years and an extremely low 

rate on investment, and when we see the Sask Party government 

giving over $20 million to this failed American smart meter 

manufacturer, Saskatchewan ratepayers and taxpayers are 

rightfully concerned about this government’s failed approach 

and what it will mean for their power bills. To this minister: 

how much more will Saskatchewan families have to pay for 

power because of this government’s failed approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the rates for SaskPower are a 

matter of public record here in Saskatchewan. They are debated 

in this legislature. They are put through the rate review panel. 

Everybody in Saskatchewan knows what those rates are. In 

addition to that, Mr. Speaker, they also know about the history 

of the NDP when it comes to dividends with respect to 

SaskPower. They stripped every dividend they ever could from 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker — 114 per cent in 1998 they stripped 

from them; 97 per cent of their earnings in ’99; and in 2001, the 

largest figure in the history of the province, they stripped 181 

per cent of the dividends from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, when you look down the long 

list of failures that the NDP had here in Saskatchewan, it totals 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $303 million, time after 

time after time here in Saskatchewan, failure after failure after 

failure. That’s the record of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Condition of Highways 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Highways 220 and 322 are total disasters, Mr. Speaker. Those 

roads are really, really bad. Marina Ahrendt says, “I pretty 

much have to drive in the ditch. I have to go completely around 

the broken pavement.” Reeve Gary Gilbert says, “I would call 

Highway 220 horrible. I would call it non-driveable.” Ashlie 

Peakman says, “Every year roads get worse. How bad do they 

have to be before they are fixed?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Highways minister: what’s her answer to 

Ashlie’s question? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we acknowledge that there are roads across this province that 

are facing some issues when it comes to pavement breaking. 

322 and 220 are no different. I was on those roads last week. 

Mr. Speaker, we have crews out seven days a week making sure 

that those roads are levelled off so that they are as driveable as 

possible until the roadbed dries out so that we can do some 

more permanent repairs — as opposed to what the member 

from Rosemont said, that a wet roadbed is no reason not to fix a 

road. Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s not an engineer and neither am I, 

but I know that you can’t make a permanent repair on a soaking 

wet roadbed. So as soon as those conditions are in place, we 

will be making permanent repairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, despite the government having 

eight long years of record windfall revenues, we keep hearing 

about highways getting worse all throughout the province 

because this government wastes too much money too often. 

Under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, the Highways minister has 



April 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6913 

increased spending — not on roads, but on consultants — by 

404 per cent since 2009. And highway contractors have said, 

highway contractors have said this government’s reliance on 

private consultants have at least doubled the cost and led to 

lower quality work. That’s what the highways contractors have 

said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: how could she possibly justify a 400 per cent 

increase on consultants when highways like Highways 220 and 

322 are literally falling apart? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

references record revenues that the province of Saskatchewan 

has seen and, Mr. Speaker, we have coupled that with record 

investment in our infrastructure in this province. Mr. Speaker, 

in our last eight budgets we have spent $1 billion more on 

highway infrastructure than the NDP did in their 16 years in 

government, Mr. Speaker — half the time, $1 billion more. 

 

We are investing in our highways, Mr. Speaker, and the 

member opposite asks about consultants. We are doing more 

than this province has ever seen when it comes to infrastructure, 

and every one of those projects requires help on the consulting 

side, Mr. Speaker. We are undertaking projects that the NDP 

never dreamed of doing — interchanges, twinning, passing 

lanes, the Regina bypass, working on the Saskatoon perimeter 

highway, Mr. Speaker — record investment in the highway 

system in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in the Ministry of Highways 

alone, this government is spending over 400 per cent more on 

consultants. Internal government documents show that this 

government is spending way more money because it had 

outsourced so much of the work. For outsourced surveyors, this 

government is spending 227 per cent more on outsourced 

surveyors. This is just wasteful spending under the Sask Party’s 

watch, and so much neglect is the net result on highways like 

220 and 322. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party willing to pay way more 

and get way less through wasteful outsourcing and more cash 

cow consultant contracts? Why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we are spending more 

because we are doing more. From 2008 to 2014, the number of 

culvert projects in the province has increased by 2,100 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker — 2,100 per cent. The number of TMS [thin 

membrane surface] upgrades between 2008 and 2014 has 

increased by 27 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We have increased 

budgets year over year, record investments, Mr. Speaker. 

Things are costing more because we are doing more. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the member opposite is 

finally on his feet. I think it’s the second time in the last year, so 

good for him for getting up. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite 

evident that highways is not a priority for the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. Their press release before this last year’s budget, no 

mention of highways. Their press release before the Throne 

Speech last fall with their must-haves, no mention of highways. 

Their press release before the budget last year with their 

must-haves, no mention of highways, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 

before, not a priority when they were in government, not a 

priority when they are in opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Farm Land Ownership 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government has finally 

announced that it will freeze future farm land purchases by 

pension plans and institutional investors. Surely the Assiniboia 

land deal with Canada Pension Plan should also finally be 

considered inappropriate by the minister. This special 

Assiniboia land deal delivered huge benefits to two Sask Party 

insiders, and a former manager of the Farm Land Security 

Board says that special deal was bizarre. 

 

To the minister: why did this government approve this bizarre 

deal and why should Sask Party insiders get special treatment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member for that question. There’s certainly no insider deal 

and there’s certainly no special treatment. That deal was 

allowed to happen because the Ministry of Justice provided a 

legal opinion that it was a proper deal and that it probably could 

not be stopped. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the Sask 

Party government can’t admit that it was wrong to let that 

massive special land deal go ahead — a $128 million deal for 

Saskatchewan farm land which delivered huge benefits to the 

Premier’s former senior advisor and the Sask Party’s former 

executive directors. No other deals like that will be allowed. So 

it’s not surprising that more and more Saskatchewan people are 

starting to question: why is it that this government seems more 

interested in looking out for its friends than standing up for 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

To the minister: will this government require CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan] to divest itself of Saskatchewan farm land 

holdings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

recently announced, as recently as yesterday, that there will be a 

conversation with the people of Saskatchewan over the course 

of this summer about farm land ownership in the province, 

including mainly the two main issues of foreign ownership and 

as well institutional owners, ownership by institutional 

investors. Mr. Speaker, the details of that consultation will be 

announced this spring and the consultation will carry on 



6914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2015 

throughout much of the summer, giving everyone in the 

province who is interested an opportunity to respond and 

provide the government with their views on farm land 

ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what more we could do. We’re 

going to listen to the people of Saskatchewan and we’re going 

to act accordingly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Steinley: — I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills to report private Bill No. 904, The Mohyla Institute 

(1958) Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment, and to 

present its sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 904, The Mohyla Institute 

(1958) Amendment Act, 2014, and that the bill be now read the 

third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 904, The 

Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 2014, and that the bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 904 — The Mohyla Institute (1958) 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

Mr. Makowsky: — I move that this bill now be read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

904, The Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees, both this 

afternoon and this evening, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:23.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Withdrawal of Statement and Apology 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6905 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Question of Privilege 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6905 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6905 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6905 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6905 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6906 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6906 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6906 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6906 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6906 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6907 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6907 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 College of Arts and Science Alumni of Influence 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6907 

 Be Kind to Lawyers Day 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6907 

 Saskatchewan Video Released by Saskatoon Firm 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6908 

 Sutherland Curling Club Exemplifies Community 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6908 

 Recipients of Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recognized 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6908 

 Remembering Elmer Lach 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6909 

 Saskatchewan Woman Honoured for Heroism 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6909 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Seniors’ Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6909 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6909 

 Costs Associated with Smart Meter Program 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6911 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6911 

 Condition of Highways 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6912 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6912 

 Farm Land Ownership 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6913 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6913 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6914 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 904 — The Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 2014 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6914 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


