






















































Hansard: May 14, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 65A  THURSDAY, MAY 14, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7249 
 May 14, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce three really good friends of mine: two brothers, the 
Barriault brothers. Emmett Barriault is in grade 7 at 
Montgomery School. He’s a product of the Saskatoon Minor 
Football program. He’s playing for the Stampeders right now 
and one day will get traded to the Roughriders. He’s a terrific 
snowboarder and, you know, he just finished a wood carving of 
a spirit bear that was just terrific. And so this is his very first 
visit. In fact his snowboarding inspiration comes from one 
Mark McMorris, and the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
has helped to realize a bit of a dream by making sure that he’s 
had a signed poster that now hangs proudly in his room. 
 
He’s accompanied by his brother who’s in grade 4. Hayden’s in 
grade 4. He plays flag football. He’s with the Wombats and, 
Mr. Speaker, we thought you’d like that name from Australia. 
He’s also a great hockey fiend; a bit of a refined perspective, he 
appreciates goaltending. And he’s very, very attuned and 
attentive to success in math and sciences. They’re here with 
their mom, Carol. And I’ve known Carol for 28 years. So I’m 
delighted to be able to welcome all of them to their first visit to 
this legislature, and I’d ask all members to help join me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, in the gallery seated across from myself right now, 
I’m looking at fine young grade 8 students from Senator Allen 
Bird Memorial School in Montreal Lake. I want to welcome 
them, but I guess with a few comments to their teachers, Joe 
Nelson and also Larry Bear, I would like to welcome. As their 
teachers, you’ve brought them here to have an opportunity to 
learn a little bit of what’s going on in the province and the 
proceedings of the House, and I think it’s important for them to 
see that they belong. This is your Assembly. You have a right to 
be here. You have a right to see the proceedings and to see 
some questions asked of government on your behalf as a 
provincial resident, a proud province that we have. I just want 
to take an opportunity to welcome you here. 
 
I’ll have a chance to meet with you. We can share a little bit of 
information about the proceedings today, but again, it is an 
honour for you to be here. This is your Legislative Assembly 
and all of us, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
First Nations community members to their Legislative 
Assembly. It is an honour to have you here. So I welcome them. 
Please join me. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly the Hon. Ron Lemieux, 
Minister of Tourism, Culture, Heritage, Sport and Consumer 
Protection and minister responsible for the liquor and lotteries 
Act for the province of Manitoba. Ron and I had a wonderful 
meeting earlier this morning, and I know he’s going to be 
meeting with other members of cabinet today. So I would ask 
that members join with me in welcoming Minister Lemieux to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we too would like to welcome Minister 
Lemieux to our Assembly today and wish you many productive 
meetings when you’re here and certainly wish the best for you 
in your time in Saskatchewan. So welcome to our Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour for me to rise in the House today to welcome my 
constituency assistant, Heather Howell-Shiplack, to the 
Legislative Assembly. I know the member for The Battlefords’ 
constituency assistant was here yesterday, and he welcomed 
her, but I think I have the best constituency assistant in 
Saskatchewan. She does a wonderful job keeping the office 
running when we’re in session, and I’m looking forward to 
seeing her a bit more over the next few months in the 
constituency office. I’m not sure if she’s going to be happy that 
I’m there as much as I’m going to be. 
 
And along with Heather is her momma, her mom, Donna, her 
momma. And Donna is a wonderful lady. She helps out on a 
few fundraising events, and she’s also fundraising for a good 
cause this fall. She’s going to Iceland to raise money for Team 
Diabetes, and she’s doing a marathon, a bike marathon in 
Iceland. So I wish her all the luck, and hopefully we can raise 
some funds for her by introducing her during the House today. 
So welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome my 
SLIP [Saskatchewan legislative internship program] intern, 
Derrick Lepine He’s from Coderre, Saskatchewan, and I’ve 
actually had time to go to Coderre a couple of times in my life. I 
played hockey in the Gravelbourg area, and his family farms 
out there. We’ve had a wonderful time so far in the first couple 
of weeks in the SLIP internship, and we’re going to go and . . . 
The member across the way, I think it’s the member from 
Athabasca, he had his intern, so I hope I can teach him a little 
bit more than the member from Athabasca did about House 
proceedings and about process. But I’m thinking that I can meet 
the bar that he raised, and I’m hoping I can get over it just a 
little bit. So welcome Derrick Lepine to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 



7250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, I’d like 
to introduce some students from Macdonald School in 
Stockholm. Today we have 23 grade 7, 8, and 9 students in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Nicole Therrien, Laurie Johanson; chaperones, Kim 
Simpson, Jamie Roberts, and Terra Talbot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll have the opportunity to meet with them shortly 
after question period, but I would ask everyone to welcome 
them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are two individuals that 
really don’t need an introduction, but I’m going to give them 
one anyways. We’ve got two members of the Regina Chamber 
of Commerce with us today: John Hopkins who’s the executive 
director of the Regina chamber, and with him is Nadia 
Williamson who is the new Chair of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hopkins has done nothing but been an instrumental leader 
for the Regina chamber for this community, and Nadia 
Williamson, Mr. Speaker, again probably needs no introduction. 
She had a fabulous showing at the Sask Fashion Week this year, 
or this past weekend, and between that and her entrepreneurship 
with her company NWL, she is again leading the nation. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like all members to help 
welcome these two individuals from Regina to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite, and it’s a pleasure to welcome these 
leaders of the Regina chamber to their Assembly, very 
important leaders within our city. And certainly John Hopkins 
has served the business community and our city with 
distinction. He’s been in fact recognized by his peers across 
Canada for his leadership, and it’s a pleasure to welcome him to 
this Assembly here today. 
 
It’s also a pleasure to welcome our Chair, Ms. Nadia 
Williamson to her Assembly. And certainly she’s a 
distinguished entrepreneur within our city, has a wonderful 
store, NWL in downtown Regina, but gives back to our 
community in so many other ways as well, Mr. Speaker. A real 
leader within our community. 
 
I also had the pleasure to be running with both of these 
individuals in the Royal Road Race on Saturday morning. 
They’re active and involved in our community in so many 
ways, and I’m thankful for the leadership they provide. So I ask 
all members to join with me in welcoming these leaders from 
the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Thank you and while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize some very important leaders with the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce that have joined us here today in the 
west gallery. And we have CEO [chief executive officer] Steve 
McLellan that’s joined us here today, along with Curtis 

Hemming and Libbey Morin that have joined us here today. 
 
And certainly the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce plays a 
very important role within Saskatchewan. I know we look 
forward every year to the gathering and the forum that we have 
with entrepreneurs and business leaders from across 
Saskatchewan, hosted by the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, that breaks out very important policy areas that are 
identified by the chamber and by the business leaders and able 
to have a very frank and open dialogue with members of this 
legislature. So I thank Steve for his leadership. I thank Curtis 
and Libbey as well. I thank all members of the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce for joining us here today. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I am very, very 
pleased to be able to introduce the two most important people in 
my life that are joining us in your gallery this morning. I’m 
actually a little bit surprised that it’s already happened this 
morning. I can’t imagine how many traffic violations were 
violated in getting here this early. Mr. Speaker, I think no 
stranger to members in the House, my wife, Amanda. But for 
the first time, our son, Jack, has joined us in the Chamber. It’s 
not his first time in the building. He’s been here on a number of 
occasions. In fact he watched the budget speech delivered by 
the member from Canora-Pelly in my office. So he was here for 
budget day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jack is a little over 10 months old. He has brought 
so much happiness and joy to our lives. He’s a very bright, very 
happy boy. And I know this, that he knows these things already 
at an early age: to cheer for the Toronto Blue Jays; that if he 
fusses enough for supper that he gets to go right to dessert; and, 
Mr. Speaker, by where he’s seated that it is better to be seated 
on the right hand of the Speaker. And so I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming Amanda and Jack 
Alexander Duncan to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
I just wanted to share with them, Mr. Speaker, in Cree, that I’m 
very happy to see the First Nations students here from Montreal 
Lake as well as their chaperones, in my language of Cree, and 
to point out to them that they’re very welcome and not to be 
afraid of anything in the Assembly. I wanted to join my 
colleague from Cumberland and tell them that the First Nations 
people of Saskatchewan have contributed so much, and it’s so 
awesome to see students here from the North, especially those 
from the First Nations schools, and to point out to them that I’m 
so glad that you’re here visiting today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
want to acknowledge Steve McLellan in the west gallery from 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. He is the executive 
director, and along with Curtis Hemming, the director of 
government relations, and Libbey Morin, research policy 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7251 

analysis, all from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce does a great job in 
promoting business, in attracting business, in encouraging 
business in our province, and we appreciate having them join us 
in the legislature today. And I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome and to introduce the visitor services team to the 
Speaker’s gallery. These information officers work from 8 a.m. 
to 9 p.m. seven days a week to welcome visitors to the 
Legislative Assembly building and to do tours of the building. 
 
This year we have no new returning staff. We have many 
returning staff. The bilingual information officers are Brittany 
Love, if you would care to stand when I call out your name, 
Marie Digney, Émilie Chan, François Hawkins, Alan Chan, and 
that is our first brother and sister team that have been with 
visitor services, and Jean-René Robillard. 
 
Our casual information officers are Ted Forrest, Penny Forrest, 
another combination; Edith Seiferling and Gabe Seiferling — 
they’re a couple as well — and our permanent staff: Arnold 
McKenzie, Kelly Liberet, Marianne Morgan, and the director of 
visitor services, Lorraine deMontigny. I would ask that all 
members welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Celebrating Norwegian Constitution Day 
 
Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Norwegian.] 
 
These are the first words of the Norwegian national anthem 
written by Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson in 1859, and these words are 
going to be sung all over the world on Sunday, May 17th to 
celebrate the Constitution Day of Norway. It’s a day for 
children to celebrate the founding of Norway 201 years ago. In 
Saskatchewan there will be a big party at the Forestry Farm in 
Saskatoon with a children’s parade and a barbecue, and other 
communities across the province where this will be celebrated. 
 
We’re very fortunate in Saskatchewan to have many people of 
Norwegian descent, and King Harald of Norway and Queen 
Sonja of Norway send greetings to all of the Norwegian 
descendants in Saskatchewan as well as probably about 30 
Norwegian citizens who live here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with the members from Saskatoon Massey 
Place, Melville-Saltcoats, Regina Wascana Plains, Regina 
Northeast, Saskatchewan Rivers, and Rosthern-Shellbrook, we 
all want to celebrate our Norwegian ancestry. This will be the 
last time that I will do this, but I know that the member from 
Massey Place will probably take up the sort of flame from me 
to follow in his grandfather’s footsteps who did this during the 
’60s. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

Early Childhood Education Month 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
to join me in acknowledging the significant contribution of 
those who work in the early learning and child care sector. 
Today, May 14th, has been proclaimed as early childhood 
education appreciation day, and May has been proclaimed Early 
Childhood Education Month. Whether in child care, 
pre-kindergarten, or other early learning years, early childhood 
educators dedicate themselves to building strong, trusting 
relationships with children and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has made significant investments 
in supporting children during their early years. Since 2007 we 
have allocated funding for 4,935 new child care spaces across 
the province. This is a 53 per cent increase and brings the total 
number of licensed child care spaces in Saskatchewan to more 
than 14,200. We have also committed to more than 800 new 
spaces in the nine joint-use schools that will be opening in 
2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008 our government has also made a 
significant investment in pre-kindergarten. We’ve made more 
than double the number of programs from 155 to 316, providing 
more than 5,000 children the opportunity to benefit from these 
programs. Mr. Speaker, this is one example of how this 
government is continuing to make Saskatchewan the best place 
to live and to raise a family. 
 
I encourage all members to recognize the professionalism and 
dedication of our early childhood educators during Early 
Childhood Education Month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Football Camp Supports Youth 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month I had the 
pleasure to attend the Don Narcisse All-Star Football Camp 
fundraising gala. Don Narcisse, of course, is a Rider nation 
legend whom we’ve all cheered for on the field. 
 
What’s as remarkable about Don is his commitment to giving 
back to the Regina community and to guiding youth through 
sport. His football camps in Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon 
match young players with CFL [Canadian Football League] 
stars and local coaches to learn from the best. This year the 
players in Regina at the Regina camp had the opportunity to get 
pointers and skills from many CFL stars, including Anthony 
Calvillo and Eddie Davis, two extraordinary players with so 
much experience and skills to share. 
 
Don’s football camps also raise money for charities and 
community-based organizations that provide some of our most 
vulnerable people supports they deserve. This year the proceeds 
are going towards Big Brothers and Big Sisters of Regina, 
which do such important work here in Regina, providing 
mentorship and support to young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Mr. Don 
Narcisse, the CFL all-stars, the community’s minor football 
coaches who took part, and the Big Brothers and Big Sisters of 
Regina for their leadership and everything they do to make 



7252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

Regina a better place for young people today, and to build 
bright futures for tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Pie in the Eye in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 7th I had 
the opportunity to take part in the Moose Jaw YMCA’s [Young 
Men’s Christian Association] 11th annual Pie in the Eye 
fundraiser. YMCA staff and volunteers spent the day delivering 
pies to raise funds in support of the Strong Kids campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Pie in the Eye fundraiser provides Moose 
Javians with the opportunity to buy pies for five bucks or more, 
which they can send to a friend, family member, co-worker, or 
boss. These recipients of the pies can choose to accept the pie 
and be pied in the face or they can match the original purchase 
price of the pie and send it on to someone else. Pie senders 
enjoyed the relief of knowing that when they send a pie, the 
receiver cannot send it back to them; they can only send it on to 
someone new. I myself had the pleasure of being pied, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This year’s event raised more than $10,000 to support the 
campaign which helped provide low-income families with 
access to the YMCA’s programs and services. Last year the 
Moose Jaw YMCA was able to provide more than $15,000 in 
sponsorships to allow kids to attend summer camps. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw YMCA on another successful fundraiser for the 
Strong Kids campaign. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Saskatchewan Curlers Join Sports Hall of Fame 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. His Excellency the 
Right Honourable David Johnson, Governor General of Canada, 
has declared 2015 the Year of Sport in Canada. 
 
It’s very fitting that in the Year of Sport in Canada, the 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame recently announced that the 
2009 senior men’s world curling champions, with skip Eugene 
Hritzuk, third Kevin Kalthoff, second Verne Anderson who is 
from the great constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, and lead 
David Folk would be enshrined as part of the class of 2015 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the senior world championship took place in 
Dunedin, New Zealand, where they went undefeated with a 
seven and zero record. The Canadians competed against the US 
[United States] in their final game. To win the championship, 
Hritzuk took out the United States’ lone rock and stayed in the 
house. Verne Anderson, in an interview with The Wadena News 
after the win, stated, “Winning the Canadian title is big, but 
hearing the Canadian anthem announce that you have just won 
gold at worlds is a humbling experience that entirely changes 
the way you look at life.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the House to join me in congratulating 

this team on being inducted into the class of 2015 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame on June the 13th, 2015. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Funding for Research and Development Internships 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize our government’s latest 
investment in Saskatchewan’s young talent. Late last week the 
Minister of Advanced Education announced $270,000 in 
funding to support graduate students and post-doctoral fellows 
in research and development internships with Saskatchewan’s 
companies and industry associations. 
 
Mitacs is a national not-for-profit research and development 
organization that specializes in the commercialization of 
cutting-edge technologies. Mitacs enables interns to develop 
vital scientific and business skills by matching top university 
talent with companies who solve real-life problems and increase 
competiveness at low cost. Mr. Speaker, Mitacs interns gain 
valuable industrial experience, networks, and professional skills 
for high-quality careers in Saskatchewan. 
 
The provincial contribution to Mitacs will leverage an 
additional $810,000 in funding in 2015-16 from the federal 
government and private sector partners. This funding will allow 
a total of 36 interns to develop their careers with Saskatchewan 
companies with a focus on physical, life and health sciences, 
engineering, and social sciences research. 
 
Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, our province has invested nearly $1.5 
million in the Mitacs accelerated internship program. With 
federal government funding and industry contributions, a total 
of $4.2 million has been invested in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating this year’s 
Mitacs interns and wishing them the best in their future careers 
right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Is Our Province Better Off Today? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We’re coming to the end of another sitting 
of this House and I think, Mr. Speaker, that everyone in this 
Assembly would measure the success of our work the same 
way: is our province better off today than it was yesterday? 
 
I don’t think anyone who saw oil prices plummeting this winter 
would have predicted this spring’s budget, a balanced budget, a 
budget that controls government spending, a budget that 
continues to invest in infrastructure — and I know, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite really appreciate this — a 
budget that keeps taxes low for families. It comes down to 
choices, Mr. Speaker, and we know what choices members 
opposite made when they were in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made choices to support our potash and 
uranium producers overseas, and these members opposite have 
made it clear that they don’t agree with these choices. We made 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7253 

choices to continue to support those who are investing in 
growing our diversified economy, an economy that has created 
7,700 more jobs and has the lowest unemployment rate in the 
country for the past 19 months. Mr. Speaker, we introduced 
manufacturing credits that companies like Evraz are taking 
advantage of, a $200 million expansion. The members opposite 
chose to vote against that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last seven years, on average, 26 jobs a day 
have been created. That’s more than one an hour for the last 
seven years. Mr. Speaker, is our province better off today than 
it was? I think so, Mr. Speaker, but I also believe the best is yet 
to come. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ombudsman’s Report and Provision of Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there was so much that was 
disturbing within the Ombudsman’s report on Margaret 
Warholm’s death and the quality of care being delivered to 
thousands of seniors throughout Saskatchewan. The worst by 
far is confirmation that major problems within seniors’ care are 
widespread, but among the other extremely disturbing aspects is 
that families are afraid to speak out. Seniors are afraid to speak 
out. Nurses and care aids are afraid to speak out. Does the 
Premier agree that this type of widespread fear is incredibly 
disturbing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I reject the premise of the hon. 
member’s question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, quite a contradiction. Yesterday 
they say they support the Ombudsman’s report, that they agree 
with it, Mr. Speaker. And now, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
Premier calling into question much of what was on display in 
the Ombudsman’s report. It’s absolutely unbelievable. And it’s 
also, Mr. Speaker, an indication of how dismissive this 
government has been when it comes to seniors’ care here in the 
province. 
 
The Ombudsman says that seniors and their families, nurses, 
and care aids are afraid to speak out. And the reality is that the 
Premier has contributed in a very significant way to that culture 
of fear, not just because he minimizes the concerns that are 
brought forward as other members of the government have 
done, but also because he personally directed a leak of 
confidential information about the only care aid who came to 
the legislature and publicly spoke out. 
 
This Premier ordered his chief of communications and 
operations to share confidential and questionable details in 
order to destroy the reputation of that care aid, and also, Mr. 
Speaker, to undermine the very real concerns that he was 
bringing forward. To have the government, Mr. Speaker, the 
head of government personally involved in such a nasty attack 
on a private citizen is unprecedented in an advanced democracy. 

Does the Premier recognize that his actions have contributed in 
a big way to the disturbing culture of fear that we see in seniors’ 
care here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of that question is 
the same as the previous one. There is not a culture of fear with 
respect to the public service or those working in health care. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just not correct. 
 
We’ve had, whether it’s through correspondence directly to my 
office, my constituents coming forward, letters to the editor that 
we see, people phoning into open-line shows to enter this 
debate, this important debate about seniors’ care . . . Some of 
them are family members. Some of them work in the system, 
Mr. Speaker. These folks are coming forward and providing 
very direct response, in fact through the lean process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
What’s elemental of the lean process is that front-line staff 
report back through to senior managers. In fact the Leader of 
the Opposition quotes them, stands in his place and quotes 
criticisms from health care workers, not just about seniors’ care, 
but these criticisms are obviously freely given, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’ll be the kind of government that listens carefully to 
what health care workers and family members are saying. 
That’s why in the last eight years we’ve sought to significantly 
turn things around from what was left by the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] in health care, to significantly hire more 
nurses, hire more doctors, build more facilities, health care 
facilities, open long-term care beds instead of close them, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve done these things because precisely we were 
listening, not just to health care workers but patients and the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, how incredibly dismissive and 
how incredibly out of touch with what the reality is for seniors, 
for front-line workers, Mr. Speaker. The Ombudsman is 
incredibly clear about the fear, about the barriers that people 
feel in coming forward. I have personally spoken with many 
health care workers, many families, many seniors who are 
afraid to speak out, especially in the wake of seeing how this 
Premier has gone after a health care worker who came and 
spoke out and raised concerns, whose concerns have now been 
absolutely backed up by what the Ombudsman says. 
 
Let’s be clear with what’s happening right now. The Premier 
and his chief of communications and operations are being 
investigated for breaking the law. Penalties for breaking that 
law, Mr. Speaker, include a fine and include jail time. Last 
week, unbelievably, the Premier said that he had no regrets 
about taking the personal decision and directing the leak of 
confidential and questionable information about a care aid. Now 
he’s had time, Mr. Speaker, to review the Ombudsman’s report, 
including a big focus on the fear that people have for speaking 
out. My question to the Premier: has he changed his mind? 
Does he have regrets about personally directing the leak of 
confidential information? 



7254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman has in her 
report indicated there are some that feared coming forward with 
information. The minister yesterday said we would be 
responding to the Ombudsman report. We would be addressing 
the concerns that were raised in the report. We take them very 
seriously. 
 
There were 89 cases that came forward because of the 
Ombudsman’s work. That was work that we had asked her to 
do actually because of a very serious incident in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have well over 8,000 seniors in care and we 
do need to underscore the fact that 89 cases is very significant 
and worthy of the government’s attention, and we’ll provide 
that attention. But we also need to acknowledge the system 
providing excellent care, health care workers providing 
excellent care both at acute care and in seniors’ care across the 
system. This is not to minimize the report. It’s not to minimize 
the challenges that each of us hear in our constituencies about 
seniors’ care, some of them long standing, some of them more 
current. And we will address them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular budget there was an additional $10 million 
specifically around seniors’ care. That builds on what was 
additional in the budget before that. That builds on significant 
increase in front-line staff for seniors’ care, some 800 more, 
almost 800 more front-line workers in integrated and seniors’ 
care in the province, because this is a priority. We have not yet 
been able to address all of the issues, but we are going to 
continue to work towards doing just that, Mr. Speaker. The best 
indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour, and ours has 
been a commitment to increasing investment, increasing 
front-line staff in health care over what members opposite did 
when they had a chance to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Complete avoidance of the question that was 
just asked. The Premier and his chief of communications and 
operations are being investigated for breaking the law. Last 
week the Premier said he had no regrets about that. We see the 
Ombudsman’s report that talks about the fear that people have 
in coming forward. My question once again to the Premier: 
does he have any regrets now about ordering the release of 
confidential and questionable information about the care aid 
who came forward as a whistleblower? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend has a habit of 
re-asking the same question over and over again. I answered the 
question in estimates, and he’ll know that I did, and I stand by 
that answer. Mr. Speaker, furthermore there is a process under 
way with the Privacy Commissioner and we’re going to let that 
process unfold as it should. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Astonishing that he could read the 
Ombudsman’s report and still hold to his position that it was 
appropriate to do what he did. Unreal, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
seeing more and more of this dismissive approach from the 

Premier and from members of his cabinet, laughing off 
ridiculous expenses, Mr. Speaker. I think of the two travel 
scouts going months in advance, not hammering out trade deals, 
but simply making sure that the personal needs of the Premier 
were being properly cared for. 
 
I think of, Mr. Speaker, of minimizing concerns on the day 
when the people from Craik came to the legislature, concerns 
that they have about the erosion of rural health care in their 
community. I think, Mr. Speaker, of telling Sara Bucsis-Gunn, 
in the face of debt for ambulance bills for her daughter, 
suggesting that a steak night fundraiser is the right way to go. 
We’re seeing more and more of this dismissiveness from the 
government. 
 
And now we have the Ombudsman saying that there’s a fear 
that many have, Mr. Speaker, talking about the culture of fear 
within seniors’ care, that people are afraid to speak out. Yet the 
Premier, once again today, sticks to his misguided guns that 
what he did was appropriate and that he has no regrets about it. 
My question to the Premier: does he at least recognize that his 
actions have contributed to this culture of fear within seniors’ 
care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve only been serving in this 
legislature since 1999, and I’ve served on both sides of the 
House. Rarely have I witnessed a session where the opposition 
was so consistently errant in fact, wrong in the cases . . . in 
some of the details around cases they’ve brought forward. Chief 
among those, by the way, who’ve . . . 
 
Well we can talk about the individual in Moose Jaw, I think the 
Moose Jaw area, that that hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition actually publicized, put out a press release to say 
this individual was wandering around with dementia. 
 
An Hon. Member: — As reported in the paper there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, as reported in the paper. This is 
always their excuse. Bar talk counts for question period 
material for them. What might be in the newspaper counts for 
question period material for them. 
 
What I would advise my hon. friend if he . . . I think if he wants 
to gain some credibility, is they’ve got to do a little bit of 
research. If somebody doesn’t have dementia, they might not 
want to repeat it. They might want to google basic cases and 
find out if there’s been a court case that refutes almost all of the 
allegations they made in another health care thing. They might 
want to find out if a company even in fact has a condo in 
Mexico before they smear them in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is the job on both sides of the House for us that we would 
deal in fact, that we would have important debates, and we will, 
Mr. Speaker. But I want to say to members opposite, I want to 
say to members opposite that for an opposition to go through an 
entire session with such a long list of either mistakes or an 
inability to present the facts as they should be presented, Mr. 
Speaker, to go through a fall session and a spring session like 
that, it’s quite amazing. I’ve never seen it before, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re hearing it door knocking. We’ve knocked 20,000 doors, 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7255 

our party has this spring. We’re actually picking it up on the 
door. 
 
They are lacking credibility over there because they can’t deal 
in fact, Mr. Speaker. If he wants to have a debate, present the 
facts. We’ll have the debate and we’ll let the people decide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we can look at the example of 
these ministers time and time again. We have a Minister of 
Parks, Mr. Speaker, who didn’t know if he was selling off 
Crown land or if he wasn’t. We have a Minister of Corrections, 
Mr. Speaker, doesn’t know what the changes are happening 
with one facility after another. We have a Health minister, Mr. 
Speaker, who can’t tell us if they’re keeping a hyperbaric 
chamber or if they aren’t. The Premier says it might be added 
onto a hospital. We don’t know. They’re making up things on 
the back of a napkin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we’re talking about seniors. We’re talking about families 
that are suffering and that are afraid to speak out. We have a 
Premier who personally ordered the leak of confidential 
information. You know why he said he did that, Mr. Speaker? 
His own words, because he had a conundrum. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not an appropriate reason to breach the privacy of an 
individual. Mr. Speaker, what that care aid said when he came 
forward, that’s been backed up, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Ombudsman’s report. 
 
And we’ve heard the same types of concerns time and time 
again. Staffing levels are inadequate. A quality of care that’s not 
even close to acceptable, Mr. Speaker, and where it should be. 
Here’s a quote from a care aid, from the report, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Neglect? Yes of course, it’s absolutely frequent. Not 
intentional neglect, but the type of neglect that happens 
when the workload is too heavy, not organized well, and 
not supported. 

 
My question to the Premier: does he at least recognize that 
neglect is frequent or does he dispute that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for his question. There are 19 recommendations in this 
report. It’s a good report. It’s thorough. It highlights that there 
is significant work yet to do in long-term care. 
 
The minister has indicated we are going to be responding to 
those recommendations. We’re going to be working hard to 
adopt those recommendations. There is additional resources in 
this current budget. There was additional resources for seniors’ 
care in the budget before that. 
 
There are challenges in seniors’ care, to be sure. But imagine, 
Mr. Speaker, where we would be today if, heaven forbid, those 
members had been in power for the last eight years, Mr. 
Speaker. Where would we be without 800 additional front-line 
workers that have been hired since the election in 2007? Where 
would we be without 800 more front-line seniors’ care 
providers working in the province of Saskatchewan, that this 

side of the House offered? Where would we be had they been in 
office ignoring the nursing shortage, rather than the 2,600 more 
nurses that have been hired since this government took office? 
Where would the system be without the 400 more doctors hired 
by this side of the House? Where would this province be in 
seniors’ care if, heaven forbid, this gentleman was somehow on 
this side of the House and that party was on this side of the 
House closing long-term care beds? 
 
Over 1,000 long-term care beds closed by that side of the 
House. A huge deficit in seniors’ care left behind by that party 
and that former Health minister that sits in the back row, 
smiling now as he does from that back row. Where would we 
be, Mr. Speaker? We would be in a much worse place. 
 
There is work to be done, but thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve made the progress we’ve had and we have a government 
on this side of the House committed to continued progress in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, to have such bragging on the day 
after the Ombudsman releases a report talking about widespread 
problems throughout is really strange, Mr. Speaker. And I wish 
the same energy, the same energy that went into the bluster, Mr. 
Speaker, went into recognizing that seniors’ care is inadequate, 
that we’re failing seniors, Mr. Speaker, and that we need to do 
much, much better, and that this government’s actions have 
contributed to the troublesome situation that we have now. 
 
For over two years now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been pushing for 
minimum care standards and clear rules around staffing levels. 
The Premier and his two Health ministers have repeatedly 
dismissed the need for that. But the Ombudsman says that our 
province needs a seniors’ care strategy and it needs to 
adequately address staffing levels and it needs to include 
specific rules and standards of care, not just extremely general 
guidelines. 
 
My question to the Premier: is he willing and ready to commit 
to that today, and if so, when can we expect the desperately 
needed seniors’ care strategy for the seniors here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I want to thank the Ombudsman for the great work that 
her office and her staff have done, a dedicated staff over there. 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate that it is an example of the 
reason why this government decided to put dollars — this 
legislature, because it’s not the ministry — this legislature 
decided to put dollars into having, through the independent 
Office of the Ombudsman, a health ombudsman full-time staff. 
And so they did a great deal of work in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to note for the record, as I did yesterday, 
the Ombudsman acknowledges on page 7 that the guidelines 
include over 100 individual standards. We’ve heard a lot about, 
from the opposition, that we don’t have standards in this 
province. Clearly we do have standards in this province. 
 



7256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

What the Ombudsman has pointed out, which we agree, is that 
we need to operationalize those standards. We need to have 
plans in place to operationalize those standards. We agree with 
that, Mr. Speaker, and we also agree on publicly reporting. It 
was actually this side of the House that decided to publicly 
report on our personal care homes and how they do on the 
inspections. And we’ll be looking forward on how to publicly 
report on our special care homes as per the Ombudsman’s 
recommendations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Prince Albert Flood Plain Policy 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government decided to start enforcing the 1 in 500 year flood 
plain policy for the city of Prince Albert, but they have left 
homeowners in Prince Albert in the lurch without proper 
support. The government should review this policy to determine 
if it’s absolutely necessary and, if it is necessary, it should 
provide support to affected communities and families. But 
instead, Mr. Speaker, this government is ignoring the concerns 
of Prince Albert residents once again. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Why is his government ignoring 
these concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the government isn’t 
ignoring those concerns. It’s important to look at the history of 
what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker. Back in 1978 the 1 in 500 
standard was adopted by the province. It’s continued to be the 
standard over the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, the 
requirement for all official community plans and zoning bylaws 
has been for, again for many years, has been to recognize the 1 
in 500 standard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a technical issue that it’s important that we 
let officials with the provincial government and city work their 
way through, answer questions that citizens may have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province will certainly be flexible on this and 
we look forward to having our officials work with city officials. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to provide more information in 
subsequent questions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Sask Party’s 
ignoring the concerns of Prince Albert residents and once again 
evidenced by that answer, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a technical 
issue; it is a life issue for many people being impacted by this 
decision. 
 
Is it because the Sask Party MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Prince Albert absolutely refuses to speak up on 
behalf of the P.A. families? And that’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here’s what the Daily Herald editorial board says: “We 

need Prince Albert’s voice in Regina, not Regina’s voice in 
Prince Albert. Until local MLAs realize this, we’ll have to 
continue looking to the Official Opposition for representation.” 
And we will represent them, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. 
 
To the Premier: since his MLA for P.A. is so ineffective, will he 
agree to at least meet with the Prince Albert families affected by 
this flood plain issue, to hear their concerns first-hand? Will he 
commit to that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Athabasca’s wrong. This is a technical issue that needs to be 
worked through by officials in the ministry and officials with 
the city. I’d like to read from a memorandum sent from the 
deputy minister’s office to the Minister of Government 
Relations’ office, Mr. Speaker, that I think spells it out quite 
well. It says: 
 

In the near future the city of Prince Albert will seek 
ministerial approval for a subdivision bylaw development 
plan, a zoning bylaw pursuant to The Planning and 
Development Act. Approval of the planning bylaws will be 
dependent on the city incorporating a flood damage 
reduction policy into its plans that recognizes the 
provincial 1 in 500 year flood standard. The standard will 
impact . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite doesn’t like that. And 
that’s funny because, Mr. Speaker, this memo went in early 
2007 to NDP minister Harry Van Mulligen. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
technical issue that the NDP supported when they were in 
government, but as is typical with the NDP, don’t do what I do, 
do what I say. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — What is wrong, Mr. Speaker? The Sask 
Party’s treatment of Prince Albert and area, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. And here’s what else the Daily 
Herald editorial board says, and I quote: 
 

When it comes to the 1:500-year flood plain, the second 
bridge, and the impending closure of North Sask. Laundry, 
Prince Albert residents have made it clear the Sask Party’s 
decisions are not in the city’s best interests. 
 
It’s during these instances that we need elected officials 
who will advocate for their constituents’ needs — 
something Jurgens appears unwilling to do. 

 
End quote, Mr. Speaker. Leadership is a lot more than just 
putting up a bunch of billboards in a city, Mr. Speaker. Prince 
Albert families deserve so much better. So once again to the 
Premier: what will it take for this government to start finally 
listening to the concerns of Prince Albert families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7257 

member criticizes the member from Prince Albert, but let’s look 
at what’s happened at the last couple of public meetings, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition, at a public meeting a 
few weeks ago, waltzes into the public meeting with about 10 
minutes left to go, goes to the floor mike with his entourage 
cheering, Mr. Speaker, and starts to politicize the entire event. 
Mr. Speaker, he had no facts. He didn’t know the issue he was 
speaking about, but he didn’t turn down an opportunity to go a 
microphone. 
 
And the strange thing, Mr. Speaker, is somehow in the middle 
of that discussion of the flood plain of Prince Albert, what does 
he do? He says this, Mr. Speaker. He talks about the flood plain 
issue and he says, “This isn’t some luxury item or something 
frivolous. I mean it’s not like the football stadium in Regina.” 
Mr. Speaker, so now he’s criticizing that. He says one thing 
when he’s in Regina, says another thing when he’s in Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Gay-Straight Alliances 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, this government’s position on GSAs [gay-straight 
alliance] is becoming a national embarrassment. When the 
Premier reversed his position on strip clubs, he said it was 
necessary even to protect just one person from increased risk of 
human trafficking. But when it comes to protecting vulnerable 
kids, the Premier refuses to budge. He prefers a vague policy 
released in secret with absolutely no publicity, and he refuses to 
enshrine this right in legislation. 
 
Experts say this legislation would make a big difference for a 
lot of kids, Mr. Speaker. But my question, my question to the 
minister: even if it saves just one life, even if it prevents one 
suicide, why don’t we do it? Why don’t we put it in legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how you can 
have a secretly released policy. There was nothing secret about 
it. We were very serious in communication with our education 
partners, and for the NDP to somehow portray that we’re not 
prepared to provide the facilitation of GSAs is just wrong. The 
policy is adamant that if you’re receiving public dollars from 
the government in Education, GSAs must be facilitated. 
 
That policy is identical to the bill that they introduced in the 
House, Mr. Speaker. In fact, their bill is arguably pretty weak, 
because if you go to the section where there would be 
enforcement, what do they say? This is the NDP bill: “School 
administrators shall ensure that the Student Bill of Rights is 
respected and promoted in each school and that the Student Bill 
of Rights is posted in standard . . . [CNIB] . . .” and the thing 
goes on. But basically their bill says that school boards must do 
this. 
 
You can do it by legislation. You can do it by regulation. We’re 
doing it by policy tied to funding, Mr. Speaker. I said in 
estimates, if there’s a need to go further we will, but right now 
we’re going to work with school boards and all schools to make 
sure that GSAs are available freely and immediately in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Early Childhood Education Courses Partnership 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, it is my 
privilege to announce that the Ministry of Education has 
formalized a new partnership with the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic to offer dual credit for three early childhood 
education courses. I am pleased to be able to make this 
announcement today on Early Childhood Educator 
Appreciation Day in our province. 
 
Thanks to this partnership, grade 11 and 12 students will have 
the opportunity to complete three courses that will be credited 
towards both a high school diploma and an early childhood 
educator certificate or diploma at Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
I’m also pleased and proud to announce that because those 
courses will be offered through Saskatchewan Polytechnic’s 
distance learning program, all grade 11 and 12 students across 
Saskatchewan, including students in First Nations high schools, 
will have access to the courses beginning this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new partnership not only offers students an 
alternate pathway to high school graduation, a priority in the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth, but also helps address demand 
for early childhood educators in our province. Upon 
successfully completing the three courses, students will be 
eligible to receive their early childhood educator level 1 
certification from the Ministry of Education. This is important 
because with that certification they are eligible for entry-level, 
full-time work at one of the province’s 301 licensed child care 
centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this partnership also responds to the 
pre-kindergarten engagement that was led by the Legislative 
Secretary to the Minister of Education, the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. The Legislative Secretary heard from our 
partners in the education sector that we need to encourage more 
young people to explore early childhood education as a career 
path, and I’m happy to say that today’s announcement does just 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is first and foremost committed to 
a student-first approach to education. On behalf of the 
government, I would like to thank the many dedicated early 
childhood educators who dedicate themselves to creating 
high-quality learning environments so the children they care for 
are best prepared for school and lifelong success. As Minister of 
Education I look forward to watching many students enhance 
their success in high school through this program and go on to 
become leaders in early childhood education. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It must be the 



7258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

last day, that the other side is showing me the love when I take 
to my feet here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In a brief way I’d like to join with the minister to recognize this 
partnership. And certainly extending learning opportunities, 
both to those that are in high school but as well those in our 
Polytechnic environment, is important. And when we’re 
looking at what we need to do to better support early childhood 
education, certainly enabling students to connect with that 
learning is an important piece. 
 
And you know, this is also something that can allow students to 
have some real-world learning while in high school. There’s a 
certain relevance to it. And certainly we know that if those 
students are able to step forward into the important service of 
young families and young people, we’re certainly better for it, 
Mr. Speaker. So I welcome this announcement here today. I 
thank Sask Polytechnic for their partnership. I thank the schools 
and the teachers all across Saskatchewan that will be a part of 
delivering this program. 
 
And I would be remiss though, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that 
we don’t recognize the broader context that needs to be 
supported when it comes to early childhood education, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that it is concerning to see the cancellation 
of the 500 child care spaces that should have gone forward here 
this year, Mr. Speaker. That was an important measure, one that 
was scrapped by government, which we think should have been 
in place. And government needs to better recognize the strain 
and pressures on those child care centres, early learning centres 
all across Saskatchewan. I know, I meet with those directors. I 
meet with those staff. They’re starved for resources. The 
compensation is incredibly meagre amidst a high cost of living, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So certainly the education is an important part of making sure 
we have quality child care, Mr. Speaker, but we also need to 
then make sure that we can retain these young people into 
careers in early childhood, and that’s going to require a broader 
focus of this government. But I certainly welcome this 
announcement here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask leave to 
move a motion regarding the appointment of the Provincial 
Auditor of Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I will 
get that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts to present the first report, which summarizes 
the process undertaken in selection of the Provincial Auditor 
and makes a recommendation for appointment. I move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of the Public Accounts 
committee has moved: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I am advised that Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

[At 11:01 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 153 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
Bill No. 154 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit 
législatif 

Bill No. 155 - The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé 

Bill No. 156 - The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 

Bill No. 144 - The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment 
Act, 2014 

Bill No. 152 - The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

Bill No. 145 - The Fee Waiver Act 
Bill No. 146 - The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver 
Act 

Bill No. 165 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation 
des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

Bill No. 176 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 141 - The Archives and Public Records Management 

Act 
Bill No. 142 - The Archives and Public Records Management 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7259 

Bill No. 904 - The Mohyla Institute (1958) Amendment Act, 
2014 

Bill No. 143 - The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
Bill No. 147 - The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
Bill No. 150 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2014 
Bill No. 162 - The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2014 
Bill No. 148 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services 
de l’état civil 

Bill No. 151 - The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
Bill No. 157 - The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
Bill No. 159 - The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
Bill No. 161 - The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 

modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
Bill No. 174 - The Registered Teachers Act 
Bill No. 175 - The Registered Teachers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Registered Teachers Act 

Bill No. 163 - The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 149 - The Health Administration Amendment Act, 
2014 

Bill No. 164 - The Health Information Protection Amendment 
Act, 2014 

Bill No. 172 - The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
Bill No. 166 - The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
Bill No. 167 - The Local Government Election Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Local Government Election Act, 2014 

Bill No. 168 - The Government Relations Administration Act 
Bill No. 170 - The Fire Safety Act 
Bill No. 177 - The Insurance Act 
Bill No. 180 - The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 

2015/Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur 
l'Assemblée legislative 

Bill No. 181 - The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 

Bill No. 158 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 
Act, 2014 

Bill No. 178 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 182 - The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:07.] 
 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask leave to move a motion regarding the appointment of the 
Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland has 
requested leave to move a motion to appoint the Provincial 
Auditor. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know 
everybody’s a little anxious to get out of here so I’ll keep my 
remarks down to an hour and a half. Mr. Speaker, there’s a few 
thank yous that I would like to put out there right away. First of 
all, I’d like to thank the Public Accounts Committee: the 
member from Biggar, Cut Knife-Turtleford, Saskatoon 
Greystone, Last Mountain-Touchwood, Moose Jaw North, 
Saskatoon Riversdale, and Regina Rosemont. But we did have 
to enlist a couple of experts from the audit area, Mr. Speaker, 
and I want to put special appreciation out to Ms. Shirley Raab, 
Chair of the audit committee, and Mr. Devan Mescall who is a 
member of our technical committee. I’d also like to thank Kathy 
Burianyk, Senior Committee Clerk, and Ginette Michaluk, 
director of human resources for the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, seated in your 
gallery, it’s my honour to welcome, to recommend the 
candidate for the role of the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan, Ms. Judy Ferguson. 
 
Just a little information, Mr. Speaker, on Ms. Ferguson. She’s 
been the Acting Provincial Auditor with Saskatchewan for the 
last 19 months. She has more than 30 years service with the 
Provincial Auditor’s office, and she was appointed to the 
assistant provincial auditor in 2012. 
 
Throughout her career she has spent time in various audit 
positions within the audit office. Ms. Ferguson holds a Bachelor 
of Commerce degree from the University of Saskatchewan, is a 
chartered professional accountant, and was awarded the 
fellowship of chartered professional accountancy of 
Saskatchewan in 2004. She has considerable expertise relating 
to audit and financial reporting and serves as a representative 
with several professional organizations and advisory groups, 
including Canadian Council of Legislative Auditors. She also 
served on the Canadian Auditing and Assurance Standards 
Board from 2007 to 2013. 
 
And on behalf of the committee, I just want to thank everybody 
that was involved with the process of hiring the auditor, and I 
want to welcome Judy as . . . Ms. Ferguson as our official 
Provincial Auditor. Thank you very much for all the help in the 
past, and look forward to working forward in the future with 



7260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d now like to read this motion, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That pursuant to section 3.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act, 
this Assembly appoints Judy Ferguson to the position of 
Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland: 
 

That pursuant to section 3.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act, 
this Assembly appoints Judy Ferguson to the position of 
Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 
join with the Vice-Chair of the Public Accounts at this time in 
recognizing, first, all those individuals that were involved in the 
selection process, certainly the technical experts, the 
independent experts that were able to join from the audit 
committee: Ms. Shirley Raab, Mr. Devan Mescall. I’d like to 
recognize as well Ms. Kathy Burianyk and Ms. Ginette 
Michaluk from the legislature here, Mr. Speaker, certainly as 
well the steering committee and leadership of the Public 
Accounts Committee through the selection process. 
 
And I’m very pleased to welcome Ms. Judy Ferguson as the 
official auditor for Saskatchewan. I thank her for her service to 
date, a dedicated service to Saskatchewan people in her 
capacities both as acting auditor but a long history and career 
within that office and someone that has certainly served with 
distinction there for Saskatchewan people but has also 
represented her profession on many committees, through many 
activities, as well represented Saskatchewan and her profession 
and auditors’ offices on national committees, Mr. Speaker. So I 
know this office is in very able hands. 
 
I know that the auditor’s office of Saskatchewan as well is an 
incredibly impressive office, and I am so confident in the senior 
leadership within that office that extends beyond the auditor 
here today, the culture that they’ve created and the very 
important work that they provide back to Saskatchewan people. 
 
When you think of the importance of this role in providing good 
stewardship of resources and protecting the public in assessing 
the economy and efficiency and performance of government 
programs, this is an incredibly important office, one that’s 
independent of us as legislators, independent of the parties, Mr. 
Speaker, one that certainly provides good governance for all 
Saskatchewan people and builds trust through to the legislature 
and our democratic processes for Saskatchewan people. So it’s 
my honour to welcome Ms. Judy Ferguson as our Provincial 
Auditor, and I thank her in advance for her service throughout 
her term. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. At this time it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the Legislative Assembly the new Provincial 
Auditor, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Ms. Judy Ferguson as 
an officer of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
Welcome and congratulations. I invite all members to welcome 
our new Provincial Auditor. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Gay-Straight Alliances 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 
like to seek leave under rule 61 to move a motion of urgent and 
pressing necessity. If there’s unanimous consent to do so, I’d be 
prepared to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the importance of 
gay-straight alliances or gender sexual alliances and agrees 
to hold a free vote on Bill 612, The Respect for Diversity 
— Student Bill of Rights Act today. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to present a 
motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 
[11:15] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I wish to table the 
answers to questions 956 through 969. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 956 through 969. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to make a brief statement regarding the 
conclusion of session. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to make a statement regarding the end of session. Is leave 
granted? 
 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7261 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Expression of Thanks 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I understand my hon. friend across the way would like 
to do the same thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in closing this spring session I would like to 
express my sincere thank you to the many individuals who help 
run this great place. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 
you for all the work that you do. We have seen some lively 
debate here in the Chamber this session, and you’ve done an 
excellent job of imposing discipline and decorum on both sides 
of the aisle. And I stress the word “imposing” in reference to 
some of the statements that were made, but I’m sure members 
would agree that they were necessary and they in fact enhanced 
the debate that has taken place. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Clerks-at-the-Table — Greg, Iris — 
and the Table Officers for your expert advice and for navigating 
parliamentary rules and procedure, as well as the committees 
branch and their staff for helping run, running committees well 
into the evenings. 
 
Thanks also to the committee Chairs, the members from Regina 
Dewdney, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, the 
member from Carrot River Valley, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, and the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, for all the great work that they do in managing their 
committees and ensuring that the work of the committees is 
completed. 
 
A big thank you also to the building staff, to broadcast services, 
library services, Journals, and Hansard, folks who stick around 
after to put in many long hours and stick around long after 
many of the members have gone home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his 
staff for the work that they do. After the tragic events in Ottawa 
last October, I think all members of the House, colleagues on 
this side and opposite, both sides of the aisle, as well as 
building staff, have gained a new insight into the role you play 
in the protection of democracy and free debate in this great 
Chamber. 
 
I’d also like to thank the commissionaires, the cafeteria staff, 
the Pages, and the interns for all the important work that they 
do, as well as the tour guides and visitor services who do an 
excellent job of sharing this beautiful building and its history 
with each and every individual who has the pleasure of 
entering. 
 
A special thank you is also in order to government staff, staff in 
House business, Graham Stewart, Jarret Coels, Harrison Clark 
for all the work they do in supporting me in my role as House 
Leader. Thanks also to the media who are here day in and day 
out, holding the government to a standard and reporting on the 
news of the day. 

On a personal note, I’d like to thank the member from Meadow 
Lake for his guidance and support in my role and also 
Saskatoon Eastview in assisting me in carrying out my work — 
and the Whip as well, the member from The Battlefords. 
 
I’d also like to thank colleagues from across the aisle, certainly 
the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, the Opposition 
House Leader, for the great work that he has done and the 
relationship that we do have. It’s a professional one, and I 
believe it has served this legislature well. Many people are out 
there watching, and some only watch the combative nature of 
politics. They see question period, and they see the to and fro. 
They see some lively debates. But it’s important that people 
realize that there is a co-operative relationship as well between 
both sides of the aisle that is far less prominent and less of the 
focus from the outside. So I’d like to thank the Opposition 
House Leader for the job he has done in working to make the 
process function properly. 
 
I’d also, Mr. Speaker, like to thank our CAs, our constituency 
assistants. There’s been some talk about who has the best one. 
It’s always been competitive, but I think each and every one of 
us would say that we have the best constituency assistant. But 
they help us do our job when we’re here and a big thank you to 
each of them. 
 
Finally I’d like to thank the families of all building staff, of all 
members, of everyone involved in making this place run. It 
takes a lot of time away from families, and it’s important that 
we’re able to thank them at this time. This job takes many of 
my colleagues away from our families for extended periods of 
time. There’s also travel involved, and we do look forward to 
having more time to spend with them. 
 
On a personal note, to my family, to Trish, Carter, and Paige I’d 
like to thank you for allowing me to do the job that I do, and on 
behalf of all MLAs, to thank all our families for making sure 
that we are able to do the best job possible. Your support means 
a great deal to us. So ladies and gentlemen, God bless. Have a 
safe Saskatchewan summer. Thank you for this opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Government House Leader in providing some 
end-of-session remarks and thank yous. And I’ll start out, Mr. 
Speaker, with thanking you for all of your advice, both the 
formal advice and the informal advice and the hints and the 
looks and the things that you give us all the time. And we also 
want to thank you and wish you all the best in getting rid of this 
nasty illness that’s gotten you down the last few weeks. But we 
look forward to the fall when we can return and have some 
more I think fun but also work for the people of the province 
here. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank the Table officers for their work and their 
advice as we’ve gone through all of these things. Once again 
it’s that formal advice, but also the informal side that’s really 
important for the work that we do. And I know every member 
enjoys the opportunity and knows that they don’t have to be 
afraid to talk to any one of you about issues, and I think that’s 
an important factor in making sure this legislature works well. 



7262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2015 

All of the staff in the Clerk’s office with the Clerk add to the 
important things that happen here, and we want to say a special 
thank you to them. As well we want to thank all of the people in 
members’ services. They keep track of the things that we do 
and they continually remind us to make sure that we’ve gotten 
everything done properly, and we very much thank them. 
 
Special thank you to all the people who work in Hansard. And 
many times we don’t see them, but we know that they’ve 
provided a very accurate record of what’s happened in this 
place. As we all know, there are many times we remember 
something that happened 5 years, 10 years before, and having 
Hansard available really makes a big difference in our lives, 
also, as well, all of the people who work on the Journals that 
relate to this institution. 
 
A special thank you to the audio-visual people. They have 
added a few new features this year that have assisted all of us, 
but once again they make sure most of the time that the best 
side of us is shown to the public. And that’s not always an easy 
task, so we thank them especially for that work. 
 
And to the Sergeant-at-Arms and the security people and the 
commissionaires, we’ve always known that you’ve done an 
excellent job for us, but in this year I think we’ve had a special 
recognition that the kind of calm presence that you provide in 
this building and around our constituency offices across the 
province is invaluable. So thank you very much for that. 
 
A very special thank you to all the people in the library. And I 
know that all members use the library, some more than others, 
but there’s no question that the library is a huge important part 
of this institution, and we thank them for all that work. 
 
I also want to thank Chef Trent Brears and the cafeteria staff for 
making sure that we’re properly nourished with some of the 
best food that you can find in Saskatchewan. 
 
Special thank you to the Pages. We appreciate the work that 
you do. You are basically able to provide us with assistance at 
all times, and we very much hope that this experience will 
encourage you, in all of your subsequent careers, to do the good 
things that we do — maybe not some of the other parts though. 
And special thank you to the interns from the SLIP program 
who have provided service for us. 
 
Another group I want to thank is the staff of Wascana Centre 
for the work that they do in keeping the grounds around the 
legislature well maintained, and we’re especially looking 
forward to all of the planting of the flowers and things that will 
enhance this place. 
 
I want to thank the members of the press gallery. They have a 
difficult task to report on many things that are happening here 
and, as we know, they don’t have as many members as they did 
a few years ago, and their task is quite, quite difficult. 
 
Our House Leader is not able to be here today, and so I’m 
expressing these things on his behalf, on all of our behalf, but 
he wants to make a special point of thanking the Government 
House Leader for the relationship that they’ve been able to 
develop as this work is being done here. There are times when 
there are tensions, but there are also times when solutions are 

found that are best for all of us. 
 
I also want to thank all of the members of the legislature on 
both sides of the House. There are roles that we have, and we 
play them well most of the time, but we also know that we’re 
part of a family that we’ll be part of for a long time. 
 
Also I want to say a special thank you to the caucus staff that 
we have. They have served us well. We don’t have as many as 
the government does, so we’re often feeling like we’re in a 
corner, but that’s fine. I also want to say a special thank you to 
all of the constituency assistants across the province. 
 
I know that all of our families who support us are a big part of 
who we are. And I know I want to thank obviously my family 
but also I think thank all of the families for all of the members 
and all of the staff, all of the people who work here. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a big thank you to the 
people of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan have 
given us their trust. They trust us to do the right thing, and 
that’s really important. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Since we’re relaxing the rules a little bit on 
speeches for the end of session, I might as well do mine now 
along with the other two members. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone for their 
hard work this session. Thank you to the members for their 
many hours of service to Saskatchewan and for the long hours 
and days away from their families. It is time to return to your 
homes and spend some quality time with your family. Thank 
you to the families at home for their support. 
 
While the Assembly is not likely to sit until the fall, I know the 
work does not end, and committee work will continue through 
the recess period. Ministers will continue their duties and 
meetings in Regina and Saskatoon or across the province. 
Private members will work on their constituency issues and in 
their roles as committee members, legislative secretaries, or 
critics. 
 
I would like to thank the LAS [Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan] staff: the Clerks and officers, the Pages, 
Hansard, the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff, the interns, caucus 
staff, cafeteria staff, Central Services’ building staff. Their 
hours are often as long or, in the case of Hansard, longer than 
those of the members. Thank you to our constituency staff for 
their diligence and hard work, especially while the members are 
in the Assembly. 
 
Thank you to my staff, Sheila and Connie, for their support, 
especially in dealing with the programs and initiatives such as 
SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy] and the educational outreach 
program which are run out of the Speaker’s office. These 
programs take a lot of extra time but are well worth the effort. 
 
I would also like to give a special thank you to the Deputy 
Speaker who has been filling in for me while I have been absent 
and ill. Everyone have a safe and fulfilling summer.  
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m surprised that you came back. 



May 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7263 

The Speaker: — I’m not sure you all wanted me back. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to make a motion regarding the end of 
session. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to make a motion regarding the end of session. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set 
by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government; and 
 
That the Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion moved by the Government House 
Leader is: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set 
by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government; and 
 
That Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have leave 
to adjourn the House. I’d like to make a motion to adjourn the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again we’re at the end of a session, and our thank 
yous have been said. It’s been an opportunity for all of us to 
reflect and to do the work of the province of Saskatchewan. 
Again I want to thank my Premier, my leader, and all of those 
who helped me do the job. We look forward to continuing our 
work at our constituency offices and across the province. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn to the call of the Chair. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to the 
call of the Chair. Have a good summer. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:33.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7249 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7249 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7249 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7249 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7249 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7250 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7250 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7250 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7250 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7250 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7250 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7251 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Celebrating Norwegian Constitution Day 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7251 
 Early Childhood Education Month 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7251 
 Football Camp Supports Youth 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7251 
 Pie in the Eye in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7252 
 Saskatchewan Curlers Join Sports Hall of Fame 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7252 
 Funding for Research and Development Internships 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7252 
 Is Our Province Better Off Today? 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7252 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Ombudsman’s Report and Provision of Seniors’ Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7253 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7253 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7255 
 Prince Albert Flood Plain Policy 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7256 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7256 
 Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7257 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7257 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Early Childhood Education Courses Partnership 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7257 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7257 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7258 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7258 
MOTIONS 
 Appointment of Provincial Auditor 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7259 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7260 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7260 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7260 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Expression of Thanks 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7261 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7261 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7262 



 

MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7263 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	MOTION UNDER RULE 61
	Gay-Straight Alliances
	MOTION UNDER RULE 61
	Gay-Straight Alliances

