






















































Hansard: March 24, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 39B  TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6721 
 March 24, 2015 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into the debate on our 2015-16 budget for the 
Saskatchewan government. 
 
I would like to follow with a lot of my other colleagues here, do 
a few thank yous before I commence into the budget itself. 
Firstly, of course, thank our families. I thank my family. First of 
all, my wife, Leone. I wouldn’t be able to be here and do this 
job if it wasn’t for her looking after me and looking after 
everything back at home, for certain. Also my daughter, 
Katelin, who is just at this point finishing up her nursing career, 
nursing training actually, doing her practicum in Saskatoon at 
RUH [Royal University Hospital]. So I’m really looking 
forward to what she’s going to offer the nursing profession in 
this province. And admittedly one of the recipients of the 
expanded nursing program that we do have here in the province. 
And I did mention these two previously, I think my Throne 
Speech reply, Mr. Speaker, but my daughter Rayanne Krahenbil 
and her husband, Austin Krahenbil. Austin’s from the 
Lemberg-Melville area, Rayanne, of course, from Yorkton, but 
living in Ottawa for four years and moved home just about a 
year ago to start their life here in Saskatchewan. 
 
As my friend, the one member from Saskatoon, mentioned a 
grandchild on the way, we too are expecting a grandchild in the 
coming days, actually. I think April 4th is my daughter’s due 
date so we’re looking forward to welcoming our first 
grandchild, Leone and my first grandchild, into this world. We 
know that’s going to change the whole environment around our 
house, and we’re really looking forward to that. And so I think 
now we were up to 1,132,641; 642 now we’re going to have in 
the province. So we’re really looking forward to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I would be remiss if I didn’t thank the people of Yorkton 
and area for honouring me with the privilege of representing 
them in this fine building with this fine group of colleagues and 
people on this side of the House and colleagues across as well, 
Mr. Speaker. The community has been great to my family, 
whether it’s been business, raising our kids, support through 

admittedly some of the most difficult times in our life, also 
support for this job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Recently I took part in a roast in Yorkton raising money for 
Boy Scouts, raised about $16,000, myself being roasted, but 
again good-hearted fun. And you know, bordering on some 
maybe sketchy jokes, but everybody kept it well within the 
family bounds of a Scouting event, and it was a real great event 
there. 
 
I want to thank also my staff, firstly back at home: Lauretta, 
Ingrid, and Rachelle that keep the office in Yorkton running so 
efficiently, and I really am thankful for the great work that they 
do for me there and for the constituents of Yorkton, and 
represent me specifically there very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the staff in Regina. As you know, I was sworn in to this 
position September 24th. Very honoured to take this portfolio 
working alongside my esteemed colleague, the Minister of 
Health from Weyburn-Big Muddy, a man probably almost two 
decades younger than me, Mr. Speaker, but I look up to him. 
He’s very, very detail oriented, does a very good job, and is a 
mentor to myself in this position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the staff here in this office, Minister Responsible for Rural 
and Remote Health office, my chief of staff Mike Kindrachuk, 
just a great young fellow who does just an unbelievable job in 
keeping me informed and keeping the office running well. 
Selena Beahm, who I know you know, Mr. Speaker, and just a 
really great administrative chief that really keeps the office 
running well. Ashley Boha, our head MA [ministerial assistant] 
that does the casework there, just very caring, very dedicated 
young lady who recently got married. I was blessed to be 
invited to her wedding. We had a really great time there. And 
last but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, Brittany Gogel who 
keeps me on track when we’re on the road — communications, 
ministerial assistant, casework. And she just does an amazing 
job. So very, very blessed to have all those working with me. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve pointed out to them, although my 
name might be on the door out in the hallway, collectively we 
are the Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health. And 
I want to acknowledge as well the staff in the Minister of 
Health’s office, that we do work very close together, very much 
supportive in both offices, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 
Cole and Christopher and Dale over there, as well as Chaelah, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleagues, the Premier specifically, my colleagues over 
here, we truly are a big family. Admittedly, you know, there’s a 
bit of a political spectrum represented over here, a lot of diverse 
backgrounds. I think I heard one of the members last night 
when they were speaking talked about the diversity of our 
caucus, Mr. Speaker. It is great to have that diversity. I looked 
across the floor and, you know, not meaning to ridicule or poke 
at all but, you know, quite a narrow focus of expertise in the 
nine members across. Mr. Speaker, the 48, 49 members on this 
side, again going all the way from health backgrounds to 
business backgrounds to agriculture to you name it, Mr. 
Speaker, very wide variety of backgrounds, union backgrounds. 
So very well represented spectrum over here to represent the 
issues and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 



6722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

I want to also recognize not specifically each one, but all of the 
members that are leaving us, some that have left already, some 
that won’t be running again, some relatively new members and 
some very long-term members, Mr. Speaker, that their expertise 
and their mentorship and the knowledge is going to be very, 
very missed, Mr. Speaker, including the member from 
Moosomin who has become a very good friend of mine over the 
last 10 years. I look at as somewhat of a father figure, although 
he’s not that old, but a father figure, a really good mentor, and a 
really, really good person, Mr. Speaker, to befriend, learn this 
place, learn the expertise being here. I think by the time he 
retires it will be almost 30 years, twenty-nine and a half years, 
Mr. Speaker. And I really am thankful for his friendship. 
 
And the one I will mention specifically of course is the member 
from Canora-Pelly who, I know myself, I wouldn’t be here if it 
wasn’t for him. I had sort of made a decision to maybe go down 
this path, but if it wasn’t for him and his wife, Gail, being 
mentors and getting us, my wife and I, kind of the inside tracks 
and really specific information on what it takes to do this job, I 
wouldn’t have been as prepared as I was, and I probably 
wouldn’t have done this either, Mr. Speaker. So you know, I 
know the recognition he’s gotten previously as the minister of 
Education, of course the Deputy Premier. But, Mr. Speaker, in 
foreshadowing, I’m going to be very happy to support this fifth 
budget of his, this fifth balanced budget, our eighth overall 
balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And of course I certainly want to 
recognize him for again his friendship, his wife’s friendship, 
Gail, his mentorship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again another member of this House that . . . Any member 
that’s newly coming in or has been here for any length of time 
should really look to the front row, Mr. Speaker, in the centre, 
and pattern their career, their work ethic, and their dedication to 
not only this place, their constituents, but the people of the 
province, after the member for Canora-Pelly, the Deputy 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t even have to pay me to say 
that. Joking aside, Mr. Speaker, I really do admire him and 
cherish his friendship. Although you know, I don’t want to just 
count him out too soon here. He’s got some time left here yet. 
He’s got a few useful months left here, Mr. Speaker, so we’re 
going utilize that expertise to the bitter end. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, getting to the budget, you know, when I was 
elected here in 2007, admittedly a lot of the business 
community is who were supporting me and asking me to do this 
job and run in this position. And the message I got for them 
was, you know, you run a business, a very successful business. 
You’ve done well, you’re engaged in the community. Run the 
province like you run your household. Run the province like 
you run your business. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say by most 
comparisons, virtually all comparisons, many members on this 
side would have had the same input and take that to heart and 
actually do do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, when things are good, you live within reason, you 
invest in your family, your home, your extras. You pay down 
debt. You save for emergencies. Things get a bit difficult, you 
know, you have to make some tough decisions, but you make 
the best decisions with the information you have at the time. 
You maintain your home, you look after your family essentials, 
use the money for emergencies when you need to, continue to 
maintain and invest in your home, and borrow to maintain your 

assets if you need to, Mr. Speaker. If you’ve got the cash in the 
bank, of course utilize it. If you have to borrow for significant 
investments that have value, that have . . . capital assets, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s a new vehicle, specifically a home or, you 
know, family infrastructure or in the case of business, business 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, very important to continue to do 
that. 
 
When it comes to a business, operate efficiently and effectively 
as possible. I know I’m always accused of being probably a 
little bit tight, Mr. Speaker, but if I had the cash for equipment 
I’d buy my equipment in cash. If I had a 2, 300, $400,000 piece 
of equipment, you’ve got to amortize that over time because 
you just can’t absorb that instantly. But again a long-term plan; 
you have a debt repayment plan, Mr. Speaker, on that 
equipment. And number one, Mr. Speaker, in business: you 
look after your customers. And something I’m proud to say that 
I always did, my brother did, as he was my partner for some 
time, and I know the people that are now running our old 
business is definitely doing the same, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
we’re going to continue just to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve heard it . . . I’ll get into the, 
where did the money go, maybe a little bit more in depth. I 
don’t want to take up a whole bunch of time here. I know 
there’s a lot of members who want to speak. But you know, I 
focused on emergencies, floods. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
where a lot of the money went. Unforeseen circumstances we 
. . . The members across know how many floods, how many 
emergency situations we’ve had in this province over the past 
number of years, specifically in our last seven and a half years. 
Some great years, admittedly but again, a lot of those savings 
put aside going to support the people of the province, whether 
it’s flood damage, you know, some agricultural issues, Mr. 
Speaker, supports for industry, whatever it might be. We’ve 
been there for the people of this province. And although, 
admittedly, many people would want more, you know, I think 
we’ve done a fairly good job at addressing some of the needs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to infrastructure, I hope we’ll have some time to 
get into more detail about infrastructure, specifically around 
health care. But you know, I’m driving back and forth to Regina 
— and I think a few members touched on it here — I’ve got to 
stop myself from getting a bit angry. You’ve got to slow down 
to 60 over and over and over; stop for traffic, Mr. Speaker, at 
stop lights; replacing bridge after bridge after bridge; culvert 
after culvert after culvert along specifically Highway 10 
corridor, Melville to Yorkton where there was significant 
flooding. 
 
Calls from people. You know, I credit the Highways minister; 
she’s done a great job in addressing the needs of a lot of those 
constituents where they were, admittedly, concerned over 
culverts and more culvert capacity and water flows and, you 
know, acting very, very quickly and addressing a lot of those 
concerns, Mr. Speaker. So very proud of my colleagues, 
specifically the Minister of Highways. 
 
You know, looking through this budget, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, where did the money go? Well again we can pride 
ourselves on no tax increases, in fact a lot of significant tax 
reductions, Mr. Speaker; no property tax increases, in fact 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6723 

significant property tax cuts over the years; record income tax 
cuts, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s seniors, those of low income — 
effectively most of those people of low income, especially 
seniors and those with some disabilities, likely zero income tax 
payable on the provincial side and totalling up to $5 billion in 
tax relief over the years, Mr. Speaker, of our tenure. 
 
Controlled spending. We see our budgets year over year 
admittedly increasing, but when we listen to the members 
opposite comparing 8 billion to 14 billion, Mr. Speaker, a 
general revenue budget to a summary budget, we’ve got to, as 
the Minister of Finance pointed out the other day, we’ve got to 
compare apples to apples. We look at the last year of the NDP 
[New Democratic Party], about 11.7 billion on a summary 
basis. This year with this government, just over 14 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. So over a seven-year period, almost eight years, a $2 
billion increase but very effective, very targeted spending, Mr. 
Speaker, in areas that are very needed, so a controlled spending 
that we’re very proud of. 
 
And we look at again highways projects, very important in 
keeping the economy moving, keeping traffic moving, the 
twinning projects that have happened throughout the province 
effectively increasing safety in many areas, Mr. Speaker. 
Twinning projects, I know I think the first ones we did were 
between Fort Qu’Appelle and Regina or Balgonie, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know myself travelling that highway, quite often daily 
and I know weekly, the flow, the safety of traffic now in that 
corridor is second to none. It just, it moves so great. It works 
well, and exciting to see that many of those projects are going 
to continue throughout the province. I won’t be naming them 
specifically. 
 
Schools. Aside from the nine joint-use schools that we’ve 
announced, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Connaught or other 
schools that admittedly a lot of them I think, if not all, affect the 
members opposite, yet they vote against these budgets where 
we see . . . I think the member for Cumberland was up on his 
feet today, you know, criticizing us on our long-term care and 
seniors’ issues. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s this place is 
about is debate and addressing and acknowledging those 
problems. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, to totally disregard a $500,000 
investment in his own constituency for planning for a new 
long-term care facility in La Ronge that admittedly is, as the 
Minister of Health had pointed out, that that money hasn’t been 
spent yet; they’re still in the planning stage. I’m not sure if he 
decides to build something without a plan, without even a 
foundation set down, Mr. Speaker. But again I’m very proud of 
our government’s record on those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And you know, the members again across continually talking 
about us patting ourselves on the back. Where did the money 
go? What would you do? Where did the money go? So you tell 
them, and you’re patting yourself on the back. Like the 
hypocrisy is astounding in here some days, Mr. Speaker. But 
you know, I can tell by the eye I’m getting from you, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m just going to leave that one alone. I’m just going 
to move on, but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t think that 
was a twinkle. 

New schools. I’ll get into some of the infrastructure projects, 
Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan Hospital, 100-year-old project. 
There’s a hospital that’s a health care and mental health facility, 
Mr. Speaker, that needs replacing. This government’s going to 
get it done. You know, I know there was a former member from 
North Battleford, NDP. I know he was in cabinet, never got it 
done. Our Whip, Mr. Speaker, member from North Battleford, 
he’s getting it done. The hospital in Moose Jaw, I think it was 
pointed out by the member last night — I was really enjoying 
the speech last night from him — two cabinet ministers, 
premier from Moose Jaw, no hospital, Mr. Speaker. These two 
members — they can criticize the members from Moose Jaw all 
they want, backbenchers and all the rest — they got it done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I won’t get into all the different incentives around a lot of the 
job creation, Mr. Speaker. Our record speaks for itself, I 
believe, with the increase in population, the opportunities for 
people here, including my daughter who now won’t have to 
move out of the province to get her nursing degree, practise in 
nursing, Mr. Speaker. She’ll have opportunities here. 
 
I would be remiss if I didn’t talk a little bit about investing in 
people, specifically, Mr. Speaker, increased supports for those 
with disabilities and seniors. Now I know it was pointed out but 
it can’t go without saying, Mr. Speaker, that the members’ 
opposite seniors’ income plan, untouched from 1992 till they 
lost government in 2007. Mr. Speaker, under this government, 
this final budget, with the increase brought forward by the 
Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, tripling that benefit and also 
increasing the number of seniors able to access that program by 
I think it was 10,000, Mr. Speaker, because of changing of the 
limit on income that you can access that program. 
 
I know when I was legislative secretary for Social Services, 
CBO [community-based organization] sector, Mr. Speaker, we 
heard over and over again about an income plan specifically for 
those with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, this is the party, this is the 
government that put it in place, increasing it year over year to 
the point now that these people with disabilities have their own 
dignity, their own dignified source of income through the 
Saskatchewan assured income disability plan. This government 
did it. They didn’t, Mr. Speaker. So again, pat ourselves on the 
back. Call it if you want. We’re proud to look after those in this 
province that have challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, I touch on a few points here fairly quickly. 
Municipal revenue sharing, I know it’s a very good, 
well-received part of our budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I won’t 
even have to use a quote because the mayor was so happy 
during the budget. I was sitting here listening to the minister, 
the Deputy Premier, deliver his budget, and the mayor’s texting 
me, he’s so happy, and really happy about of course the 
additional funds going to finish the Parkland College. And he 
didn’t even know about . . . I had to let him know about because 
it’s not specified in the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, but the 
extra $500,000 for 100 more training seats at Parkland College 
in Yorkton. 
 
So again, you know, our record: keeping taxes low, continuing 
to invest in infrastructure, which we know is part of keeping our 
economy strong. I won’t go through all those different 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, but controlled spending, creating jobs, 



6724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

balancing the budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite are going to 
talk about, is it balanced? Is it not? You know, I go by 
Moody’s, Mr. Speaker, Moody’s independent agency, AAA 
credit rating, and it continues. And again what do we see the 
NDP do in times like these that are a little bit tough, smaller 
increases, smaller budget times, Mr. Speaker? They neglected 
infrastructure. They neglected seniors, and they neglected the 
disabled. 
 
And I remember talking to the deputy premier back then. It was 
Mr. Serby from Yorkton. I talked about some of the challenges 
he might be having in business, and he had the same attitude in 
business that they had in government. Just charge more. Raise 
taxes 17 times. Stop investing in infrastructure. Drive the 
economy into the ground. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be wrapping up pretty soon here 
because my seatmate is looking at me. But you know, the 
investments in health, I’m not going to really go too much in 
depth, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health went ahead of me 
here a few speakers ago, and he really did a great job about the 
increased funding for health authorities; increased funding for 
Cancer Agency; capital investments in Swift Current, Leader, 
Moose Jaw, Kelvington, Weyburn; critical infrastructure 
repairs, Mr. Speaker; and of course the 13 long-term care 
facilities we have been building across the province. 
 
I really wanted to read into record the 19 long-term care 
facilities that the members opposite closed, but of course time 
won’t allow for that. But it’s pretty easy access, and over the 
coming days, I’ll try and read those into the record, Mr. 
Speaker, the 19 long-term care facilities that the NDP killed in 
19 different communities around the province, forcing health 
care workers and doctors and those services away from rural 
Saskatchewan. And now they stand in the House and proclaim 
to be the saviours of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Again I 
find that, you know, laughable. I’m not meaning to be 
disrespectful, but it’s just laughable. 
 
You know, I want to touch on another point very quickly, Mr. 
Speaker: the NDP record in closing hospitals. I’m not going to 
name those. But you know, the curious thing I found when we 
talk about the Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment program brought in by this government to bring 
more doctors to the province? Ninety-six per cent of those grads 
are practicing in rural areas, Mr. Speaker. Fifty-two 
communities at last count were accessing those services. That’s 
the same amount of hospitals that they closed. That’s the kind 
of things that make you go hmm. More doctor seats, more 
training seats, more residency positions — a lot of those in rural 
Saskatchewan — 22 nurse practitioner seats all funded in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, investments in the Crown corporations, they talk 
about, you know this, where’s all this debt coming from. Mr. 
Speaker, they neglected their Crowns so badly, SaskPower 
needs a billion a year. SaskTel needs millions a year. 
SaskEnergy needs millions time over time to increase the safety 
of the infrastructure and expand the infrastructure for our 
growing economy and our growing population. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, they talk about the state of 
long-term care in the province, the state of health care. 
Admittedly there’s issues to address but, Mr. Speaker, I’ll stand 
in this House and defend our record day after day when I look 
at the record of the members opposite. It’s deplorable. I mean 
what they left the province with — admittedly focused a bit on 
Regina, Saskatoon, P.A. [Prince Albert]; Moose Jaw, maybe a 
little bit, although our members got the hospital there, they 
didn’t — but just a terrible record in rural Saskatchewan. And 
then they stand in this House and they expect people to forget 
how they decimated rural Saskatchewan, whether it’s with 
health care or schools or whatever else it might be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But my last point I want to touch on, and I apologize to my 
colleagues for maybe going a bit long, but this, I think I’ve 
spoken about this very briefly, but it’s something that I’ll admit 
is pretty emotional for myself and my family. But you know, 
the first official duty I had after being sworn in as minister, I 
think it was actually the day after, was I did a trip up to 
Saskatoon. We were doing the sod-turning, official sod-turning 
on the children’s hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, what was surreal 
for me was, we’re sitting there, we’re turning sod, and I’m 
looking into the hole where they’re putting the foundation in, 
and that used to be a parkade. And I remember that parkade full 
of cars, but I remember that parkade because, if I look up to the 
right of where I was standing, is Peds 3000. That’s where a lot 
of the cancer kids would be getting treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I thought, how would I have ever guessed that 14 years, 
maybe 15 years later, the windows I used to look down on, and 
my son used to call that parkade the car collection. Because you 
look out, it’d be like a hot wheels thing. You flip it open; all the 
cars are laid out there. That was his car collection. So we’d be 
looking down at this car collection. So I’m thinking, how cool 
is this? Fifteen years later I’m looking up at this window, you 
know. Some of the staff is still there and we’re turning sod on 
this facility, $235 million lean-design children’s hospital that’s 
going to benefit people throughout the province. 
 
And I know members opposite, some of them criticize, some of 
the members of the media criticize: spread the money 
throughout the health care system, target it in certain area, and 
address situations, Mr. Speaker. But you know, we look at . . . 
I’ll use an example of a different type of facility in Yorkton, the 
Gallagher Centre: wave pool, curling rink, hockey rink, 
Flexihall. If we waited to have the money to do that and fix 
everything else, Mr. Speaker, we would be lacking facilities for 
the people of this province to improve their quality of life. 
 
We’ve got to have those and address issues as we can, as we 
can afford, and try and make the best decisions we can, again 
with the information we have at hand, Mr. Speaker. But if we 
were to neglect that children’s hospital, if we were to neglect 
that facility, Mr. Speaker, that hurts everybody in the province. 
That facility is going to benefit rural, remote, and urban alike in 
this province. The children of this province are going to be very 
well treated in that hospital, very well looked after, Mr. 
Speaker, as they are up in the pediatrics ward, as they are in 
other pediatric wards around the province, Mr. Speaker. But 
from personal experience I know the caring, the dedication of 
those healthcare workers. And I am so proud to support that 
project. 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6725 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, taking all that aside — this is, I 
think, the last point I’m going to make — taking all that aside, 
the members opposite make their points and some members in 
the public make their points about, you know, is this really the 
best source of funds? What really made me focus on why that’s 
a good project, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to use a name here, 
Dr. Yager. Dr. Jerry Yager was our neurologist back in 1998 
when my son was diagnosed all the way till 2000 when we lost 
him. And, you know, lo and behold we’re doing this the sod 
turning, and who’s one of the main fundraisers? Who is one of 
the main pushes behind this facility? Dr. Jerry Yager, Mr. 
Speaker, a man respected in this province by all circles, Mr. 
Speaker, just an unbelievable great man and became somewhat 
of a friend, a friend of ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I thought, you know what? That’s the measure I’m going 
to go by — a dedicated physician, a neurologist who not only 
supports the project, but he’s behind fundraising for the project, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I’m behind this project because of 
the reasons brought forward by my colleagues across on this 
side of the floor, the Minister of Finance, my friend, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I’m 
supporting this budget, and I will not be supporting the 
amendment brought forward by the members across. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to be able to rise tonight to speak to our 2015-16 budget. And as 
so many of my colleagues have done, I’d like to start off with a 
few thank yous, first of all to my constituency assistant, 
Whitney, who’s on year 21 as a CA [constituency assistant]. I 
value his input and his advice and taking care of things at home 
when I’m down here so very much, so I want to thank him. 
 
To my staff in my Regina office, to Annie and Kim and David, 
Adam, and Cole. I want to thank them. We have a lot of fun in 
my office, and Cole has the misfortune of being my chief of 
staff again. He was my chief of staff when I was Central 
Services minister for a while and I managed to get him back. 
And I appreciate the conversations that we can have. 
 
I also want to thank my girls, Jasmine and Sharmaine. Jasmine 
is turning 21 or just turned 21, and Sharmaine just turned 18. 
They’ve just turned into such great young ladies. And I just got 
a text from Sharmaine today. She got 94 per cent on her English 
midterm, so her grandfather would be very proud of her. 
 
And I also want to do what so many of my colleagues have 
done and thank the Finance minister. I have had the absolute 
honour of sitting beside this man on treasury board for the last 
five years. And I’ve told him this personally, and I’d like to say 
it publicly that I’m a better minister and MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for the time that I’ve spent with him and 
his advice and counsel. And so thank you to him. 
 
I also want thank the staff and my ministry, to my deputy 
minister, Nithi, and to the executive team, to Blair and Jen and 
Ron, Wayne for all of the input and advice that they have given 
me over this last year, Mr. Speaker, and especially the input 
into this budget. We know that this was going to be a difficult 
budget year, and they offered so much advice to me along the 

way when we were preparing this. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, to the staff in the Ministry of Highways. 
I know that they go above and beyond. We saw that again 
today. As soon as we knew that there was going to be a weather 
incident today, the plow operators are out making sure that our 
citizens are safe on our highways. But in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, last summer when we had a torrential rainfall in the 
end of June, beginning of July, a lot of those folks from 
Highways who stepped up to make sure that our people were 
safe were scheduled to be on holidays. It was Canada Day long 
weekend, and they forfeited their holidays, Mr. Speaker, to 
serve the people of this province. And I want to publicly 
acknowledge them as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to my mayors and reeves, I have some of the 
fastest growing communities, not only in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but in all of Canada. They have faced some 
particular challenges that come with growth but, Mr. Speaker, 
they all embrace the challenges that come with that. And 
they’ve really taken on a regional approach to problem solving 
and coordinating our efforts, and it is such a pleasure to be able 
to work with them. So I want to thank them as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my last thank you is to my major stakeholder 
group, the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. As 
I’ve said to them and to others, the Government of 
Saskatchewan doesn’t build highways. These people do, the 
contractors that are members of the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association. So to their board, to Shantel and 
Carmen and Sean and Allan and the rest of the board members 
and their regular members, I want to say thank you to them for 
their dedication to our province, for sticking around when 
things were not good for them in this province, and for stepping 
up now when we’ve asked them to do more than ever before, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I probably shouldn’t single out just one contractor, I 
will — a man named George Wilson. He lives in my 
constituency but he’s originally from Buchanan. And I stopped 
by to visit him last fall. He started his business, G W 
Construction, over 60 years ago. He’s now 90, I believe he 
turns 91 this year, and, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that a man of 
that age would be retired. But he isn’t; he is still running his 
business. The convention last fall, I asked him if he was going. 
He said he was too old to go, and then I found out he spent the 
day working instead. And he is a true builder of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s been building roads in this province for over 
60 years. And he’s so very proud of family involvement. 
 
So one thing I’ve come to realize with our contractors is that so 
many of these businesses are family-based businesses. They’re 
second and third generation. And George Wilson and his family 
are just a shining example of the dedication that they have to 
this province. And like I said, I shouldn’t just single out one, 
but Grandpa George is kind of a cool guy, and I wanted to give 
him some recognition for all the work that he does. I’m sure 
he’ll be working long into his 90s because I don’t think that 
man is capable of retiring. So thank you to him and his 
company and to the rest of the contractors in this province. 
 
[19:30] 
 



6726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what this budget 
does for my constituency. The biggest issues at home have been 
schools and roads, and I’m happy to say that when it comes to 
our highways, most of those have been fixed. 305 was recently 
rebuilt and opened between Martensville and Warman, and 305 
from Martensville to Dalmeny is under construction as we 
speak. That will be such a great improvement for those 
communities, Mr. Speaker. When I was elected in 2007, they 
were pretty much just goat paths going to some of these 
communities. I’d ask the Highways minister at the time to come 
out and take a little tour of my constituency, but that offer was 
not taken up, which is unfortunate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m so very proud of our government and 
Highways ministers in the past who have stepped up and fixed 
some of those roads in my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
this budget, as you would know, there’s money set aside for 
interchanges on Highway 11 at Warman and Highway 12 at 
Martensville to accommodate the increased population and 
traffic on those particular highways, Mr. Speaker, and the safety 
that these interchanges are going to provide is most welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that I have at home is schools. 
We’ve invested heavily in capital. In my constituency, Prairie 
Spirit School Division has received over $90 million in school 
capital since we’ve been in government. It’s a far greater share 
than any other division has seen in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And with the two joint-use schools, one in Warman and one in 
Martensville, that’s going to greatly benefit the young families 
that continue to move there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, when the NDP come into this 
Chamber, we spend a lot of time on this side of the House 
correcting the things that they say on that side of the House 
because they’re not always coming out with all the facts in their 
back pocket, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP Education critic was 
up last week complaining that we weren’t doing anything about 
child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, if they had bothered to ask a 
question or dig into this a little bit more, they would know that 
every one of the nine joint-use schools in this province that we 
are going to be building comes with child care spaces. I believe 
it’s over 800 spaces that are going to be going into these 
schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Highways 
budget. As Highways minister, obviously that was my focus the 
last few months. Mr. Speaker, as you would know, there’s 
unprecedented investment in our province in transportation 
infrastructure since we took office. We were left with a billion 
dollar pothole. Last year’s budget was a record investment in 
transportation infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and this year we 
broke that record again. Record budget this year is $842 
million. It’s a 27 per cent increase over last year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in our eight budgets 
that we have introduced, we have invested $1 billion more in 
transportation infrastructure in those eight budgets than the 
NDP did in their entire 16 years — half the time and $1 billion 
dollars more, Mr. Speaker. I think our commitment to 
rebuilding and building new infrastructure in our province is 
quite evident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Highways capital budget has increased 135 per cent from 

’08-09 to 2015-16, Mr. Speaker. And we know that when we 
went into this budget deliberation process that, while the 
revenues of our province might have been hit by the oil 
situation, our economy is doing quite well, and the worst thing 
that we could do is stop building. We are committed to invest in 
capital in our province, whether it’s schools or hospitals or 
long-term homes for our seniors or highways, Mr. Speaker, and 
I think our dedication to that is evident through this budget. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, roads fell apart because 
of neglect. We see challenges in our road system now because 
of increased population, increased traffic, and more truck traffic 
because our economy is doing so well, Mr. Speaker, so we have 
to invest. Not only are we catching up to the horrible legacy that 
the NDP left behind, but we’re continuing on with regular 
maintenance and then building infrastructure for the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of our investments include: the number of culvert projects 
from ’08 to 2014 increased by over 2,000 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
The number of TMS [thin membrane surface] roads upgraded is 
over 24 per cent over what we saw before, Mr. Speaker. By the 
time this construction season is over, we will have improved 
almost 9,000 kilometres of our provincial highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the NDP like to ask, where did the 
money go? I’m happy to say where the money went. We are 
investing in massive projects, things that the NDP would never 
imagine investing in, Mr. Speaker: twinning of Highway 7, 
twinning of Highway 16. We finished twinning Highway 11; as 
I mentioned, interchanges at Warman and Martensville. We’re 
working on the Regina bypass. We’re planning for the 
Saskatoon perimeter highway. There are passing lanes on 7, 
passing lanes on 10, and money in this budget to plan for 
passing lanes on Highway 5. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca questions this. 
It’s all in the budget. It’s in black and white. All he has to do is 
read it. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP don’t actually 
want to read what’s in our budget. We saw that this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Cumberland was up 
saying that we weren’t investing in northern roads. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, here are the facts of the matter. Once again we have to 
correct what the NDP say. The budget last year for northern 
roads was $37 million. The budget this year is $56.3 million. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what kind of math the NDP are 
engaged in, but in my world $56 million is more than $37 
million. So then, Mr. Speaker, when I pointed that out to them, 
then he said, the member from Cumberland said, well that’s all 
for maintenance. There’s no capital. 
 
Of that $56.3 million — and I wish the member for Athabasca 
would listen because he was questioning this earlier as well — 
of the $56.3 million, $30 million of that is for maintenance. The 
rest is for capital projects, Mr. Speaker. It’s for construction. 
That construction includes improvements to Stony Rapids 
airport and Buffalo Narrows airport, including investment in 
capital projects in roads in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I explained that to the member from Cumberland, and then 
he said, well it doesn’t matter because none of this is new 
money because it was all announced last fall. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps the members opposite don’t understand how a 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6727 

fall tender plan works in the Ministry of Highways. We release 
a fall tender plan so our contractors have an idea of what’s 
coming up in the next construction season. It is paired then with 
the spring tender plan, which is the rest of our capital 
investment but, Mr. Speaker, the fall tender plan is funded with 
the next year’s budget. So whatever came out . . . And maybe 
the member from Athabasca can listen because he didn’t 
believe me earlier this afternoon. The fall tender plan that we 
released last fall in 2014 will be paid for in the ’15-16 budget, 
so even though it was on the fall tender plan, Mr. Speaker, those 
are new capital projects, including projects in the North. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that our investment in the 
North has increased by 42, by 42 per cent over the NDP, and 
that was when the member for Athabasca, a member who 
represents the North, was the Highways minister, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve invested 42 per cent more than the NDP did. 
 
And I know that the member for Athabasca doesn’t stand up on 
his feet and ask some questions. I’m not sure why. Happy to 
answer his questions if he ever gets up, but I know that he’s 
beaked from his seat about 924, Highway 924. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the maintenance budget for 924 since 2011, not even 
comparing to the NDP’s horrible investment in highways, from 
2011 to 2014, we have increased the maintenance budget for 
that particular highway — listen — 485 per cent. So, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite can sit there and say that we’re 
not investing in the North but, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely 
not the case, and I think our investment in this year’s budget 
demonstrates that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the member for Athabasca did an interview last year 
about the budget and said that it was flat, that there was no 
increase in funding. Well again, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m in 
estimates next Wednesday, and I would imagine as the critic 
he’s going to show up and we can explain to him that $37 
million last year, $56.3 million this year is not flat. It’s an 
increase. So we can have that discussion with him. We can have 
that discussion with him next week, Mr. Speaker, if he’s 
interested in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP had absolutely no plans to 
invest in roads. We saw that. We drove all those highways all 
those years, bumping along. And even now when they’re in 
opposition, highways is not any kind of priority for them. 
 
We saw before last year’s budget, the NDP put out a press 
release asking for their must-haves in the budget. Was there any 
mention of highways, Mr. Speaker? No, not a word. And then 
before the Throne Speech last fall, again the members opposite 
issued a press release asking for their must-haves in our Throne 
Speech. How many times was highways mentioned? None. 
Zero. Not a word, Mr. Speaker. And then before this year’s 
budget, just last week, the NDP issued yet another press release 
asking for their must-haves in this year’s budget. And how 
many times was highways mentioned? None. Not once. Zero. 
 
So I don’t know what the Highways critic over there is doing, if 
he has no input into caucus or if they’re just ignoring him or if 
it is, as we’ve always believed it to be, Mr. Speaker, that the 
NDP have absolutely no interest in fixing our roads. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, there might be some politics behind this 
because they know, Mr. Speaker, that rural Saskatchewan 

doesn’t support them. I don’t know if it was retaliated, but they 
certainly didn’t reward anybody in rural Saskatchewan in their 
time in government because they ignored our highways, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is not the approach that we are taking. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, as well, their former leader, Dwain 
Lingenfelter, I know they don’t like talking about him. He said, 
Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “The government will look seriously 
at the idea of volunteer maintenance.” They were going to send 
people out with shovels and a bucket of cold fill and go make 
them fix their own potholes. That was the NDP’s approach to 
highways maintenance in this province, Mr. Speaker. It is 
absolutely embarrassing, the NDP record in highways and 
infrastructure investment overall in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just in closing, I want to mention I think what some of my 
colleagues have mentioned as well, Mr. Speaker, is what we 
didn’t do in this budget. As I said, we faced some challenges 
when it came to revenue. And we know under the NDP, when 
they faced challenges, they’d dip into the pockets of taxpayers 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. They’d raise taxes: PST 
[provincial sales tax], income tax. They’d raise taxes or, Mr. 
Speaker, they’d download onto municipalities. 
 
As an example, urban revenue sharing in 1993-94 was $50 
million. By 2000 it was $26 million, Mr. Speaker. And my 
chart’s a little bit old, but 2012-13 was 151. And I’m sure off 
the top of his head, the Finance minister can tell me what 
revenue sharing is this year. I think it’s about $265 million, 265. 
So, Mr. Speaker, we can see the downloading to municipalities 
that the NDP did by slashing revenue sharing to municipalities, 
Mr. Speaker. Not only did they slash revenue sharing, they 
didn’t fix their roads either, so it was a double hit to these 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. That’s not what we’re going to be 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP have no plan. We are a 
year away from an election. We keep asking them for it. They 
come into this House and criticize, and that’s fine. Their job is 
to hold government to account, and we understand that. There 
were those of us who served in opposition, Mr. Speaker. You 
can criticize what the government is doing, but on the flip side 
of that you’re supposed to have a plan to say how you’re going 
to do things differently. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have 
absolutely failed in that respect. 
 
I think that the people of this province understand that the NDP 
have no plan. So without a plan and looking at the NDP’s 
record, Mr. Speaker . . . I know that they complain about the 
three extra MLAs that are going to be in the next election, and I 
think they’re just a little sad that those three MLAs are not 
going to be sitting on their side of the House because they’re 
going to be lucky if they bring back even the nine that they have 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am very proud to support our government’s budget, and I will 
not be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to speak on this 24th day of March. This day has a lot 
of importance for me and for my family. And the first thing I 



6728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

want to say is happy birthday to Solveig, my daughter. She was 
born on this day 26 years ago, and so it’s an important day. And 
I think some of my colleagues here at the legislature remember 
one or two times when I’ve had a chance to speak on the 24th, 
that I’ve gotten the chance to say happy birthday to her. So I 
appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to a few people and point 
out some of the supports that I’ve had in doing this job as a 
legislator. I’m going to start off with my wife Linda. This is our 
41st year of marriage, and she’s put up with a lot, especially the 
last 20 years. I also want to thank my daughters, Ingrid and 
Solveig. They’ve provided a lot of support. My parents, who 
live in Regina, are 89 years old this year, Tom and Randi 
Nilson. And they watch faithfully for all of the things that 
happen here in the legislature, and I want to say a special thank 
you to them. 
 
And I also want to say happy birthday to my godmother, my 
aunt, Gertrude Satre. And this is a very sad day in our family 
today because my uncle Curtis, my godfather, died last 
Wednesday. We had a funeral in Saskatoon on Sunday and 
today he’s buried at his home church with his parents in Irma, 
Alberta at Sharon Lutheran Church. And my uncle Curtis who 
was 90 years old, he was somebody who was there when I was 
born, basically was part of my life all the time for my whole 
life. And I want to say thank you to him and to all of his family 
for the support that I’ve had right across the province. 
 
[19:45] 
 
I also want to say thank you to my wife’s parents, Stan and 
Betty Lee. They’re 96 and 91 this year, living in Everett, 
Washington, and they’ve continued to provide support. They 
can’t drive out here during session to help out with the kids 
anymore, but I know that they follow what’s going on and we 
look forward to see them over Easter. 
 
And the other people I want to say thank you are to my brother 
Ralph and his wife, Suzie, and their daughters Anna and 
Bethany and families. Then my sister JoAnn Nilson and her 
husband, James Lokken, in Saskatoon and their four boys, Nils, 
Olaf, Torbjorn, and Knut. And they provide all kinds of support 
in various ways throughout Saskatchewan including listening 
very carefully when people have concerns about things like this 
budget. 
 
My family in Saskatchewan has been here for a long time. My 
mother’s father, John, came to Saskatchewan in the summer of 
1903 to homestead with his father just south of Outlook at 
Macrorie, and he then married my grandmother Anna in 1913. 
He lured her away from her home in Banff, Alberta. She’d lived 
there for a lot of years, but had come from Norway originally 
via Minnesota, South Dakota, and Manitoba. So on that side of 
the family we have strong roots right around Outlook. 
 
And then my father’s mother came up to Regina and to Moose 
Jaw on July 4th of 1912 just after the hurricane hit Regina, and 
she ended up living in Regina in the early years. She married 
my grandfather, Andrew, and they then ended up on the farm 
out at Parkbeg, and it’s through that connection that we have all 
of the Parkbeg and Gainer the Gopher connections. 
 

Also I want to say thank you to people in Regina who are 
family but they’re friends, and that’s Rick Hordern and Nancy 
Talsness Hordern and their daughters Marja and Kjersten and 
Kjersten’s husband, Aaron. 
 
The important part of being a legislator is that you have the 
honour and ability to support and work for your constituents. 
And I have to say that being the member of the legislature for 
Regina Lakeview has been an honour. I also want to thank all of 
the people who have come up to me and asked me very difficult 
questions. Sometimes they provided advice, but they’ve 
continued to be very supportive in the role, whether it was on 
the government side or in opposition side. So I want to say a 
great thank you to the people of Regina Lakeview. 
 
Also I want to thank the members of my New Democratic Party 
executive, because they’ve asked even harder questions. I 
always tell them that no matter how hard a question you get in 
this place, theirs are usually twice as hard because they know a 
lot of things about that. 
 
My constituency assistants that have helped me in Regina 
Lakeview at the present time are Conni Yakimchuk and Cory 
Oxelgren. But they come and support . . . not a very long list of 
people, but starting with Elaine Wood who helped me for many 
years, Karen Pattison, Bernie Yakimchuk, and Judy Kerr. They, 
over 20 years, have made sure that the messages get to me and 
also that their issues can be dealt with professionally and in a 
very good way. 
 
I also want to say a special thank you to a number of women 
who worked with me when I was in the ministry, and two of 
them are Wendy Hollinger and Elaine Maksymiw. They were 
with me all 12 years that I was a minister, and I would have to 
say that they were instrumental in making sure that I didn’t go 
down the wrong path on different things that we did and that we 
made sure we had all of the things done properly. 
 
Also my chiefs of staff over those years: Betty Ann Cox, 
Heather Nord, and Conni Yakimchuk, as well as Michele 
Kobayashi, were very much a help. 
 
It’s been very interesting to be part of a caucus in five different 
forms, but I have to say that the last number of years with this 
caucus has been probably the, you know, in some ways the 
most rewarding, because the nine of us are very much I think 
supportive of each other. We understand each other’s abilities. 
We push each other to do things a little better. 
 
And I want to say a special thank you to Cam for all of the 
leadership that he’s provided now over the last two years And I 
look forward to the tempering, if I can put it that way, of the 
people on this side of the House as they prepare to form 
government at some point in the future. And I know that some 
of the members opposite who are retiring this year know that 
process of how much you learn sitting on this side that’s helpful 
for when you’re over there working on the government side. 
 
And I also want to say a special thank you to the caucus staff 
that we have. They do a tough job. We don’t end up having as 
many people as you do when you’re in government and many 
times that’s quite frustrating, but I think that we have excellent 
people working with us and we very much appreciate the work 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6729 

that they do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget this year I think surprised me. 
And I’ll say where the surprise comes is that after all these 
years of working pretty carefully to try to make sure that we 
were spending money here in Saskatchewan in a way that we 
could afford, it appears as if the Premier and the Finance 
minister and the team over there have made a big bet. They 
basically said, well let’s spend all the money we’ve been 
spending already and let’s borrow a bunch more and let’s go 
and do a whole number of things so that basically we can try to 
put out any fires of people that want things. 
 
Now the part that surprised me was that we’ve forgotten the 
lessons of the ’80s and the ’90s. We know that when the 
government changed in 1991, we had some extreme difficulties 
in Saskatchewan that meant that all of the citizens, all of the 
businesses, all of the institutions had to work together to try to 
get the ship back onto a more stable position. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that that exercise, which was very painful for many 
years, produced some very good results for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ve been living with those results 
probably for about the last 10, 11, 12 years. And to take some 
steps now to start dipping . . . not into the pockets of people 
right now — I’ve heard people say that — but we’re dipping 
into the pockets of our children and our grandchildren. And 
we’re doing it very directly, but we’re trying to cover it up. 
We’re trying to hide it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we got the documents about this year’s 
budget, there were so many things that we still can’t tell exactly 
what the financial moves are. And I mean it’s things like the 
mayor of Regina saying, oh yes, we agree that we won’t get the 
last $25 million on building the stadium until after March 31st, 
2016, so it doesn’t have to show up in this year’s books even 
though that was the supposed plan, or that we’ve basically 
delayed the third-quarter report so that you can adjust some of 
these numbers. And the potash deferral or speeding up of 
getting revenue, well a major part of that was to put a bunch of 
money into this present year, this ’14-15 year, to try to fill in 
some of the holes that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time I go back and look at these documents, 
I spot something else where I say, well, why are they doing 
that? And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how we should be doing 
things. 
 
I’m a bit, you know, I’m a bit sad about the legacy of the 
Finance minister because this is his last chance to do this job, 
and there’s a whole number of things that we won’t be able to 
tell what kind of decisions or choices they made until we get the 
auditor’s reports probably 18 months to two years from now. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not an appropriate plan. That’s not an 
appropriate thing to do as a Finance minister, and that’s not an 
appropriate way to present the books of the province. 
 
Some of the excuses that we had right off the top were, well, 
we’re making that transition from the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund] to summary reporting, but we’ve been in that kind of a 
transition for quite a few years, and there’s no reason to obscure 
what’s going on unless there’s something here that they don’t 
want people to see. And unfortunately I think that that’s what’s 
going on, and I’m not sure where it goes. 

Now the members opposite, the Minister of Highways is 
chirping here, but one of the things that’s quite frustrating is 
that we’ve seen a steady shift of debt over onto the Crown so 
that people can pay for that debt through their utility bills. 
We’ve seen now a straight-up borrowing of $700 million to fill 
in the holes. 
 
Now there’s all kinds of justifications, but it’s the same kind of 
justifications I used to hear in my law practice when I would 
deal with businesses that were on the edge. I had a practice 
where I would work with farm machinery dealers or car dealers 
or other businesses, farms that were in financial trouble, and 
often they would get to a point where they would make the big 
bet. They’d say, well we’ll just go and spend a whole bunch of 
money in the hope that we’re going to come out the other side. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the time, sort of six months to eight 
months after that kind of a decision, where they’d show up in a 
lawyer’s office and say, now what do I do? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I have the feeling that we’re, 
as a province, have that kind of a bet being made. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think that that’s an appropriate legacy for the 
Minister of Finance. I don’t think it’s an appropriate kind of 
thing for the Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, when we in this 
province have to try to sift through all of the different decisions 
that are made to figure how much we actually owe to all of 
these various institutions, we know that we’re in trouble. 
 
Now the P3 [public-private partnership] financing which is . . . 
They continue to say, oh we’ll only do it if we’ve got the full 
disclosure. Well, Mr. Speaker, we set out a bill on this side of 
the House that would provide some ways so we could actually 
get some comparisons on that. But we know from other 
provinces where P3s have gone in that it costs more to do that. 
It’s just logical that it’s going to cost more than what 
government’s doing, and so there we have a whole area of debt 
that we don’t know where it’s going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we end up having other areas where we know that 
they’ve pushed services into various agencies. And if you look 
at the numbers of jobs that have gone from the public service 
into these agencies or into other places, there’s also costs that 
are going there that cost us more to provide the services for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And so what are we to say about this legacy? We all have a 
responsibility. Whether it’s the member from Kindersley, 
whether it’s the member from, you know, Yorkton, or 
wherever, we all have a responsibility to be watching carefully 
how we spend this money. 
 
Now we’ve heard quite a few glowing reports about treasury 
board and the decisions that they’ve been making but, Mr. 
Speaker, part of the job when you’re in caucus, especially a big 
caucus, is to have some people who really ask some hard 
questions about the spending and about the long-term 
commitments. And, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister often 
will do that. But when you get in a financial jam or when you’re 
in a spot where you don’t quite know how to meet all the 
demands of all the people in the province, you sometimes make 
decisions that are not going to be helpful. And unfortunately I 



6730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

think that we’re in that kind of a spot. And so it’s sad for me. 
And that’s what I said when I saw the documents. I thought, 
well no, we don’t want to go down this kind of track again. We 
don’t want to get ourselves caught into trying to finance by 
borrowing more money. And frankly when you look at the 
initial reactions of the press, of people in the province, they 
continue to say, well how can this be a balanced budget when 
you have to borrow $700 million, plus you’ve got other 
borrowing other places, plus you’re shoving debts, other 
corners and hiding them from the public? And I think that that’s 
why there’s a frustration. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance is chirping from his seat here, and 
I think he should be, because it’s his responsibility. I’m talking 
about his legacy for the province. We know what’s going on 
here is that when you’re with a Premier who’s made all kinds of 
promises and you have to figure out how to pay for them and 
that’s your job and your treasury board’s job to come up with 
the money, you work to figure out how you can get that money. 
I mean why would you run a whole series of ads with the 
Premier promising the students of the province that we have 
this great graduate retention program and then just a few years 
later, a few months later, you defer that expense and you do it in 
a way so that the poorest people aren’t ever going to collect it? 
 
Now I think that that’s a kind of decision that’s wrong. I know 
that the potash corporations have raised some questions about 
how this was done. We know that working to try to get the right 
balance between revenues for the province and other places, 
you need to be very, very careful. 
 
Now the kinds of things that are in this budget are the kinds of 
things that are obscured right now in different ways, but as we 
dig into this . . . Now the other part that makes me really 
frustrated about this budget is that the Minister of Finance has 
done this for the last I think two or three years, where he’ll 
basically say, here’s the amount of money to do this but we 
want you to try to save money, send some money back. And we 
saw that in health; we see it in post-secondary education; we see 
it in a few other places. 
 
And what does that do? Well that ends up meaning that, oh well 
there’s maybe not quite as much staff to do some of the jobs. 
And guess what happens? We end up with the sad stories like 
we hear in this legislature on a regular basis. And you hear in 
the coffee shops and you hear in other places where there are 
not sufficient staff in many of the procedures. And we know 
that the people who work in our health system, whether it’s the 
CEOs [chief executive officer] or the people in the kitchen or 
the nurses or the doctors, they all want to do a good job. But 
when you’ve got a situation where there’s pressures on this, 
plus you add in some of the stupidity of this John Black lean 
stuff that basically frustrates a whole series of workers, you deal 
with the morale issues; you deal with a whole number of issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Highways minister and the Finance 
minister love to talk about how much money they spend on 
highways, but they don’t want to talk about how many 
kilometres of road they do because I know . . . I asked the 
Premier. He gave me information to show that the amount of 
money that it costs to do the same work that was there five or 
six years ago has gone up dramatically. And so they don’t want 
to talk about what they actually are doing. They want to talk 

about how much money they spent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s have more information. And I can 
assure the Finance minister I’ll be asking again this year like I 
did last year to please provide me with the cost per kilometre of 
highway. Because we need to see how much money you’re 
spending. And sure, you’re spending a lot more money, but I 
don’t even think you’re getting as many roads as we had 10, 12 
years ago. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think the overlying or the underlying or 
the piece that isn’t here is a longer term plan. And we know 
about it when we talk about the futures fund. We hear today that 
the Premier of Alberta has made some promises about a futures 
fund in Alberta when they supposedly, or I think they do, have 
a much more dramatic hit from the oil industry than we do. I 
think there must be some discussion that we need to have here 
in this province about that. 
 
We also need to talk about simple things like why three more 
MLAs. I mean that’s a simple question. Why three more 
MLAs? And we’ve heard some different explanations from 
people across the way but I think that it’s one of those ones that 
maybe was a . . . It seemed like a brilliant idea a few years ago, 
but it’s starting to come back to say, hey, who thought that one 
up? And I guess it’s the Premier and people in his staff that did 
that. But there needs to be a lot better explanation of that than 
what we’ve had so far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency here in Regina, one of the 
difficulties relates to the overall sense of confidence in the 
provincial government. And when the provincial government is 
doing things that are not understandable by the ordinary people 
in the province, they’re even less understandable by the civil 
servants who are working within the government or the Crown 
employees. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m worried for our city that 
because of the uneasiness about this kind of budget, we’re 
going to end up having more pressures and more people being 
very careful how they spend their money, how they do things in 
Regina. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this budget has too many little hidden 
pieces, too many things that are not explainable on the face of 
it, too many new ways of describing things for it to be a budget 
that we can trust. And as I said when I started, that makes me 
very sad because so many years of work by all of us, you know, 
whether you’re in opposition or in government, we all worked 
hard to try to get something back on to the right track. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a situation where we need to be 
very careful, and we need many more and much better 
explanations than we’ve had so far. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments tonight about this 
budget, but I’m looking forward to asking lots of questions in 
the estimates committees because there are too many mysteries. 
I’m sad for the province. I’m sad for us as legislators that this is 
what we have to deal with. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to rise and speak to this budget. Mr. Speaker, this is my 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6731 

first budget as minister, and I’m happy to say I’ll be supporting 
this budget motion put forward by the Finance minister and 
seconded by the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the last budget put forward by the member 
from Canora-Pelly, and I can say, and I’m sure reiterated by my 
colleagues, that we will miss Canada’s best Finance minister. 
We will miss his humour, his thoughtfulness, and his shrewd 
financial wisdom, but most of all, Mr. Speaker, we’ll miss his 
love of this province. So, Mr. Finance Minister, thank you. 
 
I’d also like to thank treasury board, cabinet, caucus for your 
thoughtfulness, your thoughtful budget deliberations. And as is 
customary, I have people to thank as well. I’d like to thank the 
constituents of Coronation Park for their support. Thank you for 
your trust in me as your MLA. 
 
I’d like to thank my partner, Lisa, for her continued support and 
your belief in me. I couldn’t do it without you. 
 
I’d like to thank my constituent assistants, Kristy and Bonnie, 
for the conscientious work you do serving the people of 
Coronation Park. And actually they also serve an awful lot of 
the opposition’s constituencies as well because we have one of 
the busiest offices in the province. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport, 
the staff as well as the minister’s office staff, for the great work 
you continue to do. So thank you, Morgan and Morgan and 
Tara and Dylan and Bob. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been an interesting spring session, lots of 
questions and posturing by the members opposite. I understand 
that they have a job to do as critics, but as witnessed, a little too 
contrarian and no solutions, and no costed-out solutions. 
 
Last election we heard about the game-changer calculator and 
maybe we’ll see it again. Actually I would encourage the 
members opposite to please bring back the game-changer. 
There’s someone else I can think of to bring back as well, but I 
think the members opposite hope that that name is buried in the 
archives. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of this month, my 
ministry launched the park reservation system over a 10-day 
period. I’m confused, Mr. Speaker. Not a word out of the 
members opposite on the launch. And I’d like to tell you why, 
Mr. Speaker. The park reservation system, early March, we 
have 28 campgrounds under our reservation system. When we 
compare this year to last year, 22 campgrounds saw an increase 
in reservation on launch day. In 2014 we had 22,276 
reservations. In 2015 we had 25,760 reservations. That’s a 16 
per cent increase. When you compare 2015 to 2013, it’s 
actually a 42 per cent increase. 
 
I want to point out a couple of parks in particular. In Buffalo 
Pound in 2014 there were 1,377 reservations; this year we had 
1,747 reservations. In Sask Landing 2014, there were 1,189 
reservations; this year we had 1,618 reservations. In Cypress 
Hills in 2014 there were 2,835 reservations; this year 3,674 
reservations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province love their parks and for 

good reason. They’re great. Our park staff are great and the 
ministry did a great job. Maybe the members opposite don’t 
utilize our parks. Maybe they do. I don’t know. They don’t say 
much. I’d have to assume that when they are silent on an issue, 
which they’re silent an awful lot, that they’re actually in 
agreement. And since they have been silent on an awful lot, we 
could take that as agreement. So thank you for your continued 
support. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot of factual errors on 
the other side. You know, Mr. Speaker, I think the members 
opposite think they are baseball players and not members of the 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, in baseball if you hit 500, if you bat 
500, you’re going to the hall of fame. Mr. Speaker, actually you 
might be going to, yes, probably you can even go to the archival 
hall of fame. But well, Mr. Speaker, if you’re 50 per cent 
correct in this House, you’re relegated to the bench of nine or 
less, and you’ll quickly become an archival memory. 
 
[20:15] 
 
The member from Nutana gave a member statement where she 
talked about watching WolfCop and Big Muddy, and remarking 
that both of these films were recipients of the film tax credit. 
Not bad. Half right. But sorry, this isn’t baseball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken a large step forward in 
support of the province’s creative industries. In addition to 
funding creative sectors that were completely overlooked by the 
NDP, we have also implemented an organization to support all 
of the creative industries, including screen-based media. To date 
Creative Saskatchewan has provided $4 million to the film 
industry alone out of a total of $7 million in direct grant support 
and an additional $2.1 million to creative industry associations. 
There is more access to markets, development, and financial 
support because of this overarching agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been criticized and Creative Sask has been 
criticized for telling the Sask story. Mr. Speaker, this 
government, unlike the previous government, likes to tell our 
story outside of the province. Back in the NDP days, they didn’t 
promote Saskatchewan. They didn’t tell the Saskatchewan 
story. It’s a shame, because we have a good story to tell. 
 
We have a story of a musician, Andy Shauf, who just recently 
signed with The Windish Agency, winner of the Independent 
Booking Agency of the Year at the 2015 Pollstar awards. We 
have the story of author Anne Lazurko who won the Women 
Writing the West literary award for historical fiction and was 
able to travel to the ceremony. We have the story of Jess 
Moskaluke who, besides her gold record, won the Female Artist 
of the Year at the Canadian Country Music Association awards. 
 
What do all these people have in common, Mr. Speaker? They 
all received funding from Creative Sask to help further their 
careers. We’ll make no apologies for telling Saskatchewan’s 
story to the world. We’ll continue to celebrate the success of 
Saskatchewan’s creative industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite accused the CEO of Creative 
Sask of bypassing the established funding application. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite accused again this funding 
application of Jess Moskaluke, based on the information they 



6732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

heard. This is simply not factually accurate, as all funding 
applications, as mandated, are to be adjudicated by an 
independent jury. This has been far too fitting for members 
opposite, getting the facts wrong. 
 
Well for the benefit of the House today, I would like to share 
real information from people within the industry. This is from 
the president of MDM Recordings Inc., the company that 
represents Jess Moskaluke: “In closing, Jess would not be 
where she is in her career today without the support and funding 
she received from Creative Sask to expand her career 
prospects.” 
 
The executive director of SaskMusic, Michael Dawson: “It is 
our hope that her gold certification will not only be celebrated 
as a milestone in Moskaluke’s career, but also accepted as 
evidence of the success of Creative Sask’s mandate and 
programming support.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to list more accomplishments. And again 
I’m going to have to correct a statement by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. She also said, “We’ve heard that Creative 
Saskatchewan spent $10,000 to print up fake gold records for 
Jess Moskaluke. No jury, no competition, just the chief 
executive officer writing a cheque.”  
 
I find these comments confusing, especially when contrasted by 
an industry professional: “All approved applications to that 
program are determined through a juried process. The purchase 
of additional gold record plaques by an artist is a proven 
strategy to ensure further growth in an artist’s career.” You 
know who said that, Mr. Speaker? Michael Dawson, the 
executive director of SaskMusic. 
 
Jess Moskaluke is the first Saskatchewan female artist to earn a 
gold status single, and the first female country music artist to do 
so since who, Mr. Speaker? Shania Twain. We’re proud of her 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to list more accomplishments. Mr. 
Speaker, a meeting with the international studio & curatorial 
program led to a partnership with the MacKenzie Art Gallery to 
sponsor a Saskatchewan artist to attend this program. A 
showcase at BreakOut West forged connections between 
musician Megan Lane and the Reeperbahn Festival in Germany 
for an international tour. Cheshire Smile Animation received 
production support from Creative Saskatchewan for the kids’ 
show Quizzine, and now it has been green-lit by City 
Saskatchewan and TVO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our stakeholders are happy with the avenues 
opened to them by Creative Sask. SaskBooks said, “It’s nice to 
finally have an agency that supports production, marketing, and 
promotion.” 
 
Again SaskMusic said, “. . . with the work that the SaskMusic 
has been doing over the last three years, coupled with the 
support of Creative Saskatchewan, I’ve been watching the rest 
of the world really start to take notice.” Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
continue to promote Saskatchewan because we are getting 
results. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, last night, I was here last night, Mr. 

Speaker, and I was listening to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. And it was kind of unfortunate but, you know, I listened 
anyways. But he asked why we never talk about the ’80s. And 
apparently we talk about the ’70s, the ’90s, the 2000s. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I started thinking about things and I got a little 
nostalgically archival. Then, Mr. Speaker, I started to think 
about the commercials featuring the Leader of the Opposition of 
where did the money go. I kept thinking about these two pieces, 
these references to the archival ’80s and where did the money 
go — ’80s and where did the money go? Then it clicked, Mr. 
Speaker. I apologize to the opposition for not getting it sooner. 
Sometimes I’m a little obtuse or ensconced in my own hubris. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were celebrating some 
classic archival rock from the ’80s. I didn’t know they were 
such fans of Robert Palmer, and in particular his song “Simply 
Irresistible” because, Mr. Speaker, apparently there’s no telling 
where that money went. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
channelling Robert Palmer. And unfortunately for the members 
opposite, this is where the money went. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money went to debt reduction. Three billion 
dollars went to reducing operating debt since our government 
took office, saving nearly 1 billion in total interest costs. It went 
to tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. Nearly $5 billion has gone into 
Saskatchewan peoples’ pockets, through the largest income tax 
reduction and education property tax reduction in Saskatchewan 
history. Infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, building highways, 
schools, and hospitals. 
 
In our first seven budgets, $6.6 billion has gone into addressing 
the massive infrastructure deficit left behind by the NDP. That’s 
more than double what the NDP invested in infrastructure in the 
last seven years in office. Mr. Speaker, that’s where the money 
went. It went to building a strong Saskatchewan through debt 
reduction, tax reduction, and building infrastructure. 
 
It’s a lot different than the questions people used to ask under 
the NDP. Where did all the people go? Where did all the jobs 
go? Where did all the investment go? Where did all the 
municipal revenue sharing go, etc., etc.? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk a little bit in particular about 
where the money went in relation to the Ministry of Parks, 
Culture and Sport and to my particular budget, Mr. Speaker. So 
where did the money go: $80 million committed to Regina’s 
new stadium, $20 million to Evraz Place, 1,000 additional seats 
for the Brandt Centre, a new Co-operators Centre. 
 
In our first seven years, we’ve committed over $71 million to 
Parks capital projects, a 244 per cent increase over the last 
seven years of the NDP. In our first seven years, we’ve 
increased overall spending in arts, culture, and heritage by 39 
per cent compared to the last seven years of the NDP. 
 
In 2011, we implemented the Main Street Saskatchewan 
demonstration program. Last year we launched the new Main 
Street program in 15 communities: four demonstrations, two 
accredited, nine affiliated. We’ve increased annual funding to 
the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation by 74 per cent as 
compared to the NDP. For the past four years, the government 
has invested in artsVest, $250,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. My 
ministry has invested over $8.5 million into the construction of 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6733 

Mosaic Place in Moose Jaw, which just this year hosted the 
Scotties. 
 
In the summer of 2013 we designated Great Blue Heron 
Provincial Park, which is the first new park to open in almost 20 
years. We’ve added 1,400 additional campsites. Nine hundred 
sites have received electrical upgrades and, by this summer, we 
will have added 242 brand new electrical campsites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to talk about some more budget 
highlights in relation to Parks, Culture and Sport. This 
government has fulfilled its commitment to provide an 
additional $10 million over four years, over and above the 
existing capital budget, for provincial parks capital projects. 
The ’15-16 budget provides $14.6 million for parks capital 
projects, just slightly below last year’s record investment. 
 
Projects undertaken this year include development of a new 
campground at Greenwater Lake Provincial Park with 68 fully 
serviced campsites that is scheduled to open this summer, 
development of a new campground at Blackstrap Provincial 
Park with 60 electrified campsites that is scheduled to open in 
2016, development of full-service campsites at Buffalo Pound 
and Moose Mountain Provincial Park, the addition of over 200 
electrified campsites throughout the provincial park system for 
a four-year total of over 800 electrified sites. 
 
Funding for the Saskatchewan Arts Board, Creative 
Saskatchewan, and other third party organizations remains 
stable, demonstrating the government’s commitment to a strong 
arts and culture community. 
 
Funding for the Main Street Saskatchewan program continues. 
Eleven new communities were accepted in 2014 and, in the past 
four years, the government has invested nearly $2 million in the 
program. The popular community rinks affordability grant will 
continue for a fourth year, following through on the 
government’s 2011 election promise. In the first three years, 
over $4.8 million has gone to 387 communities. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve got many more, many more highlights I could come up 
with. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about again Creative Saskatchewan’s 
success. Creative Saskatchewan has distributed over $6.4 
million in direct grant support to the creative industry sector, 
$2.5 million to designated creative industry associations. 
Thanks to Creative Sask, Mary Lynn Podiluk used a market 
travel grant to attend the Niche magazine awards where her 
piece won the engagement ring category. WolfCop received 
production and marketing funding for the project and has 
obtained international distribution deals, and high demand for 
the film led to a promised sequel currently in development. 
Sova Design Millinery, based in Saskatoon, has received 
production funding for the creation of their hats as well as travel 
support to represent Saskatchewan internationally.  
 
Stakeholders, they’ve been impressed with Creative 
Saskatchewan. SaskBooks has said, “It’s nice to finally have an 
agency that supports production, marketing, and promotion.” I 
already said that, Mr. Speaker. Again the executive director of 
SaskMusic: “. . . with the work that SaskMusic has been doing 
over the last few years, coupled with the support of Creative 
Saskatchewan, I’ve been watching the rest of the world [and 

again they’re] really . . . [starting] to take notice.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Creative Saskatchewan had film commitments. 
These are the film commitments that they had to date, up to 
March 4th of 2015: screen-based development, they had 45 
applications received; 36 applications were supported for 
$569,000 and change, Mr. Speaker. Three applications were 
withdrawn by the applicants. Six applications didn’t meet the 
eligibility. Screen-based production: 21 applications received; 
20 applications supported for $2,096,000, Mr. Speaker. Market 
and export development: 22 applications received; 17 
applications supported for $843,000, Mr. Speaker. Business 
capacity research: 11 applications received; 6 applications 
supported for $181,000, Mr. Speaker. Market travel grants: 37 
applications received; 31 applications supported at $304,000, 
Mr. Speaker. So in summary of all of these pieces, apparently 
it’s we’re not supporting the film industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
this sector, in terms of film commitments, received $3,994,236. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was thinking back to the time when I worked in 
government in Social Services and, Mr. Speaker, I was also 
involved in a community-based organization called Street 
Culture Kidz. And I thought . . . And we started the 
organization back in about 1996. You know, during that time, 
Mr. Speaker, we applied and asked for financial assistance from 
the government of the day. 
 
Well how did that go for us? Well, Mr. Speaker, we received 
zero dollars, so then we tried again in 1997. We received zero 
dollars. So then we tried in 1998. We received zero dollars. 
Then we tried in 1999 — zero dollars. We applied again in 
2000 — zero dollars. Then 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 
— zero dollars. And during that time, Mr. Speaker, we worked 
with social service clients almost exclusively because you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? It was exactly the right thing to do. 
 
And you know what happened in 2007-2008 and onwards? We 
started to build partnerships with the Ministry of Social 
Services, the Ministry of Corrections. And what did we get, Mr. 
Speaker? Funding, operational funding, Mr. Speaker, 
partnerships, partnerships to support our most vulnerable, our 
most vulnerable children and youth. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was 
unbelievable at the time, but that’s exactly what happened. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it an absolute shock that the members 
opposite have any problem with this budget. The problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, we understand making good choices. We’ve made 
good choices. We’re going to continue to make good choices. 
The people of this province, they get it. They understand. They 
look at us and they nod their heads, and they go yes, yes. You 
made some choices. Some of them were tough, but you made 
good choices. And they thank us. We’ve been thanked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do good quality work. 
We’re going to continue to represent this province, continue to 
think again outside the box and try different things. But we’ll 
also, if nothing else, continue to have this province to grow. 
 
I’m proud of the work that our cabinet does. I’m proud of our 
caucus. I’m proud of our Premier. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of 
this government. And if nothing else, I’d like us to continue to 



6734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

go forward. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to support 
this budget motion, and I’m not going to support the 
amendment. With that, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in this House and speak in support of the 
budget that was presented by the Minister of Finance and 
seconded by the member from Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, as 
you know, I have decided not to seek re-election, so this is the 
last opportunity I will have as an MLA to respond to the budget 
speech. But there are a few comments that I’d like to make 
before I get to the budget. 
 
I’ve had the honour and privilege to serve the people of the 
Estevan constituency since 1999, and I really thank them for 
their trust and support. Mr. Speaker, I can remember the first 
time in 1999 when I won the election. I had 46.7 per cent of the 
vote. And it went up gradually, and last election in 2011, I had 
79.2 per cent of the vote. So I know that this seat, the Estevan 
seat, will continue to be held by a Sask Party MLA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the girls in my office, 
my CAs. Rosalie is still on maternity leave. She had a little girl 
Ava that was born last August. Also Susan and Wilma, and I 
just want to thank the three of them for everything they do. As 
all members know, they are our eyes and ears out there, and 
they are the first people that constituents come in contact with, 
and first impressions are lasting impressions. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t think I’m a really hard person to work for, but I always 
had one stipulation when people come into my office, and that’s 
that the CA is never to say, what do you want? It’s always, how 
can I help you? And I think that has went a long way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the caucus staff. John 
Saltasuk is the chief of staff. I work very closely with him and 
also all the researchers, the communications people, and 
Karalee at the front desk. They make our job so much easier, 
and I thank them. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not 
mention my family: my kids, my grandkids, my mom, my 
siblings. They have always been so supportive to me, and I 
thank them for that love and support. And also to my special 
friend Al, he’s just been a rock to me, and I really want to thank 
him. I’m really looking forward to spending more time with all 
the people I just mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I get to the budget, I just have to say 
this, that last night I was at home and I was listening to the 
speeches that were being delivered by members on this side, 
and they were really good speeches. I have to say that the 
member from Regina Dewdney, I enjoyed his speech. And he 
was talking about how the Premier may not be in the Chamber 
at certain times. He might be meeting with the Prime Minister 
or on a trade mission or something, and yet the Leader of the 
Opposition gets up and questions the Premier and wants him to 
meet with people that are in the gallery. He almost seems 
indignant that the Premier doesn’t respond to it, and the Premier 
isn’t even in the Chamber when this is going on. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that reminded me of something else 

that I don’t think is very parliamentary that happens here, and in 
fact I think it’s really sad. That is when opposition members are 
giving speeches, and it’s usually during a serious part of their 
speech, when they’ll pick out a member on this side and say 
that the member is laughing at what they are saying. 
 
I have been targeted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by a member over 
there. The member from Saskatoon Riversdale was giving a 
very sober speech one evening, and she accused me of laughing 
when she was speaking about a death in her family. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I have lost people that I love more than my own life 
and I would never, ever do that. And I can remember that very 
evening. I could remember that very evening. I was talking to 
the Minister of Advanced Education, and when she said it, it 
just caught me off guard. 
 
So I just want to say that that statement was so far from the 
truth. People watching on TV don’t realize it, and unfortunately 
we don’t get a chance to correct it, Mr. Speaker. But for those 
members to say that we’re laughing at someone’s hardship or 
sorrow is despicable. It’s stooping to a new low. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m glad I finally got to correct that because that is 
something has been bothering me for a very long time, and 
people who truly know me know that I am not that kind of a 
person. And there isn’t one person on this side that would laugh 
at someone else’s hardship. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, now that I’ve got that out of the way, I will get 
to the budget. I just want to say that I am very proud of this 
budget. It is a budget that is balanced. It is a budget that keeps 
taxes low because it has no tax increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
a budget that invests in people, a budget that keeps 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP asks, where has the money gone? 
Well there are a number of areas where they can look. Let’s 
look at the SIP [seniors’ income plan] program. SIP paid $90 
per month in 1991. In 2007 it was still $90 a month — not one 
increase, Mr. Speaker. With the increase announced in this 
budget, SIP benefits will now be $270 a month. That’s triple 
what the NDP gave them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is so amazing about that is that it’s the NDP 
that get up day in and day out and claim ownership of issues 
regarding seniors, and they have a very dismal record with 
seniors’ care in this province. They closed 1,200 long-term care 
beds, Mr. Speaker. They were going to raise the long-term care 
rates by 90 per cent. In fact one of the NDP ministers at the 
time said it was “the right thing to do.” And that minister was 
Mark Wartman who was Minister of Highways at the time. And 
I think in the end it cost him about $7 million out of his 
highways budget. 
 
Many times the Leader of the Opposition or the first Health 
critic and the member from Riversdale, Health critic number 
two, rise in this Chamber and criticize those who care for 
seniors in care homes. Mr. Speaker, I know several caregivers 
in my constituency, and they do an amazing job. They do a job 
that I couldn’t do. I know of instances where there are no family 
members close. Many of them volunteer to take the residents 
that are able to get out. They take them for an outing to the 
mall. They do this on their day off, Mr. Speaker, on a volunteer 
basis. And I know several times you can go to a home, and a 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6735 

senior will have their nails painted and their hair done and 
everything, and it’s one of the staff that have volunteered to do 
it on their day off. 
 
I know of one instance where a lady wanted a new dress. Her 
family was coming home for Christmas, and she wanted a new 
dress for Christmas, and one of the care aids went out and 
bought her a new dress. I just think that they do an amazing job. 
They make the long-term care residents feel so special, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I know there are issues in some of the care homes, but 
overall I think that the treatment of the seniors is very, very 
good in this province. The seniors become an extended family 
of many of the workers in there. And I think that for the 
members opposite to imply that all seniors are not receiving the 
best of care is, well frankly, it’s a slap in the face to the 
caregivers. It’s very offensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we just opened up a new long-term care 
home in Radville, and that was something they had been 
waiting for for many, many, many years. And it is truly a 
beautiful and yet practical facility. There are adjoining suites for 
married seniors that both require care, and that is a step in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that issue didn’t arise . . . Although members opposite 
want people to believe that this is an issue that’s just happened 
since 2007, for a long time there was an issue where married 
people were put in different homes. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, after they’ve been married for 40, 50, 60 years, 
whatever the time is, they deserve to be together, and it’s nice 
to see that happening now. Unfortunately when the NDP were 
in government, they didn’t do one thing to advance that, but I 
guess that would have been pretty hard to do when they were 
closing all the nursing homes that they closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Estevan has been fundraising for a new regional 
nursing home, and I’m happy that they reached their goal of $8 
million, which is their share of the $40-million project. And as 
you would know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government 
changed the split for monies that are needed for building new 
long-term care homes. Under the NDP it was a 65/35 split, 35 
per cent being raised by the community. Now it’s an 80/20 split, 
20 per cent being raised for the community share and truly more 
affordable for the community, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
Since we formed government in 2007, we have built or are in 
the process of building 15 new nursing homes. Compare that 
with the dismal record of the NDP. They closed 1,200 beds, and 
that is absolutely pathetic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, money has gone to highways. Since 2007 when 
we formed government, historical funding for highway 
infrastructure . . . in this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know 
and many other members have got up and stated about the huge 
infrastructure deficit that was left by the NDP. 
 
The people in my constituency are very happy with the 
announcements in this budget, and I’ll just mention them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 7.6 million for twinning Highway 39 from 
Estevan to Bienfait; 1.2 million twinning 6 and 39 from Regina 
to Estevan, and of course that’s planning work, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; 14.7 million for continued work on the Estevan truck 
route, which I understand will be paved later this year. Last 
year, Mr. Speaker, Highway 39 was repaved from Estevan to 
Macoun. Under the urban connector program, Highway 47 
north into the city of Estevan along Souris Avenue was repaved, 
and the people there are very, very thankful for that. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again that is where some of the money 
has gone and that is a far cry from the days of the NDP 
government. People were told to fix their own highways, and 
they did, Mr. Speaker. And I think it was out in the western part 
of the province. I can remember seeing pictures in the paper of 
farmers taking their front-end loaders and buckets filled with tar 
or gravel or something — probably gravel because they turned 
a lot of highways back to gravel — and they were out there with 
their shovels and filling in the potholes and doing the job that 
the government of the day would not do. So some money went 
there, Mr. Speaker. Lots of money went there. 
 
Money went to revenue sharing. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that revenue sharing was an issue for many, many years. In fact 
I think it was Tommy Douglas, their hero, that first raised the 
issue. He didn’t do anything about it, but he raised it. And then 
in May of 2003 the NDP government commissioned Ray 
Boughen to do a report. Well the NDP took that report and then 
implemented at least one of the recommendations, if my 
memory serves me correct. The Boughen report said that if the 
PST was raised, then revenue sharing would be implemented. 
Well guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The NDP raised the 
PST by 2 per cent but they forgot to implement revenue 
sharing. And that’s their history, Mr. Deputy Speaker — tax 
revolts, hunger strikes because people were just truly, truly fed 
up with them. And I’m proud to say that once again revenue 
sharing is in this budget, $265.3 million, more than double the 
investment in ’07-08 and the largest revenue-sharing investment 
in the province’s history. 
 
And child care spaces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some money is 
going there. They may be tired of listening to where the money 
is going, but they were the ones that asked the question and I’m 
just happy, I’m happy to oblige them with the answer. Child 
care spaces, $53.3 million for child care spaces, and that’s up 
$2.2 million over last year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, child care 
spaces have increased in number by 53 per cent since 2008. 
And even former NDP minister Pat Atkinson said that the NDP 
government failed miserably when it came to child care spaces, 
and just another area where the NDP record is absolutely 
pathetic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regarding agriculture . . . And, as you know, I 
have my farm in the Macoun area, Mr. Speaker, and so 
agriculture is pretty near and dear to my heart. And I have never 
lived in a city. Living in my apartment up in Regina here on the 
days when the legislature is in session is the closest I have ever 
came to living in a city. So I am a farm girl and I love that life. 
 
But I’m thankful in our government that we have an Ag 
minister that not only understands agriculture but is presently 
involved in the industry. So he knows, he knows what effect the 
policies that are instituted will have on farming, Mr. Speaker. 
The current minister, the member from Thunder Creek, and the 



6736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

former Ag minister, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, have 
worked extremely hard to put Saskatchewan back at the 
leadership table at first ministers’ meetings, and that was 
something that was just lacking so horribly in the NDP years. 
 
They are eager to defend the interests of Saskatchewan farmers 
and ranchers. And, Mr. Speaker, I can remember the spring of 
2011 when southeast Saskatchewan was devastated with the 
worst flood in anyone’s memory. Crop Insurance stepped up 
when in many cases farmers could not get 1 acre seeded, and I 
was one of those farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that, I 
mean I’ve been on my farm for many, many years and I know 
how much I appreciated that. So I can only imagine how young 
farmers that are paying for land, paying for farm equipment, 
you know, have small children, and just you know the everyday 
expenses of living, I can imagine how they felt. 
 
And you know, not only the farmers not getting their crops in 
but also homes flooded, and of course that wasn’t limited to the 
farms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was, you know, even in the 
cities and the smaller communities, the villages and towns. But 
PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] kicked in, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and you know, gave some order back to their 
life. And PDAP kicked in with a new formula, I should add, and 
this government changed the formula so that it was $240,000 
max that they could claim with a 5 per cent deductible. Under 
the NDP, the deductible was a lot higher and the maximum 
benefits were a lot lower. I think the deductible was something 
like 20 per cent. Maybe it maxed out at $160,000. I do stand to 
be corrected on those numbers. But in answer to the NDP’s 
question, that’s where a large amount of money went, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Still in agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can remember in 
1991, the newly elected NDP government began its revenge on 
rural Saskatchewan. And I think they decided to get even with 
the people in rural Saskatchewan for not supporting them in 
1982. I think they were also angry that their beloved land bank 
met its demise in the ’80s with a government that didn’t believe 
that government should be aggressively buying up farm land. 
 
The NDP, in the 16 years when they were in government, never 
stood up once for agriculture. We saw bankruptcies, auction 
sales, tax revolts. We saw sit-ins in this very building, all 
because the NDP would not defend agriculture during some 
pretty tough times. 
 
And they were tough times, but some of those tough times were 
brought on by the fact that Ag ministers did not understand 
agriculture, and they would not sign on to programs. I think 
they were CFIP [Canadian farm income program] probably 
back then, and AIDA [agricultural income disaster assistance], 
and they wouldn’t sign on to them till the very, very last, and 
really left farmers wondering about their future. 
 
And I sometimes I guess I hope the NDP have learned 
something, but I really don’t think so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
here’s why I say that. About two years ago when the film tax 
credit came to an end . . . And it’s not really a credit; for the 
record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a grant. Anyhow, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Lakeview stood in this Chamber and 
said, the film tax credit should be reinstated. And when asked 
how, where the funding dollars would come from, he said, 

agriculture and municipalities. Can you believe it? Agriculture 
and municipalities. So they haven’t got over that feeling that 
they shared for rural Saskatchewan in 1991 and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is why they have absolutely zero credibility out in 
rural Saskatchewan today. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just yesterday when we entered the 
Chamber, on our desks were little members’ newsletters. And 
it’s a publication that’s put out by the Legislative Library, I 
think on a monthly basis. But in this paper I found a quote and I 
believe it makes quite a statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I quote: 
“Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will 
spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms and the 
grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country.” 
William Jennings Bryan. And, Mr. Speaker, when you really, 
really think about that, that has a lot of meaning to it about how 
if you don’t support the people that put the food on your table 
that pretty soon like the cities will meet their demise as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my time is running short. There are many 
more areas I could speak on but I know other members have 
touched on them. Members that spoke before me and those that 
are speaking after me will focus on others. But I’ll just do a 
quick recap, Mr. Speaker. Where did the money go? Under a 
Sask Party government, back into the pockets of the citizens of 
this province through lower property taxes, lower personal 
taxes, higher sick benefits, PDAP, historical investments in 
infrastructure like the energy training centre in Estevan, like 
Boundary dam 3, highway twinning projects, hospitals. And I’ll 
put our record in health care up against theirs any day of the 
week. They closed 52. Long-term care homes, again we’ve got 
15 that have been built or are in the process and they closed 19. 
Schools, they closed 176 schools during their reign. That’s one 
a month. We are building schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I know the member from Regina Rosemont gets up and 
he’s on about overcrowding in schools. And you know what? 
That is an issue but it was never an issue under the NDP 
because there was lots of room in the classrooms. There was no 
crowding because people were leaving this province in droves. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where did the money go under the 
NDP? I can remember $1.5 million being spent for an 
exclamation point after the word Saskatchewan. And some 
other members have mentioned some of these but I’ll just 
review them for people that maybe didn’t see their speeches: 
tappedinto.com, 6.7 million; Persona, 9.4 million; Navigata, 
43.4 million; Retx.com, 26 million; Clickabid, 1.9; Soft Tracks, 
2.2; Ag Dealer, 8.9; SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] — we all remember SPUDCO — 35 
million; Channel Lake, 15 million; Guyana, 2 million; mega 
bingo, 8 million; and of course the Belle Plaine ethanol deal, 
$750,000. 
 
I can remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they hauled the kids out 
there on buses. They had tents set up out there. I think there was 
a few clowns out there, and the former premier in a track hoe. I 
mean it was amazing and nothing ever come of it. So just a 
total, total waste of taxpayers’ dollars. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the NDP may have a different leader. I don’t really 
think he’s any more popular than the old one. But make no 
mistake, Mr. Speaker, they’re still the same tired, old, backward 
NDP. 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6737 

In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the 
Minister of Finance, treasury board, caucus, and all those who 
worked tirelessly in preparation for this document. I am so 
proud to be a part of this government under the capable 
leadership of our Premier, the member from Swift Current. And 
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister 
of Finance for all his hard work, his friendship, his diligence, 
and being a mentor to I think pretty well every member on this 
side. And I just wish him all the health and happiness in the 
world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be supporting the budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s really an honour to stand here tonight to discuss 
the budget that our government has just introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin I will say a number of thank yous, 
as many members do when they have the opportunity to speak 
in this House. And I want to begin by thanking my three 
daughters, Crystal, Shannon, and Lindsay. They have been by 
my side. They are three very, very accomplished young women 
who were raised with a political mom who couldn’t always be 
there with them. I want to also thank my son-in-law who’s truly 
supportive, and now I want to thank them for four truly 
wonderful and precious grandchildren. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank my fiancé. And yes, I am 
engaged, so not everybody knew that, but I want to thank Tom 
Wildeman. Tom and I have a very, very, very long history. We 
knew each other since we went to high school, and he says that 
he’s a patient man. And I’d like to think high school days were 
just yesterday but unfortunately a few decades have passed 
since then. And he truly is a patient man and he’s very tolerant 
of the lifestyle that I lead. So I thank him for that support and 
his encouragement and for being by my side. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my father who has been 
supportive of me my entire life. I have had the privilege and the 
honour of spending a lot of time with him lately. He moved to 
Humboldt to a facility. He’s 94 years old and my heart, my 
thoughts, and my prayers are with him right now as he struggles 
in a hospital bed. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell my dad I love 
him and I wish him well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank my constituency assistant. She keeps the 
home front in good order. She’s so organized. She is my face in 
the constituency and she does an amazing job, and I want to 
thank her. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Other staff that do an amazing job is the staff here in this 
building, the staff within my ministry office as well as the staff 
within the Ministry of Social Services. There is the staff that I 
see fairly regularly that come over and meet with me and we 
discuss issues and policies and various things within the 
Ministry of Social Services. But who I don’t get to meet often, 
and I think they do amazing work, is those front-line workers. 
They are out there. They are having to make the very difficult 

decisions. They are dealing with vulnerable people, the most 
vulnerable within our province, and I commend them for the 
work that they do. I don’t think I could do that work, and I’m in 
awe of how hard they work and how they are able to make 
those difficult decisions. 
 
Lastly I want to thank the Finance minister and my treasury 
board colleagues. Yes, we spent many hours together and it was 
not always happy times when we were together and there was 
tough decisions to be made. We had great guidance in the 
Finance minister so I want to thank him for all of his work, for 
his guidance and his leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to focus my comments, quite frankly, 
mostly on my own budget of Social Services, starting with the 
child and family services component of the budget. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite ask where did the money go, 
and I’m more than happy to explain that to them. And a lot of 
money went to the most vulnerable within our province, and 
I’m going to begin with the most vulnerable within our 
province, and that’s our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget contains a $3 million increase for foster care and 
extended family. I will speak a little further on how the NDP 
managed with foster care, but Mr. Speaker, we have increased 
what we pay to our foster families quite substantially since we 
formed government. And we also have undergone a fairly 
extensive effort to find family members that will take children 
that are coming into our care so that they can have some 
continuity of their lives, so that they can have some stability 
instead of being placed all the time in a stranger’s home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also are increasing the budget by $2 million 
for medically fragile children with complex needs. Prior to this, 
Mr. Speaker, these children were often housed in hospitals. 
They have extreme medical needs, and we have set up CBOs 
with CBO partners who do amazing work. One example is 
Hope’s Home. And they are looking after these extremely 
medically fragile children and giving them a more comforting 
and warm home environment. So I commend those CBOs and 
the work that they do. 
 
This budget will increase the supports for assisted adoption 
client services by $1.3 million, Mr. Speaker. Quite often we 
have foster parents who will have children in their home that 
perhaps have high medical needs or they have behavioural 
challenges, and these foster parents fall in love with these 
children, Mr. Speaker, and they want to adopt them. And we 
give them ongoing support and we commend them and thank 
them so very, very much for giving that stability for these 
vulnerable children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget also increases, by 1 million, 
preventative services to keep children in our care. So another 
effort that this government has undergone is to give supports to 
families before they are in a complete crisis and we have to take 
children into our care. That is again helping to stabilize the 
families and to keep the children at home and hopefully keep 
them safe and protected. And we don’t always have to take 
them into our care as long as we’re able to support them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, since forming government, our government 
has increased funding for the child and family services from 



6738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

88.2 million under the NDP to this budget of 226.14 million. 
Mr. Speaker, that is a 156 per cent increase. It’s a strong 
commitment for support for vulnerable children and families 
and it is the choice of our government. That is where our money 
is going, Mr. Speaker, and I think it bears repeating. We have 
increased supports to our most vulnerable, to our children in our 
province, by 156 per cent. We are investing more even when 
the number of children coming into our care, Mr. Speaker, has 
been less. 
 
Our government is providing more supports for foster families. 
Under the NDP, the compensation for foster families was 
among the lowest in our country and they couldn’t figure out 
why they were having a very, very difficult time recruiting 
foster families, Mr. Speaker. This budget includes funding for 
PRIDE [parent resources for information, development, and 
education] training for those foster families, which includes a 
cultural component because many of our children that come 
into care, sadly, Mr. Speaker, are First Nations children and this 
allows or gives some training to foster parents so that they can 
keep those children in touch with their culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it includes funding for in-home support workers. 
Many of our foster families perhaps have two to three to four, 
and sometimes more if there’s a large sibling group. We will 
supply support workers to come into that home and help those 
foster families so that they can manage with these children and 
give them a warm, safe, loving environment. So we thank those 
foster families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget includes a program that our government 
introduced, which is flexible response. Again it’s intervention 
supports to families before they come into complete crisis so 
that we don’t have to always take children into our care, but 
rather we can support the families. Another in-home support 
that we give for at-risk families is called the intensive in-home 
supports, and we give that support to both families and also 
extended family members who are willing to take the children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also introduced the positive parenting 
program. Again supports for families before they go into crisis 
so we don’t always have to take the children into care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we developed an IT [information technology] 
system to track the children in our care, something that was 
promised by the NDP. I think they even put out a press release 
saying that they were going to do this, but it never got done. 
 
In our province under the NDP, in the province with the NDP, 
we could track a library book anywhere across the province but 
we could not do that with our children that were in our care. 
The children that we were responsible for, we could not track 
them in our province because there was no IT system that had 
them on file, but we could a library book. That was the NDP 
priorities. 
 
When I was minister the first time for Social Services, I said 
that we need this in our province. We need it in order to keep 
our children safe. We needed it for the front-line workers to 
make their job easier. And, Mr. Speaker, we got the job done. 
 
So let’s take a look at what the NDP choices are, because it is 
about choices. When the member from Saskatoon Centre sat at 

the cabinet table and he made decisions, as I mentioned, the 
budget at that time was only $88.2 million, which is 156 per 
cent less than what it is today. The IT system didn’t exist. It was 
never delivered. It was just a shallow, hollow press release. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were 90 fewer front-line workers, even 
though there were more children in care then than there was 
today. The welfare caseloads for children grew by 53 per cent 
between 2000 and 2007. Under our government, those numbers 
are declining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they underfunded foster homes, and no effort was 
ever made to build to capacity. I remember when I became 
minister of Social Services the first time, the Children’s 
Advocate released a report shortly after, and the report was on 
the years just prior to our forming government. It was called A 
Breach of Trust. And in A Breach of Trust, it talked about how 
there was a foster home with 21 foster children in that home. It 
talked extensively about the overcrowding in foster homes. That 
was the NDP record. That was what their priorities was. That’s 
what their choices they made at that time, and nothing’s 
changed, Mr. Speaker. They may talk the talk, but that was 
what the NDP chose to do. 
 
In April 2000 the Children’s Advocate report stated that there 
was a, and I quote, “serious gap and major disconnect” in the 
way family child welfare services are being provided. And he’s 
talking about the NDP, Mr. Speaker, and I couldn’t agree with 
him more. 
 
Our government have different priorities than the NDP has, Mr. 
Speaker. We are saying, this is where the money goes. The 
money’s going to support our most vulnerable children, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re not going to go back to the days of the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of my responsibility is disability 
services. Our budget includes a $5.7 million increase for the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, known as 
SAID. It also includes a $6.1 million increase residential spaces 
and for day programs for people with disabilities. Since we 
formed government, Mr. Speaker, across the number of 
ministries, our government has invested over 2.7 billion to 
support citizens with disabilities. That’s where our money’s 
going, Mr. Speaker, and that is the choice of this government. 
 
For years the disability community asked for a separate 
dignified support program. For years the NDP ignored them. It 
wasn’t a priority for them. Well it was for our government, and 
in 2009 we introduced the SAID program, and we have 
enhanced it every year since. This budget, Mr. Speaker, 
increases the SAID benefit amount for the fourth year in a row. 
It was a promise made by this government and a promise kept 
by this government. Even in a tight budget, we kept that 
promise, Mr. Speaker, because this government views it as a 
priority. 
 
When the NDP took office, Mr. Speaker, there was no wait-lists 
for residential supports and day program supports, but it wasn’t 
their priority. So by the year 2007, there was a wait-list of 440 
individuals that were looking for or needing residential supports 
or day program supports or both. 
 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6739 

There was a family in my area, Mr. Speaker, where the mother 
was 83 years old. She was looking after her adult disabled 
daughter. Mr. Speaker, she didn’t know what she was going to 
do. She could no longer cope with looking after her daughter. 
She herself was aging. But that government, the NDP, when 
they had the chance to make decisions, when they could make 
choices, didn’t care, Mr. Speaker. They did nothing. Well our 
government made different choices. We expanded the 
residential supports and the day programs year over year over 
year, ever since we’ve been government. And that’s where our 
money’s going. Mr. Speaker: it is to support our most 
vulnerable citizens, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t want to go back 
to where the NDP had their choices and what their priorities 
were. 
 
In the area of housing, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, well the vacancy 
rate at that time was less than 1 per cent in most of our major 
cities. They ignored it. It wasn’t a priority until finally, I think, 
the public pressure got under their skin. So they put together a 
task force, and it consisted of three cabinet ministers at that 
time. They’re gone now, but there was Judy Junor and there 
was Kevin Yates and there was Frank Quennell. But they didn’t 
hold public consultations. They talk about it now, but they 
didn’t when they had the chance to hold public consultations. 
There was a report, I suppose, but it was never made public. It 
was concealed and hidden, and no one ever got to see it and 
nothing was done, Mr. Speaker. I really think the NDP housing 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, was to let Alberta build the houses, and 
then we just shipped our families and our children into Alberta 
to live in them because they really did very little to deal with 
the housing crisis that our province was facing at that time. 
 
Our government’s choices and government’s priorities are very 
different. We’ve invested more in housing than ever before in 
the history of our province. Since 2007 we have invested 581 
million and developed over 12,500 units. Along with direct 
development and delivery and through extensive consultation, 
Mr. Speaker, all of which is public, we have developed a 
number of programs to encourage private development. And 
these programs have worked, Mr. Speaker. Housing starts are 
up 108 per cent since the NDP were government. Multi-unit 
rental starts are at — are we ready for this? — 598 per cent 
since the NDP were in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced a new housing ownership program 
called Headstart, and it’s a huge success. It has far surpassed 
our original goal, so now there are over 1,500 citizens that are 
enjoying a new home. We support the great efforts of Habitat 
for Humanity. It’s a great organization. The NDP, when they 
had the chance to support that organization, did not. That was 
not their priority. That was not their choices. But every year we 
have supported Habitat for Humanity. That’s where our money 
is going, Mr. Speaker. That is our choices and that is our 
priorities and we do not want to go back to the NDP with their 
choices and their priorities. 
 
In this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, there are no program 
enhancements, I have to say, in the Saskatchewan assistance 
program or the transition employment allowance. And the 
allocation for those programs, quite frankly, in the budget 
reflect sort of projected client numbers rather than changes to 
the program. We did have to make tough choices. We couldn’t 
enhance every single area within our budget. We simply didn’t 

have the money this year. But we chose the area of disabilities, 
we chose the area of housing, and we chose the area of our most 
vulnerable children as our priorities. 
 
And in the situation of income assistance, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know the one member opposite earlier said that we were 
concealing things, well I’m not going to conceal this at all. We 
made a reduction in one program and that was the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, and that reduction will 
come into effect on October 1st, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan employment supplement is a transitional 
program designed to assist low-income working families with 
the cost of raising their children. It’s calculated on a sliding 
scale, where the subsidy decreases as the family’s income 
increases or improves. It is a transitional program. Families are 
generally not on that program for a long period of time and the 
average time that a family remains on the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement is about seven months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[21:15] 
 
The intent, as I said earlier, is to assist families with child 
expenses and, without a doubt, one of the most costly expenses 
when raising children is child care. Children who are older than 
13 years of age seldom need child care so, in a difficult budget, 
we made the choice that we would change the program that 
there wouldn’t be a supplement component calculated for any 
children over the age of 13. We are grandfathering existing 
families, so existing families will not see a reduction. But this 
will, as of October 1st, will affect new entrants coming into the 
program, and it will affect children that are in the program 
under that age that then will age out at the age of 13 rather than 
18. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was a reduction to one program. It won’t 
affect a lot of families and in fact, for those very same families, 
this government has put in a number of other support areas to 
help them cope with their expenses. Mr. Speaker, since 2007, 
our government has increased minimum wage six times which 
calculates to a 28.3 per cent increase since we formed 
government. That will help these very same families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has implemented a number of 
other programs that’s going to help those same families. We 
introduced the children’s drug program so no parents pay more 
than $20 for their children’s prescription drugs under the age of 
14. Mr. Speaker, that helps those very same families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced the active families benefit so that 
families can access $150 per child under the age of 18 to help 
with the expenses of eligible activities. That helps those very 
same lower income families. Mr. Speaker, it was our 
government that eliminated PST on the clothing for children 
under the age of 17, and that will help those very same families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was our government that doubled low-income 
tax credit that helps those very same families. We still support a 
child care subsidy. Any family that’s in this particular program 
also qualifies for the rental supplement. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have also, as a government, implemented the largest personal 
tax decreases in the history of our province. We’ve taken 
114,000 people, low-income people and families off of the tax 
rolls completely, and that will help these very same families. 



6740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

So if it came to this one reduction that we had to do to one 
program or going back to the way of the NDP, where none of 
these other supports were in place, where they were raised . . . 
they had to pay higher taxes time and time again where they 
didn’t have a drug program, where they didn’t have an active 
families program, where they didn’t have a rental supplement, 
where they had to pay PST, I think their choice will be to give 
up this small part of one program and keep all of the programs 
that this government has implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area in the income assistance that we have 
changed — and the NDP, again not their priority; they may talk 
the talk but they didn’t walk the walk, Mr. Speaker — was in 
the area of income assistance. We indexed and adjusted every 
six months the amount that they would pay for shelter. That 
now has plateaued, but there was a number of years where that 
was escalating, Mr. Speaker. And we stepped up to the plate 
and we increased shelter allowances for those people that were 
on assistance. What happened under the days of the NDP? Well 
from 1990 to 2007, which I think is around 16 years, two 
increases. In all those years they only increased the shelter 
allowance twice. That was the priority of the NDP. This 
government has different priorities, and we have shown that we 
will support individuals for their shelter costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s talk for a minute about seniors. I know that 
the NDP have brought up seniors and senior support time and 
time again. They talk about long-term care homes and how the 
staffing levels should be more. Well I’ll tell you, no one wants 
to go back to the staffing levels of the NDP because this 
government has increased in long-term care homes, Mr. 
Speaker, licensed practical nurses by 40 per cent. We have 
increased registered nurses by 6 per cent. We have increased 
care aids by 11 per cent. So we have quite substantially 
increased the workers in long-term care homes, so I don’t think 
anyone wants to go back to the staffing levels of the NDP. We 
also have implemented, or added an additional 10 million to 
enhance seniors’ care services that is in the health care budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my own budget we have added, for the fourth 
year in a row, increases to the seniors’ income plan. The NDP 
left that plan at $90 a month for 16 years. Basically it was 
frozen. It was not addressed whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, we have 
now tripled the amount of money available to our low-income 
seniors because we believe in supporting them because they are 
a priority for our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also implemented a brand new program 
called the personal care home benefit. It helps seniors who are 
living in a private care home, Mr. Speaker, with the expenses of 
that private care home. That program never existed before, but 
that is a priority of our government and that was also increased 
again this year in this particular budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked quite some time about the choices 
of this government and the choices of the NDP. Our 
government chooses to keep Saskatchewan strong. We choose 
to invest more in health care, education, social programs, and 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. We choose to do that without 
raising taxes and downloading onto our third party partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP had a chance to make those very 
same choices, what did they choose? Well they chose to raise 

taxes 17 times. They raised the PST three times. They raised the 
income taxes twice. They raised business taxes four times. And 
that doesn’t even count all of the education property tax hikes 
that they implemented while they had the opportunity to make 
choices, Mr. Speaker, but I remember well the tax revolts across 
this province. 
 
They chose to stop investing in infrastructure and they chose to 
close 52 rural hospitals. They chose to close the Plains hospital 
right here in Regina. They chose to close 176 schools, which 
was nearly one a month, Mr. Speaker. They chose to close 
1,200 long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. That was the choices 
of the NDP. And what happened in Saskatchewan? Well we 
declined. People left and our population kept declining, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our government’s making different choices. We’re choosing to 
keep taxes low. We’re choosing to invest in infrastructure and 
we’re choosing to keep Saskatchewan strong. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I support the motion put forward by the Finance 
minister. I will not be supporting the amendment by the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 
me to be a part of the debate here tonight in support of the 
government’s 2015-16 budget. As we all know, politics is really 
about people and it is important that I acknowledge some really 
important people, Mr. Speaker. Without their support and 
dedication, I wouldn’t be standing here today: my constituency 
assistants Jackie and Joette, my ministerial staff Enyinnah, Alex 
who was my past chief of staff, Wendy, and Clint, my family of 
course. 
 
And I really want to pay special attention to the members who 
are leaving on our side of the House. They will leave a part of 
their soul, and it will remain with this party for as long as we 
are in existence. And I truly . . . It’s important to recognize what 
they have been and what they have done for this government, 
this party, and they need to know that they will be remembered, 
and it will bring a smile to all of our faces. 
 
I was elected to the legislature in 2007 in the constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains, and I want to thank my constituents for 
twice putting their trust in me. I’m excited about the amount of 
growth that has been taking place in my constituency. This 
continued growth has been met with continued investment by 
this government. Investment such as the Regina bypass that 
includes interchanges at Pilot Butte, White City, Emerald Park 
is critical new infrastructure, as well as the $22 million that has 
been invested for the Emerald Ridge Elementary School in 
White City. 
 
Every member here owes a debt of gratitude to our constituency 
assistants, and that’s just what I said earlier. My constituency 
president and the association always provides overwhelming 
support and help in ensuring that everything runs smoothly. 
 
And lastly, I want to thank my government colleagues, each and 
every one of them, and the Premier for his continuous 
leadership and guidance, ensuring that Saskatchewan remains 
on the path to growth. I think it’s important to acknowledge that 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6741 

for many important members . . . and I mentioned them earlier, 
and I’m not going to speak about that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members that I referred to earlier are going 
to retire from politics. And I especially wish to thank our 
Finance minister for delivering a responsible and very 
forward-looking final budget. I understand a few wonderful 
candidates have already been selected. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I 
mean potentially succeeding our wonderful colleagues because 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, they are truly 
irreplaceable. 
 
We are entering a period of controlled spending. We have a 
balanced budget with a surplus, but it came with some very 
tough choices. But it is not all doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s important to put the Saskatchewan economy in a much 
wider perspective — a perspective that shows that we are more 
than just oil, a perspective that shows that Saskatchewan’s 
economy as a whole is diversified and resilient. 
 
Earlier this year, the Fraser Institute released their annual report 
or survey of mining companies. The report stated that 
Saskatchewan is the most attractive mining jurisdiction in 
Canada and the second-best mining jurisdiction globally. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the best places in the world to 
invest in mining. That did not just happen by accident. Another 
indication of just how important the mining climate is in 
Saskatchewan is it was announced this month that Mosaic will 
be investing 1.35 billion in potash development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also on the topic of investment, Crescent Point 
Energy Corp., a Canadian oil company from Calgary, is 
investing $1 billion in Saskatchewan’s oil fields in 2015. 
 
The latest numbers released from Statistics Canada show that 
Saskatchewan has one of the lowest unemployment rates in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more good news. Saskatchewan had record 
merchandise exports in January of 2015 that increased to 2.8 
billion compared to 2.4 billion the year before. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population grew by 
another 17,396 people in 2014 to an all-time high of 1,132,640, 
or 42 that apparently some of my other colleagues have referred 
to. This is unprecedented, and I can see this growth first-hand, 
Mr. Speaker. In my constituency, Regina Wascana Plains, we 
see growth and expansion in the areas that I mentioned earlier 
— Pilot Butte, White City, and in subdivisions in Regina such 
as the Greens on Gardiner and the Creeks. It will be a result of 
hard decisions that this government has made that will keep this 
province on the path to sustained growth. 
 
We are continuing to invest in this province, and crucial 
investments have been made in all areas by our government. 
The following is just a list, a small list of some of the 
investments in the 2015-16 budget that will keep Saskatchewan 
strong, investments that meet the challenges of growth while 
ensuring that Saskatchewan remains competitive and inclusive. 
 
26.7 million is being invested in agricultural research and 
innovation. 
 

2015-16 budget introduces two new tax incentives for job 
creation and capital investment. 
 
Part of the growth plan is ensuring that Saskatchewan is the best 
place for people with disabilities, and to that end our 
government is adding $200,000 to the employment assistance 
program for persons with disabilities. And I know my colleague 
had spoke quite eloquently on that issue. This addition will 
bring spending on programs and services, helping people with 
disabilities find a job, to more than $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
3.7 billion in total investment in education. 
 
5.5 billion is being invested in health care, focusing on senior 
care, major capital projects, and in programs aimed at reducing 
emergency room department wait times. 
 
A commitment of 46.6 million in capital for this budget for 
advanced education and training. 
 
And 581 million in 2015-16 for transportation infrastructure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to some important work that 
is being done within the Ministry of Corrections and Policing. 
Our overarching goal within the Ministry of Corrections and 
Policing is helping to create safer, more secure and healthier 
communities. The 2015-16 budget, Corrections and Policing is 
spending 424.9 million, which is an increase of 2.9 per cent 
over last year’s budget. Our goal within the Ministry of 
Corrections and Policing is to fight crime through increased 
police presence and targeted initiatives, as well as stopping 
crime before it happens through innovative initiatives like the 
Hubs and the CORs [centre of responsibility]. 
 
[21:30] 
 
The ministry is starting to look at ways, we are looking at ways 
of bending this cost curve, of looking at ways of driving down 
the demand by addressing risk factors that contribute to 
criminal behaviour like mental health and addictions, as well as 
the need for jobs and literacy skills training.  
 
Mr. Speaker, our youth facilities are underutilized, and our 
adult facilities are overcrowded. This is why we’ve developed a 
plan that focuses on realigning our resources and ensuring that 
offenders get the necessary job skills and literacy training 
without losing focus on ensuring that we have invested the 
necessary resources into our correctional infrastructure, both 
physical and technological. It is why, in 2012, the province 
signed a 20-year police service agreement with the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in Saskatchewan. The RCMP 
budget for ’15-16 is 179.1 million, which is an increase of 4.5 
per cent over last year. 
 
The ministry continues to fund and support targeted policing 
initiatives and programs. Funding for municipal policing grants 
are $15.7 million and goes to fund officers in serious crime 
units: Internet child exploitation; targeted crime initiatives in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, North Battleford, and La 
Ronge; serious and habitual offender comprehensive action 
plan, which focuses on targeting and holding repeat offenders 
under the age of 25. This is to ensure that they are held 
accountable for their crimes. 



6742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Three combined special enforcement units that focus on 
dismantling organized crime: northern drug and gang 
enforcement unit was created under this government to combat 
illegal drug use and related criminal activities in northern 
Saskatchewan, a security intelligence unit helps gather and 
shares information with law enforcement, witness protection 
program offers protection to witnesses not covered under the 
federal witness protection program, serious violent offender 
response to target violent offenders before they reoffend. In 
2012, $1.9 million was invested by this government. 
 
Safer communities and neighbourhoods, also known as SCAN, 
allows for the closing of houses and other properties in our 
communities that are used for selling drugs and other organized 
crime activities. Seven positions were added to safer 
communities and neighbourhoods in 2009. This government 
wanted to offer municipalities more options when it came to 
addressing their community safety concerns. That’s why the 
alternative enforcement model was established. 
 
As was mentioned in the House yesterday, the Ministry of 
Corrections and Policing has been working with SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], and the 
RCMP, Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police to 
develop the community safety officer program, which will offer 
municipalities an additional option to support and enhance 
current policing services by addressing the high-priority and 
low-risk concerns of any particular community. 
 
The CSO program, community safety officer program, will 
reduce demand and pressure on the RCMP and other policing 
services, as well as provide the uniform presence that 
community members seek as a mechanism of community 
safety. They will also have the ability to liaise with the building 
partnerships to reduce crime and the SCAN units. The first class 
of special constables of the community officers will be finished 
this April. 
 
This government and the Ministry of Corrections and Policing 
also want to stop crime before it starts, Mr. Speaker, and 
building partnerships to reduce crime is a crucial element of this 
strategy. Building partnerships is a cross-government approach 
that includes nine ministries, eight policing services. The 
ministry’s goal is to create safer, secure, and healthy 
communities by addressing crime prevention, suppression, and 
intervention through the building partnerships to reduce crime, 
in particular its Hubs and CORs. 
 
The Hub is a made-in-Saskatchewan solution that aims to stop 
crime before it starts by getting community agencies, health and 
education providers, as well as police to sit down together. The 
focus is to address the unique needs of the individuals brought 
before and families facing acutely elevated risk. The goal is to 
connect individuals with services within 24 to 48 hours. Two 
more Hubs were recently added for a total of 12 Hubs in the 
province, and there is potential for more in the future. 
 
Centres of responsibility, also known as the CORs, increase the 
collaboration and resource support between the Hubs. CORs 
also provide research and analysis on trends, gaps, and 
reoccurring issues in order to better mobilize resources to 
longer term systemic issues. There are currently two CORs in 

Saskatchewan: one in Prince Albert and another in Saskatoon. 
 
BPRC [building partnerships to reduce crime] will continue to 
analyze the data and examine the possibility of expanding the 
network of CORs by adding an additional centre in 2015-16. It 
should be stressed that this initiative was spearheaded by this 
government. It was this government that said, we simply don’t 
want to do things the way we have always done them. That is a 
hallmark of this particular government. If we continue to do 
things the way we have done them in the past, and we — I use 
that “we” as the province of Saskatchewan — will get exactly 
that same result. 
 
BPRC is being emulated in other parts of the country and 
elsewhere in the world. There are made-in-Saskatchewan Hubs 
in Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, Nova Scotia, and there is also 
interest coming from the United States. Mr. Speaker, as 
everyone in Canada is well aware, radicalization has become a 
growing concern, not only outside of the country but now 
within it. Within the ministry we are looking to ensuring that 
the building partnerships to reduce crime has the capacity to 
address radicalization within Saskatchewan. 
 
We are working with partners in the RCMP, municipal policing 
services, mental health professionals, and religious leaders, 
especially those in the Muslim community that have reached 
out to us, in order to ensure that we have the internal capacity 
and the necessary cultural understanding to be able to deal with 
radicalized behaviour. I’m attending a conference at the 
beginning of April in Saskatoon called Unified Approach to 
Global Peace, put on by the Imams Association of Western 
Canada. We are making anti-radicalization a priority in 
2015-16. 
 
Our ministry is also addressing the issues of overcrowding in 
our adult facilities, jobs and literacy training for inmates, and 
the underutilization of our youth facilities with a transition plan. 
Our youth facilities are running at 49 per cent capacity while 
our adult facilities are over 100 per cent capacity, so the 
ministry needed to make a change. The plan was developed, 
and we found areas that needed more focus and areas where 
strategic decisions could be made. The purpose of the plan is to 
consolidate our youth facilities, repurpose other facilities to 
reduce the demand on our adult facilities, and to provide skills 
and employment training. This will help provide offenders with 
the opportunity to integrate back into the community and 
become valued and productive members of society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nature of the youth criminal justice system is 
changing. Most youth will not see custody as part of their 
sentencing, open or closed. One of the longer term goals of this 
government is to keep as many youth out of our facilities as 
possible. This makes good economic sense but, more 
importantly, it is the best thing for the young offenders because 
where they really should be, Mr. Speaker, of course is in school 
with the proper supports. 
 
Yarrow Youth Farm is an underutilized open-custody facility 
that sits on the edge of Saskatoon. Kilburn Hall is an 
established facility. It was a home for troubled youth in the 
’80s, housing both open- and closed-custody youth until the 
early 1990s when new facilities came online and the 
open-custody program was phased out. Currently Kilburn Hall 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6743 

has two empty wings which will be purposely converted to 
house open-custody youth. Makes sense to move the 
programming from Yarrow to Kilburn Hall, the youth are 
already going to school and attending other programming 
within the city of Saskatoon. Most of the programming that the 
youth had access to at Yarrow will be transferred to Kilburn. 
The savings from closing the Yarrow facility will be reinvested 
back into all youth programming across the province. 
 
As part of the transition plan, the Orcadia youth facility in 
Yorkton will be retooled into an adult male facility that will 
eventually become a skills training facility. This will reduce 
pressure on our adult system by realigning resources to meet the 
demand, plus eventually providing offenders with the ability to 
obtain skills and training that will allow them to fully integrate 
back into their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share a statistic that is indeed 
concerning. There are 17 traffic deaths per 100,000 people in 
this province, which is completely unacceptable. To address 
this concern, Corrections and Policing along with SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], RCMP, and municipal 
police have partnered to establish two dedicated traffic safety 
enforcement units within the province to reduce traffic injuries 
and fatalities. Mr. Speaker, this is SGI-supported funding with 
$1.5 million for the municipal police in Saskatoon, Weyburn, 
Estevan, and $4.1 million for the RCMP. We all realize that 
enforcement is an integral part of keeping our roadways safe. 
We anticipate through this particular program or this initiative 
that we will have fewer deaths and injuries resulting from our 
very defined and focused enforcement on our roadways. 
 
I would like to also highlight the northern integration initiative. 
This initiative is to address violence in Pelican Narrows, 
Deschambault Lake, and Sandy Bay by working with partners 
in those communities and the federal government through the 
National Crime Prevention Centre Public Safety Canada and 
will establish programs and services for youth and young 
adults, federally supported funding of $900,000 for the first 
year of a five-year northern integration initiative pilot totalling 
4.51 million over five years. 
 
Mental health is indeed very important and a concern, Mr. 
Speaker, with significant numbers of correctional inmates 
suffering from mental health issues: 248,000 will be directed to 
the forensic psychology Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] program. 
Two psychology Ph.D. residents, each in Regina and Saskatoon, 
train and work with these inmates to reduce recidivism and public 
risk. The assessments that these residents do are instrumental in 
having an understanding of the type of offenders that are entering 
into our system and so that the proper supports and programming 
can be implemented. Federally supported funding of 100,000 for 
increased capacity in the intensive rehabilitation and custody 
supervision program for violent mentally ill offenders as well. 
 
I am going to finish off, Mr. Speaker. I got a bit of a high sign that 
my time was just about up. So I would like to speak briefly about 
some of the issues that Saskatchewan has faced. And I say these 
things, Mr. Speaker, I think they bear repeating for sure. I believe 
that there needs to be strong understanding, a visceral 
understanding of what Saskatchewan has faced under the years 
under the NDP: raised taxes 17 times, raised the PST three times, 
raised income taxes twice, raised business taxes four times. That 

doesn’t even count all the education property tax hikes as a result 
of their failure to properly fund education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember my dad actually many, many years ago, 
and it was when the NDP were in power, that my question to him 
given some of these things that we have seen, the raising of taxes 
and how difficult it was to have a business in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the reason he stayed in Saskatchewan was he 
wasn’t going to abandon it in its tougher times. 
 
And I am certainly glad that Saskatchewan now sees a light, where 
things are much brighter. People are excited to be here. People are 
wanting to come here and open businesses. I know my dad, on the 
election of this government, that there couldn’t have been anybody 
more excited. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that he now suffers 
Alzheimer’s and isn’t seeing the end results or the middle results, 
whatever, that we all see and that other business owners see. But 
he committed to sticking it out in the province of Saskatchewan 
in Regina just because that was the way you do things, and I’m 
certainly glad he did. And I wished that he could see what 
Saskatchewan is today. Unfortunately that won’t happen for 
him. 
 
[21:45] 
 
People stopped investing in infrastructure and closed facilities. 
The government, the NDP government stopped investing: 
closed 52 rural hospitals; closed the Plains Health Centre, and 
as a Regina resident, Mr. Speaker, I recall that particular 
institution, that hospital being closed and how devastating it 
was for the city of Regina and southern Saskatchewan; 176 
schools closed, nearly one a month for 16 years; closed 1,200 
long-term care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I won’t. All my colleagues have 
definitely covered these particular areas in their addresses, and 
there are just some things, Mr. Speaker, that we have to keep 
repeating and repeating because we have to vow that this 
province will never go back to the way it was under the NDP. 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to keep going. I will 
be supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s your point of order, please? 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, point of order under rule 51. 
Earlier this evening the member from Estevan made some 
comments about the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
referring to some previous debate in this House. And I would 
ask that the Speaker look at Hansard from November 4th, 2013, 
page 3833 and also watch the video from that date for what was 
happening at 7:28 p.m. That was during the Throne Speech 
debate. The member from Estevan was referring to that 
particular time, and the types of comments that she made 
tonight were not accurate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 



6744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Speaker. In responding to the point of order, I certainly was 
listening to the member’s speech. I don’t think I heard it in its 
entirety, but I was in listening to most of it. Everything that I 
heard at that time was within the course of regular debate, and I 
would certainly encourage the Speaker to review the Hansard 
in that regard, but I would certainly believe that the point would 
be not well taken. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you for the Opposition Deputy House 
Leader and the Government House Leader. I will take the point 
of order under review and return tomorrow with a ruling on the 
point of order. I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
and thank you to my colleagues. It’s a pleasure to join in on the 
debate this evening with respect to the ’15-16 budget as 
presented by the Minister of Finance in this Chamber last 
Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, on March 18th. 
 
Prior to getting to my remarks about the budget itself, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with a number of my colleagues in 
saying some thank yous to very important people in my life. 
First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
constituents of Regina Northeast. In November of 2011, they 
entrusted me, a newcomer to the political scene with respect to 
running for elected office, they entrusted me with their vote — 
the majority of them in any case — to elect me in a seat that had 
been held previously for 26 years by the opposition NDP. And 
it was a team effort, Mr. Speaker, and I never take any day for 
granted in this Chamber by not taking that vote seriously that 
those individuals, those men and women in the constituency of 
Regina Northeast, lent me their vote on that particular day, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank them for that. 
 
I want to thank the Premier as well for his confidence in me to 
serve in Executive Council, in the cabinet. And I always say, 
Mr. Speaker, that I serve as an MLA at the pleasure of the 
constituents of Regina Northeast, and I serve in cabinet at the 
pleasure of the Premier, and I take both of those responsibilities 
very, very seriously. And I want to thank the Premier for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in the Legislative Building I am very capably 
served in my ministerial office by a wonderful staff. I have 
Michelle and Aimee, Kris, Amanda, and Tyler, who are in there 
working doggedly on my behalf and on behalf of the people of 
this province, on behalf of our ministry and the various 
stakeholders that we serve in the Advanced Education ministry, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to thank them for all of their hard work and 
helping me out on a daily basis. 
 
I want to thank my constituency assistant, Mr. Ron Naidu, 
who’s been with me since day one, was a volunteer on my 
campaign and then became my constituency assistant. Ronnie, 
as I like to call him, is a retired civil servant who still has a lot 
of energy and wants to be involved, both helping out the people 
of Regina Northeast and the various folks that come into our 
constituency office as well as still wanting to be involved 
politically as he enjoys the cut and thrust of politics, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to thank Ronnie for all of his service to not 
only me but, most importantly, to the people of Regina 
Northeast. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very well served in the Ministry of 
Advanced Education by a number of officials, many of whom I 
never get to see on a daily basis because they do all the work 
behind the scenes over at the ministry on behalf of our 
stakeholders and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 
those that rely on their services — primarily students, Mr. 
Speaker, in the post-secondary education sector. 
 
The Ministry of Advanced Education is very ably led by Dr. 
Louise Greenberg and all of her senior officials that I typically 
get the opportunity to interact with. I want to thank Dr. 
Greenberg who is a very unique individual, and I quite enjoy 
working with her. And she sends pictures to me on the weekend 
as well as to the Minister of Education of various foods that she 
cooks and that the Minister of Education cooks, and they like to 
trade these pictures back and forth and make me very jealous 
about the kind of food they’re eating on the weekend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the leaders of all of our 
post-secondary educational institutions in this province. I’ve 
had the opportunity to work with them for almost a year now 
since being appointed to this cabinet post. And I believe that we 
— not only myself, but we in the ministry — have a very good, 
strong working professional relationship with all of the leaders 
across the entire post-secondary spectrum, Mr. Speaker, from 
our universities to Saskatchewan Polytechnic to our regional 
colleges to First Nations University and to Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies. 
 
I quite enjoy working with all of these very accomplished 
individuals. We had some difficult discussions this year, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to this budget. As difficult as this budget 
was, I think that in the end point where we came out with 
respect to the support from this government to the 
post-secondary sector speaks well of this government’s priority 
of wanting to support post-secondary education in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a member of treasury board, I want to thank all of my 
colleagues, the various ministers that came before treasury 
board, along with their officials and the staffs from their 
respective offices. It can get quite heated at treasury board from 
time to time, Mr. Speaker, over the course of developing a 
provincial budget. We typically start in the early fall and work 
our way through until we literally arrive on budget day here last 
Wednesday, March 18th, where the Minister of Finance 
delivers the budget to the people of this province. But in 
between time and in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, to coin an old 
phrase from wrestling, there’s an awful lot of work that goes on 
behind the scenes with respect to the treasury board members, 
my colleagues on treasury board, and the Minister of Finance 
and his officials. 
 
So I want to thank all the ministers and I want to thank my 
caucus colleagues who have a good deal to say about the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. When we get down to some of the final 
strokes, we have some pretty intense discussion, I think is the 
best way to put it, with respect to some of the things that go into 
the budget, perhaps don’t go into the budget, where we modify 
things in the budget and amend things. So I want to thank all of 
my caucus colleagues for their advice and their wisdom. And I 
think the end result is what you see is a group of individuals, 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6745 

men and women, coming from across the entire province who 
represent diverse interests and represent diverse constituencies, 
putting their collective minds together, Mr. Speaker, to come up 
with a budget that I think well serves the people of this 
province. 
 
I want to thank the Ministry of Finance officials who work 
tirelessly, whether it’s treasury board analysts or those in the 
revenue division or treasury and debt management, the various 
areas of the Finance ministry. We on treasury board get to 
interact with them on a fairly regular basis during the 
development of the budget. And I know that they put in long 
hours and particularly as we get towards the cabinet finalization 
on the budget, they are working, burning the midnight oil in 
trying to provide us with the best advice and the latest numbers 
and estimates that allow us to make better decisions with 
respect to where we’re going to allocate the people’s money on 
an annual basis, Mr. Speaker, and very capably led by Clare 
Isman, the deputy minister of Finance, and all of her officials. 
So I want to thank them. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with all of my 
colleagues in congratulating the Minister of Finance on his fifth 
and, by his own admission, final budget as he is retiring from 
public life here at the end of this term and not seeking 
re-election in the constituency of Canora-Pelly in next year’s 
provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to serve on treasury board with the 
Minister of Finance since I was elected. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a gentleman who has dedicated his life to 
public service here in the province of Saskatchewan. He has 
dedicated his life to education. He was an educator. He was an 
administrator in the education sector, Mr. Speaker. Then he got 
involved on the school board in his hometown, his home school 
division, and continued to serve the people in that area in that 
capacity, and then he went into public life as an elected Member 
of the Legislative Assembly some 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think what I’ve learned most from the Minister of 
Finance, the member from Canora-Pelly, is he’s never stopped 
being a teacher. He’s been a mentor to me. He’s been one that 
has served us well with respect to educating us on treasury 
board as to the intricacies of developing a provincial budget. 
It’s not an easy process, and he has been very patient. He’s been 
a source of wisdom, a source of patience, and one who has, as I 
said, been a mentor to me and one who I look up to. And I think 
I speak on behalf of all of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
know of a member in our caucus that is more well respected 
than the Minister of Finance. 
 
And we’re going to miss him dearly but I do wish him and Gail 
and their family all the best as the Minister of Finance moves 
on to other things after this next election. And the people of this 
province I can say have been well served, have been well served 
by this gentleman, Mr. Speaker, in whatever capacity he has 
been involved in in this legislature, both on the opposition 
benches and on government benches in the various portfolios 
that he’s been responsible for. The people of this province have 
been well served, and I congratulate him on a terrific budget 
and all of the work he’s done on behalf of the people of this 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to spend a few minutes going over 
what the ’15-16 budget looks like for Advanced Education and 
just outline some of the highlights with respect to where the 
money’s going. We’ve heard that refrain here for a while now 
this past few weeks on television ads and in speeches and in 
questions from members of the opposition. And I know it’s 
somewhat rhetorical but it does beg the question of, where does 
the money go here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And I can tell you in the Advanced Education budget, Mr. 
Speaker, my budget’s quite interesting because about 98 per 
cent of my budget goes out the door the day after we vote off 
the budget here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. About 88 per 
cent of the budget goes towards supporting the actual 
institutions themselves: our universities, our regional colleges, 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic. That’s for their facilities. That’s for 
their faculty staff salaries. That’s for the various and sundry 
operating costs that they have to run those various institutions, 
Mr. Speaker. About 88 per cent of the $783 million that is 
allocated in my budget goes out the door to the institutions the 
day after we vote off the budget. 
 
The other 10 per cent, another 10 per cent taking you up to 98 
per cent, goes to student support services here in the province. 
That’s in programs that are designed to assist students in 
attending post-secondary education, whether it’s in the student 
loan program, the bursaries and scholarships that are available 
in a variety of manners to the students of this province, as well 
as ensuring that there is scholarship dollars available through 
the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship and SAGES, the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, to assist 
parents and their families in providing some savings for their 
children as they grow up and eventually attend post-secondary 
education. 
 
So I have a budget of about $783 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
lot of money. But relatively speaking, if you compare that 
amount of money to what was spent in the previous eight years 
by the previous government, because it’s always interesting to 
do a benchmark analysis with respect to how are we doing 
relative to where we were . . . And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that that $783 million into the post-secondary sector represents 
a 64 per cent increase, 64 per cent increase in what was being 
spent by the previous government in 2007. 
 
Over the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, we have spent in excess 
of $6.5 billion — billion with a “b” — in the post-secondary 
sector since forming government in 2007. And of that $6.5 
billion, additional dollars, 5.3, Mr. Speaker, was spent in 
supporting our post-secondary educational institutions in our 
first eight years. That represents $1.9 billion more than the NDP 
in their last eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had my staff do some research in the archives to determine 
whether to do some comparative analysis with respect to what 
was spent previously under the NDP government and what’s 
being spent in our government, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you 
that when you’re doing research — just not to get off track here 
— but when you’re doing research at the archives, the 
Provincial Archivist is very helpful in assisting both myself and 
the staff in researching these kinds of historical documents to 
give you some analysis, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

And I know, just to get off track a bit, I was having a 
conversation with the Minister of Highways, who had 
responsibility for the Provincial Archives not that long ago, and 
she told me there’s some very, very interesting things housed in 
the archives, Mr. Speaker. I would encourage anybody, if they 
ever have to research historical documents for this Legislative 
Assembly or the Government of Saskatchewan, the Provincial 
Archives is the place to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[22:00] 
 
So when I was looking at some of the historical data for what 
we were spending, what we are spending today, Mr. Speaker, 
relative to what was being spent in the previous eight years by 
the former NDP government, we are spending $670 million, 
Mr. Speaker, in support of students and student support 
services, as I said earlier. That’s a $400 million increase or a 
160 per cent increase relative to what was being spent under the 
previous government, under the previous NDP. 
 
And I hear every single day when the members come into this 
House and they ask questions, every single day, Mr. Speaker, 
they ask under the premise of, why are you cutting funding? 
Why are you cutting funding? Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
that I’m not sure how you add that up. You have 160 per cent 
increase over an eight-year period, and someone can equate that 
to a cut. But somehow the NDP try to do that every single day, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that closing the gap in Aboriginal education in this 
province is a priority of this government. It’s been identified in 
our growth plan as something that we want to focus on, Mr. 
Speaker, both at the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] level 
and at the post-secondary level. In this budget this year, 
between the Ministry of the Economy, with my colleague, the 
Minister of Immigration and Skills, we are providing $51 
million in First Nations and Métis post-secondary education 
funding, Mr. Speaker. There’s about just over $20 million 
coming from Advanced Education and about $31 million 
coming from the Ministry of the Economy. That is nearly 
double, nearly double, twice as much as what was being spent 
in this particular area in 2007, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the 
money’s gone. 
 
We have provided in this budget, in a very difficult budget 
where a number of ministries’ budgets were actually cut, we are 
providing a 2 per cent increase to our technical institutions, that 
being Saskatchewan Polytechnic, the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies, and our federated colleges associated 
with the universities, Mr. Speaker. And we are providing a 1 
per cent lift for our universities, our affiliated colleges, and the 
regional colleges. 
 
We are also, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, under the First 
Nations and Métis post-secondary education sector, providing 
an additional $428,000 in operating funding for SIIT or the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. That’s a 24 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker, year over year from last year, and a 
121 per cent increase since 2007 that we are providing to that 
particular institution. And I know that the president of that 
institution, Riel Bellegarde, was quoted in the newspaper as 
saying that they were very pleasantly surprised at that level of 
funding increase for their institution and will do great things 

with that money. 
 
We had last year, in-year, Mr. Speaker, found $375,000 in-year 
to provide that institution to assist them with student support 
services. What President Bellegarde tells me is that they have a 
number of students coming, particularly from northern 
Saskatchewan, from First Nations, who attend SIIT campus 
either in Saskatoon or Prince Albert, and the biggest challenge 
he has is keeping them there for their first full year. If he can 
keep a student there for their first full year, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Because it’s very culturally different for some of these students 
who are landing in downtown Saskatoon. The size of that city 
relative to where they come from seems like New York, and 
they need to have a lot of student supports in adjusting to life in 
the city of Saskatoon, going to these classes, and taking the 
various programs that they’re taking. And so they’re providing 
one-on-one coaching and counselling for these students. And he 
told me, he said, if I can get them through the first year, I can 
get them to graduate. And so we were able to find those monies 
last year in-year, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve repeated that again 
this year: $375,000 for that institution to work with their 
students in ensuring that they get through their first year. 
 
We’ve increased funding to First Nations University of Canada, 
and we’ve increased their funding 60 per cent since 2007, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve increased funding to Gabriel Dumont Institute, 
increased their funding 44 per cent since 2007. We’ve increased 
funding to the Dumont Technical Institute, a 169 per cent 
increase since 2007, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve increased funding 
for the northern teacher education program and Northern 
Professional Access College, or what we call NORTEP and 
NORPAC, 42 per cent since 2007. 
 
As well in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we provided some 
additional capital infrastructure dollars, or what we like to refer 
to as PMR, or preventive maintenance and renewal, to all of our 
various institutions. We’ve increased those dollars by 14.6 per 
cent year over year, Mr. Speaker. These dollars are allocated to 
the various institutions across the province to help them when 
they have problems with their roofs or their floors or those 
minor infrastructure problems that they need to deal with. Now 
does that answer all of their problems? Of course not, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that there’s many, many needs on that front 
with respect to preventive maintenance and renewal. But where 
we could find additional dollars, we found those dollars in this 
budget, in a very difficult, tight budget, to increase that funding 
by 14.6 per cent. It’s averaged 10 per cent to the two 
universities, and I know both university presidents have been 
very, very thankful for that. 
 
We’ve allocated $10.6 million to complete the construction of 
the Southeast Regional College in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. And 
I know that the Minister of Health, the member for Weyburn 
spoke about this earlier today and how much that particular 
institution means to that community and to the students in that 
surrounding area that will be attending that institution. 
 
We’ve also provided $4.5 million to finish off our allocation to 
the Parkland College Trades and Technology Centre in 
Yorkton. And I know the member for Yorkton is listening in 
this evening, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health, and is appreciative of the monies that have gone to that 
particular college in Parkland. It’s going to provide an 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6747 

additional 200 seats, Mr. Speaker, for technology and trades 
training at that institution in Yorkton, contributing to those that 
we need to fill the labour market demands in our province. 
 
And we provided 7.9 million, almost $8 million again for the 
health sciences facility at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, as they continue to build and refit that particular health 
sciences complex at the University of Saskatchewan, a very 
important component of the delivery of medical services, not 
only to the city of Saskatoon but in the medical education and 
training to the students at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk for a minute on the changes to 
the graduate retention program that we made, and we didn’t 
make those decisions lightly, Mr. Speaker. I want to assure the 
people of Saskatchewan that what was in existence before the 
budget day with respect to the graduate retention program is 
exactly in existence today, Mr. Speaker. The vast majority, the 
vast majority of students who have accessed the graduate 
retention program never accessed the refundable component of 
that program, Mr. Speaker. They only dealt with the 
non-refundable tax credit. 
 
Now I heard today, I heard today the member for 
Regina-Elphinstone, I believe it was, in his questions at 
question period earlier today, Mr. Speaker, and the premise of 
one of his questions suggested that a single mom graduating 
from university who had paid $20,000 or more in tuition would 
have to earn $55,000 in that single mom’s first job out of 
university in order to access or to capitalize on the full amount 
of the graduate retention program non-refundable tax credit, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s just simply not true. 
 
I would like to use stronger language, Mr. Speaker, but I want 
to give him the benefit of the doubt that maybe he was 
misinformed by staff. Maybe he didn’t quite understand how 
the refundable tax credit works. We know that they’ve made a 
number of mistakes in understanding different components of 
our budget, Mr. Speaker, but I will correct the record. 
 
A single mom, or any individual for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
graduating from university today has to earn about $36,000 in 
their first job leaving university to fully access the 
non-refundable tax credit of $2,000. They access it in the first 
four years, $2,000 a year for the first four years and, for the 
ensuing three years after that, Mr. Speaker, they’re eligible for 
$4,000. 
 
So over the course of 10 years, 10 years, Mr. Speaker, the 
students who graduate from our post-secondary educational 
institutions who have paid upwards of $20,000 in tuition will 
pay virtually little or no provincial income tax over the course 
of 10 years as they begin their career here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We think that’s good public policy, Mr. 
Speaker. He mentioned in his premise to his question earlier 
today that we had cut this by $33 million, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. The expense line item has 
moved from my ministry and because it’s a non-refundable tax 
credit, now it moves over to the Ministry of Finance as 
foregone revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think the members over there understand that, certainly 
not the member from Regina Elphinstone, the critic for 

Advanced Education who was asking the questions. And I don’t 
think the Finance critic understands it in order to clarify that for 
him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to assure the people of this province, those program 
changes have nothing to do with the cessation of that program, 
not allowing them to file their income taxes for the 2014 year, 
and accessing it completely, Mr. Speaker. The program will 
continue. It is seven years in length where they can claim their 
tax credits, carried over to 10 years, Mr. Speaker. It’s a huge 
competitive advantage for our businesses in this province. 
When a student is looking at going to a career in Ontario or a 
career here in the province of Saskatchewan, they will pay little 
to virtually no provincial income tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan in their first 10 years after graduating university, 
Mr. Speaker. We want to clear the record up and make sure the 
members opposite understand that. 
 
The other issue that I’ll raise, Mr. Speaker, that I think is 
important to clarify, is that yes, there was a funding reduction to 
the University of Saskatchewan this year, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
not going to walk away from this kind of bad news. We’re not 
going to ignore it. Yes, we’ve been working with the University 
of Saskatchewan to see if there was a possibility of them 
partnering with the government in this particularly difficult 
financial year, Mr. Speaker, to see if they can draw upon some 
of their savings to help out the province of Saskatchewan in a 
very difficult financial year. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is sitting on 
about $300 million in savings at their campus, about 200 
million of it in what they call restricted funds that’s controlled 
by their board of governors. They can make changes to those 
dollars if they so choose, but they are in what we call restricted 
funds. They have about $100 million in unrestricted funds, Mr. 
Speaker, that the University of Saskatchewan can access. 
 
Now the people of this province, when the Government of 
Saskatchewan has access to a rainy day fund, if you will, expect 
us to access the rainy day fund rather than raise their taxes. 
Now the opposition, if you listen to the rhetoric of the 
opposition members on budget day and in some of their 
questions, they would expect this government, when the 
University of Saskatchewan is sitting on $100 million in their 
savings account, they would rather this government increase 
taxes on single moms and senior citizens and those on fixed 
incomes and others in this province to give them an additional 
fourteen and a half million dollars when they already have $100 
million sitting in their savings account, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made that difficult decision to go and ask the University of 
Saskatchewan if they’ll partner with us. That’s exactly what 
they did, Mr. Speaker. You’d think by what the NDP rhetoric is 
over there that we somehow cut the funding to the University of 
Saskatchewan, never intending to make it whole again, Mr. 
Speaker, and then it’s going to deplete them of everything they 
have in their savings account. It couldn’t be further from the 
truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll just close, Mr. Speaker, by talking a little bit about what 
I’ve come to I think be disappointed, is probably the strongest 
term I can use inside the Chamber here, Mr. Speaker, with the 
lack of debate, the lack of debate between competing ideas in 



6748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. And I find that that’s either out of 
fear or it’s out of lack of planning or it’s out of lack of 
confidence in being able to put forward their ideas so that the 
people of this province can say, well we want to choose this 
idea over that idea. 
 
Because what we’ve done here, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done all 
along . . . This Premier, when he was leader of the opposition, 
put out a document on a growth plan with respect to what he 
wanted to see the province do, where he wanted to take the 
province if he ever became premier. He became Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, and he lived up to that promise. Then he issued a 
growth plan a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, to show the 
people of this province some objectives that we would lay out 
to say, here’s things we want to accomplish over the next 10, 
20, 30 years. They’re goals, Mr. Speaker; they’re specific goals. 
And people will judge you on your goals. You may not reach 
them all the time, but people are happy that you have set goals 
and you have a plan to achieve those goals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I’ve been waiting. I’ve been waiting. We’re about a year 
away from an election, Mr. Speaker. A year from now we’ll be 
campaigning. We’ll be campaigning and hopefully at that point 
in time there’ll be competing ideas out there that the people of 
this province can look at and make a judgment on, Mr. Speaker. 
Because it is a choice. It is a choice between the vision between 
this government, this Premier, this party, and the Leader of the 
Opposition and the NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition has been leader for I think 
just over two years. I think March 9th was his anniversary date 
since he was elected leader of that party. And I congratulate him 
on that hard-fought campaign with some other members of their 
party in winning the leadership of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. You 
would think, over the course of two years, that the Leader of the 
Opposition might want to lay out a vision, might want to tell the 
people of this province exactly what it is that he would like to 
do if he ever became premier. He seeks to be in the highest 
office in the province, Mr. Speaker. He aspires to be the premier 
of this province, and yet he won’t tell people what it is that he 
stands for. I find that frustrating, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
talking to more and more people in my travels around the 
province, they find it equally frustrating. 
 
So then when they issued their news release, pre-budget news 
release, Mr. Speaker, I thought . . . This was dated March 16th, 
a couple of days before the budget came down. I thought, well 
here’s where he’s going to lay out some of the things that 
they’re going to want to see with respect to how the province’s 
money should be spent, where the priorities should be, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to, as they put it, “Opposition wants 
budget to re-route spending to priority areas.” So you’d think 
there’d be an awful lot in there with respect to objectives and 
targets in health care, education, post-secondary education, 
highways and infrastructure, social services — the priority areas 
of the people of this province. 
 
[22:15] 
 
So I read this document with great interest, Mr. Speaker. And 
here’s what I’ve come to truly believe. And I don’t want to be 
unfair to the Leader of the Opposition or members of the 
opposition caucus, but I’ve come to truly believe they just don’t 

fundamentally understand economics, Mr. Speaker. They just 
don’t fundamentally understand how the budget process is 
developed. Now maybe the member from Lakeview, who’s 
been in cabinet a number of times and sat at the cabinet table — 
and I don’t know if he was at the treasury board table; I assume 
he was at some point in time, Mr. Speaker — has an 
understanding how that’s done. 
 
But he’s being led now by a Leader of the Opposition, a Leader 
of the Opposition from Saskatoon Massey Place, that doesn’t 
get up in this Chamber and ever ask a question about 
economics, Mr. Speaker. He never asks a question about the 
economic activity in this province. He never asks a question 
about the economic impact of any particular sector in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. He never gets calls from national media 
to say, what do you think about what’s happening in the oil 
industry relative to the rest of the country because in 
Saskatchewan, you produce oil? He never gets asked for his 
opinion on agricultural matters from the province that has the 
largest arable land, the largest number of acres of arable land in 
the entire country, Mr. Speaker. He never gets asked any of 
those questions on national issues. Our Premier does, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when I read through their pre-budget release I thought, well 
there’s going to be some interesting information in here with 
respect to where they want to see post-secondary education go. 
Here’s what they said on post-secondary education, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, “Deliver more education and training 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people, including First Nations 
and Métis people. Deliver. I’m going to repeat that, Mr. 
Speaker, in case you didn’t . . . “Deliver more education and 
training opportunities for Saskatchewan people, including First 
Nations and Métis people.” 
 
He might as well have stood up and said, well can you just do 
some more? Do what you’re doing, but maybe do some more 
because that’s what we would do. We would just do more. He 
doesn’t say how many more training seats he would have at 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic. He doesn’t say the areas of training 
he would have at Saskatchewan Polytechnic. He doesn’t say 
how much more money they should put into the universities. He 
doesn’t say what he would do with respect to student support 
services in this province, Mr. Speaker, including their iteration 
of a graduate retention program. He doesn’t say any of that kind 
of stuff, Mr. Speaker. He just says, well do more. 
 
And then when the Advanced Education critic was asked on 
budget day, okay, if you don’t like the changes to the GRP 
[graduate retention program], what would you do, the silence 
was deafening, Mr. Speaker. And he had that blank look on his 
face, as I said earlier today, and he kind of went, well we 
wouldn’t do that. And reporters said, well what exactly would 
you do then? Well we wouldn’t do that. They have no answer, 
Mr. Speaker. They have no answer because I’ve come to realize 
they have no fundamental understanding of how to go about 
developing our economy. 
 
The number one economic priority or policy put forth by the 
Leader of the Opposition and members of the opposition is to 
buy local the first Saturday of every month, Mr. Speaker, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s the sum total of their 
economic development policy they put forward so far, is to buy 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6749 

local every first Saturday of every month, Mr. Speaker. Now 
who would disagree with that? We have said on this side of the 
House we would encourage all citizens to buy locally as much 
as they possibly can, Mr. Speaker, every single day of the week, 
in their towns and villages and cities here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s the sum total of their 
economic development policy. 
 
And then I got thinking, well maybe it’s just he’s playing 
possum here, Mr. Speaker, and going to hold out until the 
election campaign because he doesn’t want to give up this 
secret plan that he has — this master plan, as my colleague said 
— in telling the people of this province what he’s going to do. 
There’s some magic he’s going to create, and it’s going to come 
out and wow the people like their big calculator back in the 
2011 election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I realize now that that’s not going to be the case. And 
why? Because the last paragraph of their news release said it all 
to me, Mr. Speaker. “The Opposition New Democrats . . .” This 
is written by the Leader of the Opposition. “The Opposition 
New Democrats strongly oppose any government effort to 
recoup the small dip in revenue caused by low oil prices . . .” 
 
The small dip in revenue, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 650 
to $700 million that we had a hole in with respect to this past 
year’s revenues, Mr. Speaker. And what did we have to do as 
treasury board? We had to find a way to not only deal with that 
loss of revenue, Mr. Speaker, and not only have to deal with 
that loss of revenue, but when we have to keep campaign 
commitments and when we have to keep spending 
commitments to the people of this province, we have to find 
ways to ensure we keep those commitments. 
 
You can’t just shut down hospitals. Well no you can, because 
the NDP shut down 52 of them, Mr. Speaker. You can’t just 
close schools. Well no you can, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP 
closed 176 of them. You can’t just rip up contracts to farmers 
and say we’re not going to pay that out, like the gross revenue 
insurance plan. Well no, in fact you can, Mr. Speaker, because 
that’s what the NDP did. So we as a treasury board, Mr. 
Speaker, and we as a cabinet and we as a caucus had to make 
some very difficult decisions when you’re faced with a dip in 
oil revenue to the tune of $700 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we made some difficult choices. And we’re prepared to 
debate those difficult choices here on the floor of this 
legislature and take this to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve been saying to some of my friends on the other 
side, and I’ve said to them, I’ve said, would you like us to call 
an election and campaign on this budget, if you think this 
budget is so bad? And the member from Lakeview got up and 
spoke eloquently earlier tonight about the fact that he was so 
disappointed in this budget. If you think this budget is so bad, 
would you be prepared to go to the people of this province and 
campaign against this budget and present your plan? There’s 
not one of them over there, Mr. Speaker, that can look me in the 
eye and answer that question. 
 
Why? Because they don’t have a plan, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
have an alternative to what this budget is to go out there. Every 
single day they come into this Chamber and they say, we just 
think you should spend more. Well maybe you’re spending too 

much. Because you’ve got record revenues, you spent too much 
money. But every single time they get up and ask a question 
they say, well you should spend more. The simple answer to 
every single one of their dilemmas, Mr. Speaker, when they’re 
looking at a problem in this province, is that you should just 
spend more. 
 
We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, made other difficult 
choices. We made decisions with respect to where we’re going 
to have to pare back some funding. We did things like, as I said 
earlier, dealing with the University of Saskatchewan and asking 
them if they would dip into their rainy day fund and help out for 
one year with respect to some of the funds that they have 
available, most of which came from the taxpayer in the first 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we sat down, Mr. Speaker, we realized that there are a 
number of choices available to us as a treasury board and as a 
cabinet. There’s the revenue side and the expenditure side. The 
provincial budget is not that much more complicated than 
running a business or running your own household, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the fact that you only have a limited 
amount of revenue available to you. Well I suppose you have 
more than a limited amount if you’re prepared to raise taxes. 
This government chose not to do that, Mr. Speaker. Faced with 
difficult choices, faced with this little dip in revenue from the 
oil going down 6 or $700 million, we chose not to go into the 
pockets of the people of this province or the businesses of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, particularly small business, and take 
more money from them. We made those difficult choices, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re prepared to take that out to the people of 
this province and explain to them exactly what it is that we did. 
 
Now faced with the same kinds of choices when the NDP was 
in government, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP was in government 
— and we heard them all giving their various speeches here in 
response to the budget, Mr. Speaker — faced with these kinds 
of difficult choices themselves, what did we see them do? What 
did we see them do, Mr. Speaker? They sat at the cabinet table, 
no different than we did. They sat at the treasury board table 
and they sat at their caucus table and they had to make some 
decisions with how they were going to balance the budget. 
What were they going to do? 
 
And when they made those choices, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t go 
out and consult with the people. They didn’t go out and say, 
well we want to find out from you exactly what you think we 
ought to do because we’re faced with this dip in oil revenue of 6 
or $700 million or whatever the issue they were faced with in 
that particular time, Mr. Speaker. They chose to raise taxes 17 
times. Seventeen times in the course of 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 
Seventeen times they went to the people and said, well we 
know you’re struggling, we know it’s hard out there, but we’re 
going to raise your taxes. We’re going to take more money 
from you. We’re going to take more money from you and 
reduce services to you, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They raised income taxes twice. They went after everybody on 
income taxes, Mr. Speaker — high-income earners, low-income 
earners, middle-income earners, people on fixed incomes, 
single parents as they always like to raise in this House. They 
went after small businesses, Mr. Speaker, and the other 



6750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

businesses in this province, and raised their taxes four different 
times during the course of 16 years. These are the choices that 
they made. 
 
They could’ve done some of the things that we did. They 
could’ve worked even harder to try to find where there’s more 
efficiencies inside the budget, Mr. Speaker, and pare back 
spending. They chose not to do that. 
 
Then of course there’s the education property tax hikes, Mr. 
Speaker. The education property tax hikes that resulted in 
revolts, resulted in people actually not paying their taxes 
because they were fed up with this government not listening to 
them, to the NDP government not listening to them, and there 
was a revolt. 
 
And then of course they stopped spending. They stopped 
spending on infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker, again 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan. They stopped building 
roads. They stopped building highways. They shut down 
hospitals — 52 of them, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan 
and the Plains Health Centre here in Regina — probably the 
worst decision ever made by that particular member over there, 
Mr. Speaker, and his colleagues at the cabinet table. And he 
rues the day that they ever made that decision, I’m quite sure. 
 
They shut down schools, 176 schools, Mr. Speaker, nearly one 
a month for 16 years. And they fired over 600 nurses, drove 
doctors out of the province, and said to the young people of this 
province, we don’t care if you stay in Saskatchewan. We don’t 
care. Matter of fact I believe one cabinet minister said, well the 
more that leave, that means there’s more left for the rest of us 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made a different choice. We made a different choice to 
continue to keep taxes low in this province, Mr. Speaker, to not 
increase taxes. We made a choice to continue to invest in 
infrastructure, particularly highways, particularly health care 
facilities, educational facilities including in the post-secondary 
sector that I’m responsible for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve built 1,200 residents’ beds in this province at our 
universities, Mr. Speaker. Over the course of the last 16 years 
the NDP built 44. So every time they get up and they talk about 
. . . I know the member from Saskatoon Centre always talks 
about the housing crisis or the rental vacancies. They don’t tell 
the people of this province that when they had the opportunity 
to invest in housing and invest in residences for our 
post-secondary educational students, Mr. Speaker, they built 44 
beds over the course of 16 years. We’ve built 1,200 in our first 
eight years in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I find it passing strange that the Leader of the Opposition, 
when he comes into this House, asks a lot of questions about 
health care. And I think that that’s an appropriate area for the 
Leader of the Opposition to raise questions about health care. 
And he raises some very serious issues, Mr. Speaker, on a daily 
basis and ones that the Premier and the Minister of Health and 
the Minister of Rural and Remote Health take very seriously. 
And they investigate those cases, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that, 
where we can, that those kinds of things never ever happen 
again. 
 

But what I do find rather really strange is that he never comes 
into this House and asks any questions about agriculture. He’s 
asked the odd question about education. He’s never asked a 
question, to my knowledge since he’s been Leader of the 
Opposition, about the post-secondary educational sector. He’s 
never asked a question about highways and infrastructure. I 
might be wrong about that, Mr. Speaker, but they never ask any 
questions about highways and infrastructure anyway. It shows 
up nowhere in their particular news releases when they’re 
talking about the pre-Throne Speech news release or the 
pre-budget news release. Nowhere in there do they talk about 
highways and infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And they certainly 
never ask any questions about the economy, as the Minister of 
the Economy rightly points out. 
 
You would think, Mr. Speaker, when oil has gone from over 
$100 a barrel to less than $50 a barrel during the course of one 
fiscal year, one fiscal year, you would think that maybe just 
once the Leader of the Opposition might want to get up and say, 
here’s our contingency plan for what we would do if we were in 
government faced with the same dilemma that this 
government’s faced with, with the drop in revenues. His 
answer, Mr. Speaker? Bring back the film tax credit. 
 
He was going to bring back the film tax credit to pay 
Hollywood producers to come to this province and — to use 
their numbers — for every dollar the government spends, you 
get $44 back in the economy. And we know that that’s not 
exactly correct, Mr. Speaker, because 44 per cent of whatever 
filmmakers spent was on the procurement of goods and services 
outside the province of Saskatchewan, so it didn’t add a dime to 
our bottom line here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s the Leader of the Opposition’s sum total. He 
wants everyone in Saskatchewan to buy locally every first 
Saturday of every month, Mr. Speaker, and then he’s going to 
bring back the film employment tax credit to revive the 
economy when we lost $700 million in oil revenue. 
 
I think that the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, when they 
look at what this government is doing, what this government is 
doing with respect to the challenges that we are faced with, the 
challenges that we are faced with, Mr. Speaker, particularly 
engaging in Aboriginal post-secondary education and getting 
them involved in the economy, Mr. Speaker . . . and I’m very 
proud to say that over 16,000 First Nations and Métis learners 
are now enrolled at post-secondary educational institutions in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. In the Leader of the Opposition’s 
own news release, he said that we should do more . . . 
[inaudible] . . . deliver more education and training 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people, including First Nations 
and Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We increased funding to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies by 24 per cent year over year. We have increased 
funding to that institution by 121 per cent since we came to 
office, Mr. Speaker. Both the president of SIIT and I believe the 
vice-chief, Bobby Cameron, from FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] were quoted in the newspaper 
recently, Mr. Speaker, talking about how delighted they were 
with the increase in funding, by the recognition of this 
government that if we invest in post-secondary education for 
First Nations and Métis learners, that they will take full 
advantage of that and then become fully engaged in the 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6751 

economy. 
 
And when asked by the media to the Leader of the Opposition, 
what do you think about that? He said, well they ought to do 
more. They ought to do more, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t set any 
particular target as to how much more they ought to do. He just 
says that everything that you’ve done is not enough. You ought 
to do more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that given the fact that this particular 
Leader of the Opposition aspires to the highest office in the 
land, aspires to be premier of this province, he’s got to do more 
than come in this Chamber every single day and criticize the 
government for not spending enough. And then someone else 
gets up and criticizes the government for spending too much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think what we’ve done here with respect to the choices that 
were available to us relative to the choices that were available 
to the opposition when they were in government, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we made the right choices. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
will be supporting the motion by the Minister of Finance for 
this budget and not supporting the amendment by the 
opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30, this 
House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6721 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6725 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6727 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6730 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6734 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6737 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6740 
  Nilson (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................ 6743 
  Cheveldayoff (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 6743 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6744 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6744 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	EVENING SITTING
	EVENING SITTING
	fix150324Debates-PM.pdf
	EVENING SITTING
	EVENING SITTING


