
























































Hansard: April 22, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 22, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6979 
 April 22, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 38 grade 7 
and 8 students and their teachers Sarah Myers and Kayla Fraser, 
along with their chaperones DeAnn Eckdahl, Dixie McKay, 
Alayna Sirman, and Maureen Wrennick. These students are 
from Caswell Community School, seated in your west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. I invite all members to welcome these students to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Meewasin to welcome the folks 
from Caswell School. Being the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Centre, I miss this school 
by about a block on 29th Street. You folks are on 30th. It’s the 
school I used to teach at. So welcome very much to your 
legislature, and I’m glad to see you’re all here. Thank you so 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the two previous members in also welcoming the school from 
Caswell, as I represent part of the Caswell neighbourhood and 
live in Caswell. I see a few faces from Mayfair swimming pool 
in the summer as well in the crowd there, Mr. Speaker. So I just 
want to extend my welcome to this group and thank them for 
studying hard and for being good members of our community. 
Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce someone that’s very special in my life and that’s 
my daughter, Trish. She’s in the Speaker’s gallery. And it’s just 
good to have her up here today, and we get to spend more time 
together. We just don’t get enough of that, Mr. Speaker. But I 
would like all members to join me in welcoming Trish to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you a number of guests seated on the 
floor behind the bar on the government’s side. They are all 
representatives of First Steps Wellness Centre here in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re here on a wheelchair awareness day, 

disability awareness day which some of us members are taking 
part in. This is why I’m still sitting down and in a wheelchair 
today and happy to take part. 
 
With us today are Jessica Frotten, Nicholas D’Autremont — 
I’m sorry, it just says Nicholas D., Mr. Speaker — Chris 
Lesanko, Owen Carlson, Faye Lesanko, and Ilonah Evangelista. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome these fine people to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member opposite and the minister in welcoming 
these representatives of First Steps Wellness here today to their 
Assembly, and for us to take part in wheelchairs in the 
legislature. Certainly, thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your 
co-operation today to have us partake and have a small glimpse 
into some of the practical challenges facing those that are in 
wheelchairs. 
 
It’s my pleasure to welcome to the Assembly Mr. Owen 
Carlson, executive director of First Steps Wellness; my friend, 
Chris Lesanko, a real leader within our community as well; his 
mom, Mrs. Faye Lesanko, down from Sturgis here for the 
Assembly here today; your son, Nick D’Autremont; an 
incredible athlete representing us at the Pan Am Games, Ms. 
Jessica Frotten here today; and as well Ilonah Evangelista, a 
caregiver that’s here with us today. And I believe one of the 
therapists is sitting up in the Assembly, I see her now, is Sandi 
Marshall. And she’s seated there with Roland Lafrance. 
 
And I simply want to say to each of these individuals with just 
in a bit of an extended welcome to Owen and Chris. Owen, 
you’re doing an exceptional job of running that organization 
that makes a difference in people’s lives. And to Chris, this is a 
pretty remarkable guy, Mr. Speaker, arguably the best lacrosse 
player in Saskatchewan or Canada in his time, Mr. Speaker. Not 
so long ago when he was a university student as well and an 
education student, he played in Vermont, played in Bishop’s 
and in fact was Bishop’s Athlete of the Year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And watching somebody come through life and have an 
incident like he has, and to be in the position he is now, to be 
giving back to his community and giving back to so many 
others is nothing short of inspirational. Somebody that certainly 
has demonstrated perseverance, strength, and courage in ways 
that I think that I can only imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s my pleasure to welcome these leaders to their 
community, and it’s with thanks that I offer to them for what 
they do in our province every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join in welcoming Roland Lafrance. Roland is a 
constituent of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, but you know, 
Roland’s really a constituent of the city of Regina. He is an 
absolutely incredible volunteer. Whenever there’s a need within 
the community, Roland is there. He puts his hand up. He’s first 



6980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2015 

to volunteer, and he’s made such a difference to the city of 
Regina. So thank you very much, Roland, for all the work you 
do. Thank you for being my friend, but also thank you for being 
a friend to the city of Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the House, 
seated in your west gallery today a young gentleman by the 
name of Mitchell Cooper. Mitchell is not a stranger to this 
building, of course, having worked for Corrections and Policing 
over the last several months. He is now working in a law firm in 
North Battleford, and he’s already starting to be active in our 
community and making a difference. And I would just like to 
ask everybody to welcome Mitchell to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of better schools here in Saskatchewan. 
And we know that many of our schools are rundown, unsafe, or 
uninspected, and this government refuses to release information 
on the $1.5 billion of known repairs that are needed in our 
schools. And this government has a plan to rent schools from 
private corporations that’s expensive and reckless, and none of 
this is acceptable given the record revenues this government has 
had over the last eight years. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
supports for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Regina. 
I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to raise petitions once again in the Assembly here 
today as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by that 
government on Dewdney Avenue, and their failure to address 
those unsafe conditions and ensure the safety of the users and 
the families along Dewdney Avenue. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 

Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by Saskatchewan citizens once again. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I stand today to present yet another petition on the 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

That the petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan, as well as the city of 
Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from senior 
governments. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular petition 
are primarily from Moose Jaw. And as I presented page after 
page of petitions, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to stand in my 
place today to present another petition and another page of this 
long story. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of maintaining hyperbaric 
services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The petitioners point out 
that the people of Moose Jaw have worked hard for many years 
through fundraising and community activism in order to 
procure a hyperbaric chamber for the Moose Jaw Hospital. 
They point out that hyperbaric treatments are essential for the 
proper treatment for many people living with diabetes, cancer, 
and other conditions. They talk about how the existing 
hyperbaric chamber is the only unit of its kind currently in 
operation between Edmonton and Toronto, and that hyperbaric 
services will no longer be offered in the new design for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital because of the changes to the hospital 
design initiated through the John Black version of lean. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly require the Sask Party 
government to reverse its decision to scrap the hyperbaric 
chamber and to instead ensure that this service continues to 
be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 



April 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6981 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to commit to the creation of safe staffing 
levels for all valued members of the health care team and 
to reintroduce actual numbers of staff to match the level of 
care needs and the number of residents under their care in 
long-term facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from the 
fair city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. And the individuals 
who have signed this wanted to point out that this government 
has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and created an open-custody 
wing in Kilburn Hall which is a secure custody unit for youth 
considered at greater risk to their communities. The provincial 
Advocate for Children and Youth has declared he cannot 
endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens could be 
influenced and pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth 
who may be involved in serious crimes or gangs, and that 
Kilburn Hall has a more institutional environment that could 
intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences and provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Wheelchairs in the Assembly Day 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, a 
few MLAs are trying to get around in wheelchairs today to 
experience first-hand the challenges encountered daily by 
persons in wheelchairs. This program, which was initiated by 
the First Steps Wellness Centre, includes a full day in which the 
Speaker, the Minister of Corrections and Policing, Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health, Minister of Education, the member 
from Rosemont, and myself will be experiencing what it’s like 
in a wheelchair for the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has not been easy. Doors are hard to open. 
Carpets are hard to manoeuvre, and I believe the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health has already taken one spill today. 
First Steps Wellness Centre is hoping to fix all that. They’re a 
non-profit organization leading in spinal cord rehabilitation. 

Their programs are well beyond what is currently being offered 
through most rehabilitation programs in Canada. Through 
rehabilitation they are giving hope to people who have suffered 
from spinal cord injuries. Their efforts can and have improved 
the lives of those living with spinal cord injuries. 
 
As we are finding out today, living in a wheelchair is not easy. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
First Steps Wellness Centre for all the amazing work that they 
do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to sit in my 
place today to recognize and take part in Wheelchairs in the 
Assembly Day. This is an important initiative that has been 
organized for some time now by Owen Carlson, Chris Lesanko, 
and their team at First Steps Wellness Centre here in Regina, 
along with you as Speaker. 
 
I must also say thank you to Chris, Owen, and the First Steps 
Wellness team for their truly inspiring and leading-edge work 
providing quality of life and function to so many in our 
province. This is important work to support. This day is an 
opportunity for us as legislators to spend the day using a 
wheelchair and to gain a better understanding and to have a 
small glimpse of what life is like for people living with mobility 
issues in wheelchairs. 
 
For most people, Mr. Speaker, using a wheelchair isn’t 
something that they do to raise awareness or to support their 
community. It’s the reality that they live with every day. It is 
important that we, as members of the Assembly, ensure that the 
laws we pass and the government services that all 
Saskatchewan people rely on are accessible for everyone and to 
take into consideration the specific needs of those who are 
using wheelchairs. 
 
It’s also important for us to recognize the perseverance and 
strength of those in wheelchairs, Mr. Speaker, and so I ask all 
members to join me in thanking Owen Carlson, Chris Lesanko, 
the team at First Steps Wellness Centre, Jessica Frotten, who I 
see is here today and also taking part, and all other people who 
have helped make this year’s Wheelchairs in the Assembly Day 
such a success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Recognition for Marshall Volunteers 
Remembering Lloydminster Fire Chief Todd Gustavson 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize the selfless fire and EMO [Emergency Measures 
Organization] volunteer service providers of Marshall and to 
remember Chief David Todd Gustavson of the Lloydminster 
Fire Department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently had the privilege to attend an award 
ceremony and fundraising event for the Marshall volunteer fire 
and EMO services. Jason Humby and Gordon Friedrick were 
among those presented with awards. Jason Humby received the 



6982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2015 

Good Samaritan Award for pulling an unconscious neighbour 
out of a septic tank and administering CPR [cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation] until the ambulance arrived. Gordon Friedrick, 
who will turn 89 this fall, received the Emergency Services 
Award for his decades of dedication to the volunteer EMO 
services in Marshall and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April the 10th, memorial services were held in 
Lloydminster for Fire Chief Todd Gustavson. Firefighters and 
EMO service providers from across Saskatchewan were all in 
attendance to honour and pay their respects. Fire Chief 
Gustavson was just 53 years old when he passed away 
suddenly. 
 
Firefighting runs in the Gustavson family as Todd’s father and 
grandfather served on the Lloydminster Fire Department. His 
son Calem is currently with the department. Chief Todd served 
for 37 years and spent his last 17 years as the fire chief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
volunteer fire and EMO service providers of the Marshall area 
for their exemplary service and in celebrating the extraordinary 
life of Chief Todd Gustavson. He will be greatly missed. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Earth Day Hopes for Environmental Progress 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again in 
the Assembly today in recognition of Earth Day. This year 
marks the 25th Earth Day in Canada and I hope that all 
members will be able to take part in some Earth Day event in 
their constituency perhaps over the next few days. 
 
Maybe this is the year that we actually make some real progress 
on the promises made by this government on environmental 
issues. I’ve had the chance to review some of the other Earth 
Day members’ statements that have been made in this 
Assembly over the last few years and there certainly have been 
lots of eloquent words and speeches. What’s been lacking, Mr. 
Speaker, over the same period of time is any action addressing 
climate change in every sector of this province except power 
generation. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to have the highest per capita 
greenhouse gas emissions in Canada and this government’s 
incredibly expensive carbon capture project only addresses less 
than 2 per cent of our emissions. Now this government 
promised in 2009 that the time for talk was over and it 
reintroduced the reduction of greenhouses gases Act. Six years 
later, Mr. Speaker, no action, no tech fund. Then the 
government announced it would bring in its Environmental 
Code which would include a chapter on climate change, the 
most important issue facing our environment today. 
 
When the minister introduced it in the fall, where was the 
climate change chapter? Nowhere to be seen. Time and again 
this government has shown that when it comes to climate 
change, they’re all talk and no walk. The time for further 
studies and consultations is over. 
 

I ask all members to join me in marking Earth Day today and in 
urging the government to take real steps now to address our 
province’s shameful record on climate change. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

National Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
from all walks of life are in need of organ transplants. For some 
a transplant will mean a better life. For others, a transplant will 
save their life. As part of National Organ and Tissue Donation 
Awareness Week, I ask members to join me in encouraging 
Saskatchewan people to consider becoming a donor. 
 
Over the last year, there has been about 90 people waiting for a 
new kidney at any given time. During 2014, 30 Saskatchewan 
people received a kidney transplant. Eighteen of those 30 
transplants were made possible by deceased donors. During 
2014 there were 112 cornea transplants, up 250 per cent from 
the year before. Yet at the end of March 2015, there were still 
66 patients waiting for a cornea transplant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one organ can save up to eight lives. One tissue 
donor can improve the lives of more than 75 people. Fill in a 
donor card, put a sticker on your health card and, most 
importantly, talk to your family about wanting to be an organ 
and tissue donor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a giving province filled with 
people who want to do the best for one another. Becoming an 
organ or tissue donor is perhaps one of the greatest gifts you 
can give back. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Homesteading Constituents Featured in Television Series 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Discovery 
Channel will be airing a series this month titled Sons of Winter, 
staring the Barks Family from the Nipawin-White Fox area. 
 
Tara and Randy Barks, along with their three sons, Dale, Shane, 
and Kole, are homesteaders. They have rejected modern living, 
choosing to maintain a pioneer lifestyle in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For years the Barks have sustained themselves by running a 
trapline and catching such animals as lynx, wolves, beavers, 
and martins. Togetherness has always been the key for survival 
for the Barks family. However, Mr. Speaker, this winter will be 
a very different one for the Barks. The two oldest sons, 
20-year-old Dale and 19-year-old Shane, will venture alone in 
the wilderness for 90 days and, Mr. Speaker, they will do so 
during some of the coldest months of the year. During this rite 
of passage, the boys will become woodsmen while they battle 
the elements, forage for food, and establish their own traplines. 
Meanwhile Randy and Tara will be left behind with 15-year-old 
Kole to care for the family trapline. 
 



April 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6983 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 
wishing the Barks family the best of luck in their new series, 
Sons of Winter, airing next Tuesday night, April 28th. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The staff working in 
our offices that hold everything together often do not get 
enough credit for the exceptional work they do, which is why 
I’m pleased to stand today to recognize Administrative 
Professionals Day. 
 
In all types of offices across the province, admin professionals 
are heavily relied on for their organizational, IT [information 
technology], management, and people skills. They are truly the 
face of our organizations and often the first point of contact 
anyone has with our businesses. As any business owner or 
employee can tell you, first impressions matter and truly can 
make a difference for the success of your organization. 
 
Celebrated since 1952, this worldwide observance serves to 
remind us that these office professionals are the backbone of 
many of our organizations. Admin professionals are often the 
innovators of our business processes and the organizational 
engines of business in our economy. With such diversified 
skills, I can truly attest that the professionals working in this 
building alone often go above and beyond the call of duty. 
Thank you to all of them. 
 
I would like to give a special thank you to all of our MLA 
constituency assistants who manage our offices even when the 
MLAs are down here in Regina. Your hard work is definitely 
appreciated. I would ask all members to join me in applauding 
our fantastic administrative professionals. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — There are serious allegations of a significant 
breach of privacy on the part of a senior staff member in the 
Premier’s own office. Will the Premier agree today to turn all 
files and emails over to the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner for a full investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are provisions in 
legislation that allow for the release of certain parts of 
information. Mr. Speaker, procedures were followed according 
to that provision in provincial law. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think that’s something that the 
independent officer of the legislature should determine, not the 

Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker, that leaked the information in the 
first place. 
 
The Premier’s own office was involved in a serious breach of a 
citizen’s privacy because it leaked confidential information 
about an individual citizen. It couched that leaked information 
in a whole lot of innuendo in a clear attempt to sully this 
individual citizen’s reputation. And I’d argue, Mr. Speaker, that 
this looks a lot like, it looks a lot like an attempt by the 
Premier’s own office to put a big chill on front-line health care 
workers speaking out. 
 
The Premier’s office needs to turn all files and emails over to 
the Privacy Commissioner immediately, and it needs to turn all 
files and emails over to the Ombudsman as well, as this is 
directly relevant to her investigation in seniors’ care. Will the 
Premier commit to doing that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the reason certain actions 
were taken were precisely the opposite of what is being 
depicted by the member that just asked the question. 
 
The subject began when the Leader of the Opposition, in his 
preamble to questions on behalf of a health care worker asked, I 
think twice or maybe three times, to ensure that the position of 
the government was that this individual would not face any 
retributions in the workplace for coming forward. I gave my 
assurance on all three occasions. Subsequent to that, the 
Minister of Health gave his assurance on a number of 
occasions. Mr. Speaker, that’s a promise that I made. That’s a 
promise that the government made. 
 
Subsequent to that, not just a few days ago, I found out that the 
Saskatoon Health Region had in fact suspended the same 
individual, with pay, pending the investigation of some 
complaints. Mr. Speaker, I wanted the people of this province to 
know that we keep our promises, not just to this individual but 
to every other health care worker in the province. So I felt it 
was very, very important that the government, that the 
government make it known that this individual was facing some 
disciplinary action, was suspended with pay for reasons 
completely outside his attendance here at the legislature and 
him raising issues, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what 
happened. 
 
There are provisions in legislation that allow for the disclosure 
of certain kinds of information if it’s in the public interest. We 
believe it is in the public interest to send a signal to all health 
care workers that a promise that we have made will be kept, that 
the promise that there will be no retribution for anyone raising 
any concerns about health care will be kept, and that this 
particular instance, this suspension without pay had nothing to 
do with what was raised in the legislature that day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can review the 
Hansard record. I asked if Mr. Bowden would receive 
punishment, Mr. Speaker, or retaliation for speaking out, for 
speaking out and coming forward, Mr. Speaker. And it’s no 
wonder we have to ask those questions because we see how this 



6984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2015 

government approaches health care workers who do speak out, 
Mr. Speaker, by the way that they have released this 
information. My question to the Premier: was it his decision to 
leak this information? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I already answered the 
question. Moreover, we took the action we did precisely 
because he, on the floor of the legislature, took the unique 
approach of asking on three occasions for this individual, if this 
individual could be protected, to ensure that there would be no 
workplace retribution. I gave that undertaking not just to this 
Assembly, not just with respect to Mr. Bowden, but to every 
health care worker in the province. 
 
Then we found out that there was a suspension with pay for this 
individual. That concerned me because I want to make sure that 
employees of the health care system, that others that want to 
step forward have the complete freedom to do so. So we took 
the actions that are provided for in legislation. I hope he’s read 
it because he’s here on the floor asking questions about it. We 
took the allowances in the legislation to make sure certain 
general information was provided so that the people of this 
province and health care workers in the province would know 
that we kept the promise, that we will keep the promise, that no 
one will face any workplace discipline at all just for coming 
forward and expressing concerns about health care in the 
province. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re hearing is that this 
government, with the Premier’s authorization or direction, 
because he is saying this is a great thing that they did, they 
intentionally leaked information to a select handful of reporters 
about this individual, Mr. Speaker. Now forgive me if I don’t 
want to take the Premier at his word here, Mr. Speaker, that 
they were just well intended with all of this and it was, oh, just 
to clear the air. No way, Mr. Speaker. This matter needs to be 
handed over to the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. My 
question to the Premier: will he do that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the Leader 
of the Opposition knows about the particular file in question, 
but I would say frankly I don’t know the details either. I know 
the generalities, certainly. We know the generalities, and now 
they’re available to the public so that they would understand 
that no action was taken as a result of this person coming 
forward. The Saskatoon Health Region has said as much. 
 
So is the Leader of the Opposition saying they’re not telling the 
truth? Is the leader . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he 
makes some sort of inaudible interjection. That’s the 
implication he’s making. 
 
The health region has been unequivocal. The health region has 
said, these actions were taken, not because of anything that Mr. 
Bowden did in the Assembly, but because of workplace 

complaints, Mr. Speaker, possibly from, possibly from 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know the specifics. 
 
The legislation which I would have assumed he would have 
read before coming in with this line of question, the legislation 
of the province of Saskatchewan, The Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act says pretty clearly in section 29 
that certain personal information can be disclosed if it’s 
believed to be the disclosure would be in the public interest of 
the province. I think it is in the public interest of Saskatchewan 
that every health care worker would know they can come 
forward and express whatever concern they want without fear 
of retribution in the workplace. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this explanation from the Premier 
is absolutely unbelievable. It is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker; they’re 
trying to spin this now. We have seen the disgusting actions that 
we saw with how they leaked this information. We’ve seen how 
they treat our front-line workers, and we have the Premier 
admitting that it was his decision to release this information. He 
thinks everything is fine. This needs to be handed over to the 
Privacy Commissioner. It cannot be left in the Premier’s office, 
who leaked the information in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another question. Does the Premier think 
it’s fair that First Nations seniors are discriminated against by 
our current ambulance fee system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to allow the 
Minister of Health to answer this particular question and the 
subsequent line of questioning, but I think it’s very important to 
stand in my place here and state for the record, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is certain disciplinary action under way with respect 
to the individual that has nothing to do with him appearing or 
attending to the Legislative Assembly. I have an assurance of 
that, and that would be the only reason why we would take the 
extraordinary action that we’ve taken to make sure it is 
understood by all — those who observe the proceedings of this 
legislature, those who are involved in health care delivery in the 
province — that indeed they can come forward and do so freely. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s letters to the editor or other 
workers that the members have quoted that they have brought 
forward, Mr. Speaker, there clearly has not been the kind of 
retribution, the kind of depictions that the Leader of the 
Opposition is trying to paint. That’s not how we have conducted 
ourselves in government. Maybe that’s how members opposite 
acted when they were in the government, but we have not, and 
we will not. 
 
We’ll take, actually, extraordinary steps to send a signal that we 
will allow for certainly any criticism or complaint of the health 
care system free of any retribution. What we will not allow, Mr. 
Speaker, what our policies do not allow, what the health region 
policies do not allow is for any action on the part of a worker, 
any worker — now I’m speaking generally — to have a 
negative impact on the health and welfare and well-being of 
either patients or their colleagues, Mr. Speaker. On that we 
stand. 



April 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6985 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

First Nations Senior and Ambulance Service Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s actions on this file 
are appalling. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, specifically related to whether or not 
it’s appropriate that First Nations seniors in this province can be 
discriminated against in our ambulance fee system. People 
throughout Saskatchewan were saddened to hear the story of 
Louisa Moberly, and they were horrified to see the photos of 
this 79-year-old woman who was badly injured after repeated 
falls in a care facility. 
 
Now her family has learned that when Louisa gets transferred 
back to the care facility closer to home, she will receive a huge 
ambulance bill. The federal government doesn’t cover the cost 
of return ambulance transfers for First Nations people in our 
province. And First Nations seniors, they’re excluded from the 
provincial program that caps ambulance fees for all other 
seniors. To the Premier: why should First Nations seniors like 
Louisa Moberly be treated differently than every other senior in 
the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the ministry’s working 
with the region. We’re reaching out to the family to determine 
what eligibility that she may have for ambulance coverage. Mr. 
Speaker, there is some coverage that is available for 
inter-facility transfers under the payments that are made by the 
federal First Nations and Inuit health benefits, Mr. Speaker. If 
that is not an applicable benefit, Mr. Speaker, then from her age 
she would be eligible, it is my understanding, for the seniors’ 
capped program in the province, Mr. Speaker. She may be as 
well eligible for low-income supplementary health benefits, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s why we were reaching out with our health region and 
with the family to determine which benefits that she may be 
eligible for, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that she has the ability to, if 
she does wish to return back to La Ronge, that that is in fact 
going to happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister needs to get briefed 
on what programs are available to people like Louisa because 
that is not the case with respect to what she is being offered. It’s 
bad enough that Louisa’s family has to worry about their 
mother’s health after she suffered multiple falls in a care 
facility, Mr. Speaker, and was badly injured. We’ve seen the 
horrific photos. But now on top of that, the family has to worry 
about getting a massive ambulance bill because Louisa is a First 
Nations senior and is treated differently than any other senior in 
the province would be treated. 
 
This government’s very own EMS [emergency medical 
services] report in 2009, in 2009, identified this as a problem. 
And that report recommended that this government step up to 
the plate and better meet the needs of First Nations patients. 
 

My question to the Premier: why didn’t the government follow 
through? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re going to do and what my office is going to do is 
work with the family and the health region to determine what 
exactly she may be eligible for when it comes to benefits, Mr. 
Speaker. I feel you’ll, Mr. Speaker, you’ll forgive me if I don’t 
exactly take the Leader of the Opposition on this matter. 
 
In fact what happened just a couple of days ago, Mr. Speaker, in 
this House the Leader of the Opposition was talking about the 
ambulance system when it comes to families for pediatric 
services, because of the changes made in Regina to Saskatoon, 
being left with large ambulance bills. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he 
wasn’t correct when it came to that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministry’s critical care policy was changed 
once the changes were made in the city of Regina. Ambulance 
costs, whether those be road or air ambulance, and support for a 
parent or guardian are covered under our policy, Mr. Speaker, 
by the Ministry of Health. As well, Mr. Speaker, we also pay 
for accommodations and reimburse for meals for people that are 
sent to Saskatoon for pediatric intensive care services, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition was wrong on that 
account, Mr. Speaker. We will look very closely at Louisa’s 
case to see which benefits she may be eligible for in the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s very own 2009 
EMS report highlights how First Nations seniors in this 
province are suffering, how they’re falling through the cracks, 
and how the lack of programs here, Mr. Speaker, are hurting 
Saskatchewan seniors. Louisa should be able to count on the 
same kind of support that a non-First Nations senior would be 
able to count on. 
 
There are many things wrong with our current ambulance fee 
system, Mr. Speaker, and there are many things that I want to 
see fixed. The cap, or the fact that First Nations seniors fall 
through the cracks and don’t qualify for the cap on ambulance 
fees that every other seniors qualify for is one of the worst 
shortfalls in our current ambulance fee system, and it needs to 
be fixed. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he today commit to fix this 
problem? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said before, we’re working with the health 
region to determine which programs that Louisa may be eligible 
for, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that may be through the 
programming through the First Nations and Inuit health benefits 
because there is some coverage for inter-facility transfers, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re seeing if that’s applicable as well as our 
seniors’ program. If that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker, she may 
be eligible for low-income supports through our family health 



6986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2015 

benefits or supplementary health benefits, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the work that’s going on right now to determine 
which coverage may be in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will again remind the House that the Leader of 
the Opposition stood in his place just a couple of days ago and 
said that programs aren’t in place, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to families being transferred for pediatric intensive care from 
Regina to Saskatoon, that ambulance bills weren’t covered, that 
families were going to be out of pocket for lots of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, when in fact the policy was changed for critical care 
transportation, Mr. Speaker, that in fact covers those families 
and in fact goes above and beyond that to cover things like 
accommodations and per diems and meals, Mr. Speaker. So in 
this case we’re going to look very closely into the facts to see 
what exactly Louisa qualifies for, rather than rely on the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when these concerns are being 
raised about ambulance fees and the problems that it presents to 
patients, we continue to see a dismissive approach from this 
government, pretending that everything is fine and everything is 
okay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well he doesn’t have to just take my word on this, Mr. Speaker. 
We can also listen on this issue of how First Nations seniors are 
falling through the cracks, Mr. Speaker, from Chief Tammy 
Cook-Searson, chief of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band and the 
Chair of the Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority who is 
speaking out about this unfairness today. She says that First 
Nations seniors are declining ambulance transfers after surgery 
or treatment because they are afraid of the massive bills that 
will arrive. 
 
This needs to stop, Mr. Speaker. First Nations seniors in 
Saskatchewan deserve the same dignity and respect that every 
other senior in our province gets. My question to the Premier. 
Why won’t he commit to fixing this today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again, Mr. Speaker, we are 
working with the health region and the family to determine 
which programs Louisa may be eligible for, Mr. Speaker. 
Through the federal First Nations and Inuit health benefits, 
there is some coverage available for inter-facility transfers, Mr. 
Speaker. If that’s not applicable, Mr. Speaker, then she may be 
eligible under our seniors’ program, Mr. Speaker. If that’s not 
an applicable program, Mr. Speaker, there may be benefits 
under the low-income program through the family or 
supplementary health benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we are very much not dismissing this issue. That’s why 
we’re working directly with the ministry, the health region, and 
the family as well, Mr. Speaker, to determine which programs 
she may in fact be eligible for, Mr. Speaker. And again, I’m not 
going to take the word at this point from the Leader of the 
Opposition, based on what we just heard in the last couple of 
days when it came to, Mr. Speaker, the PICU [pediatric 
intensive care unit], the pediatric intensive care transportation 
policy from Regina to Saskatoon, because he stood in his place 

and said there was no program available, when in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we made those changes. And in fact in this case there 
was a program available. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Protection of Children in Care 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in question period I 
asked about the number of children who died in the care of 
Social Services last year. The minister wouldn’t answer the 
question, but she did give me the answer last night in 
committee. She said 16 children in care died last year, not 
counting the children that died of natural causes. Mr. Speaker, 
for far too many years, we’ve lost far too many children in care 
and it needs to stop. 
 
To the minister: with all the recommendations from the 
Children’s Advocate and the findings of the coroner’s inquest, 
why isn’t this government doing a better job protecting our 
province’s most vulnerable children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In reviewing 
the number of child deaths over, literally over a decade, the 
numbers have been fairly consistent, so it isn’t getting worse. 
However no death is acceptable. Some of the deaths are from 
natural causes. Some are from accidents, and there’s other 
rationale. However, Mr. Speaker, there’s always that one, such 
as the case that we’ve just heard about recently, where it’s not 
acceptable and more needs to be done. 
 
That’s why this government has taken it very seriously and 
increased the funding for our child and family services by 156 
per cent over and above what the members opposite spent when 
they were in government, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this 
government has implemented an electronic system in order to 
track the children and also to help the workers to do their work. 
That’s why this government has increased the number of 
front-line workers. That’s why this government has increased 
the amount of funding to foster families, and we’ve increased 
supports that we put into our foster homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why this government’s invested in and 
supports the families to keep them whole before they go into 
crisis, and that’s why the number of children coming into care 
is going down, Mr. Speaker. We are working very hard. We’ll 
continue to work with the Children’s Advocate to try to prevent 
future issues from happening because they’re not acceptable. 
But we don’t want to go back to the funding of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, 16 children in care died last year. 
That means since 2010, 97 children in care have died, not 
counting the ones from natural causes. And that’s 
heartbreaking. And while the Children’s Advocate 
acknowledges that there has been some progress, he says that 
this government has a long way to go when it comes to 
protecting our vulnerable children. So, Mr. Speaker, when you 
have a long way to go, slow progress is not acceptable. 



April 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6987 

To the minister: what will it take for this government to start 
properly protecting our most vulnerable children? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, from the Children’s 
Advocate most recent report, he has said that there is progress 
that’s being made, and indeed of the 18 recommendations, 
we’ve implemented 12 of those recommendations. We have 
five that are in progress and one that’s under consideration. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve put in a number of systems within our child 
protection services that has strengthened the system. 
 
It will be a continuous progress that needs to happen in this 
particular file, and it should happen. We need to learn from 
each and every time where there seems to be a gap, and we need 
to do better. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to do so because 
these are the important citizens of our province. But we don’t 
want to go back to the underfunding of the NDP where we had 
less workers, more children in our care, and not enough 
supports for the families before they came into crisis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Sour Gas Emissions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — A senior government official says this 
government has known the extent of the sour gas problem since 
2013, yet we’re only learning about it now. To the minister: 
why has the government kept this under wraps? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the oil fields of Saskatchewan 
are changing in terms of a number of things. Certainly the 
nature of H2S gas, or sour gas, are being discovered in much 
more frequency than there has been ever before in our province. 
That’s precisely the reason why we are stepping up dramatically 
the number of inspections in Saskatchewan. 
 
There were some 10,000 facilities last year in 2014 that were 
inspected. There were a number of violations; as a result of that, 
enforcement actions. There were 21 enforcement actions, 2 
suspensions, and some shut-ins as well related to sour gas. Our 
government takes this issue very seriously. We would look to 
increase even beyond that inspections if it is felt that it’s 
necessary. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that response is in disconnect 
what senior officials are saying. A senior government official 
admits that the problem here is a lack of focus by the ministry. 
There are rules in place that say oil facilities should not emit 
any gas or vapour containing sour gas at levels higher than 
1,000 parts per million. But clearly those rules are not being 
followed, not even close. 
 
This government’s whole approach has been a hands-off one: 

loosening up regulations, relaxing enforcement, and just letting 
industry police itself. To the minister: will he admit that this 
horrible sour gas situation shows the need for stronger 
regulations and more stringent enforcement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think we better check the 
record as to what the official indeed did say because I don’t 
think that’s what the official said in any way, shape, or form, 
Mr. Speaker. I think what the official indeed said was is we are 
stepping up investigations. 
 
We are stepping inspections in great measure, Mr. Speaker, and 
that there is certainly a need, given the fact that we see a 
changing oil field, the nature of the oil fields here in 
Saskatchewan. We will certainly continue to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll continue to issue violation notices if there 
are violations in the oil fields of our province, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe that we certainly want to see the protection of health 
and safety of Saskatchewan citizens is our number one priority 
when it comes to the oil fields of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I will quote from a CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news story posted 
yesterday that said: 
 

[The official] said it’s been caused, in part, by a lack of 
focus by the industry and the ministry, which is the 
regulator. 
 
“There’s been sites that have not received the attention 
they should.” 

 
So it’s clear that that’s what the senior official is saying. Here is 
the response from this government. Back in 2013, what did they 
do? The previous minister of Energy and Resources wrote a 
letter to oil and gas operators in the province as a gentle 
reminder to comply with the law. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious a gentle reminder is not proper 
enforcement. To the minister: why hasn’t this government 
properly beefed up the enforcements? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what the official was 
referring to is the fact that there hasn’t been enough inspections 
in the past. He is certainly saying that in 2014 there were 
10,000 inspections. In 2015 we’ve already started on 
inspections in significant number. We will be looking at at least 
10,000, perhaps more, in this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we have committed $2.19 million to 
expand the regulatory oversight and enforcement into 
investigations. We have also been in contact with all of the oil 
producing companies in the areas of concern, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that there is compliance, and we’ll be continuing to, 
through all regulatory efforts, ensure that the safety of workers 
in those areas is paramount. 



6988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2015 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate on The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2015. Of course this follows the budget that 
was recently brought down last month. And of course the 
minister does go through . . . and I always try to do, is take a 
look, and these bills can be very technical. Because obviously 
it’s things that we can’t see, we don’t see in the fall, we see 
following the budget, and rightfully so. 
 
So this is a kind of thing that we’ll have to take a look at, and 
we’ll have to make sure we fully understand the implications of 
this. Clearly though it’s part of the procedures of the process 
because we can’t have this too far out ahead of ourselves, the 
fact that would defeat the purpose of the budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there will be a lot to think about and talk about 
but, you know, it’s interesting. As I look about the choices this 
government made in its recent budget, I do have to make some 
comment on that. And I do think and for example, you know, 
when we were recently talking in the last couple of weeks in the 
75-minute debate, where the government really extended its 
hand again to self-congratulate itself on the budget and the tax 
cuts and that type of thing. 
 
And really when we see what’s happening here in the province, 
in many ways a good news story because more and more people 
are coming here. They’re working hard. They’re wanting to 
make sure they make ends meet, and it’s an exciting place to be. 
There are many opportunities in all sorts of ways. Not 
necessarily the film tax, people working in the film industry 
though. That is a little bit more challenging. And so we see 
what the choices of this government has been and the 
implications of not consulting, not doing the proper thinking 
about what really makes a province great and vibrant. And 
clearly they missed the boat a few years ago when they 
introduced the film tax credit. And this is the kind of thing that 
we always have to be on guard. 
 
And so when we take a look, and we’ll be taking a look at this 
bill here, and wanting to make sure we fully understand the Ps 
and Qs, and make sure all the t’s have been crossed and all the 
i’s are dotted. And I know they’re anxious to get to work. They 
must have a plan for this weekend. We’ll get it to committee 
soon enough, but I want to make sure we have time to fully 
understand, fully understand this bill because we don’t want to 
see the fiascos that we’ve seen from this government in 

previous years. 
 
And I think of just that one example, the film tax credit, where 
even the Chamber of Commerce was saying, you know, really 
you should have really thought more clearly on this. And we’re 
still seeing, we’re still seeing the ramifications of that. We’re 
still seeing the ramifications of that. And it’s hard to, it’s hard 
to let those kinds of decisions go by. I know this government 
would like to forget it, but people don’t forget it. 
 
Last night even on CBC there was a fellow trying to do a film 
in Prince Albert. He’s actually from Prince Albert, and he wants 
to come home and make this film, but he needs to get a crew 
together. And he’s wondering what kind of crew can he find in 
Prince Albert these days, or in Saskatchewan, that are qualified 
really to work on a film. And it’s a tough thing. It’s a tough 
thing. It’s something that you live with when you make these 
kinds of rash decisions. 
 
And yesterday, you know, I think about in terms of labour 
where we’ve had labour legislation now that took eight years, 
eight long years to go through the court system and we’re still 
not seeing what the end bill will be. I know this government 
will like to downplay that ruling. This is the inconsistency of 
this government where you have, you know, you have a 
massive bill coming from the Supreme Court where they ruled 
that you will have to pay costs. And we’ll be back here in 
December. Mark my words, we’ll be back here in December 
with supplementary estimates because they haven’t really 
thought through their budget. They have not thought through 
their budget. There’s been no money set aside in the budget for 
that Supreme Court ruling. There’s been nothing. 
 
They’re saying, well we don’t know, we don’t know what the 
costs were for ourselves, let alone what the costs were for the 
other side, the labour unions, what they paid. I mean how can 
you even have a benchmark if you don’t even know how much 
you paid yourself? These folks were running on an open tab for 
the last eight years for legal services on Bill 5 and 6. They don’t 
know how much that cost the province of Saskatchewan, and 
we don’t know what the other shoe will cost. What will the 
other shoe cost? And that’s got to be part of this budget process. 
 
I mean if there isn’t some . . . I mean here we have something 
that’s coming down the line and this government, in its reckless 
way of just having an open tab for lawyers on this, saying, we 
have an ideology that we want to put through, and that is that 
this bill will go all the way to the Supreme Court and whatever 
it costs, we will pay. And now we are having to actually pay 
double because we have to pay the other side. 
 
This is what we’re finding out in estimates. This government is 
not prepared. So when we have bills like this before us, we 
want to make sure we take a close look at it, that we take a close 
look at it. And so we will have a good discussion in debates 
because we want to raise concerns. 
 
And those are always interesting, Mr. Speaker. I find it 
interesting when we stand up and do our adjourned debates 
because what happens is, you know, you see what really the 
other side responds to, you know. And in many ways they kind 
of like, they like to downplay the film tax credit and what a 
fiasco that was for this government. And we won’t forget that 



April 22, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6989 

because, you know, some people have said past behaviour is a 
good indicator of future behaviour. Now who said that? Who 
said that? Past behaviour is a good indicator of future 
behaviour. And you see reckless behaviour like the film tax 
credit and like the Supreme Court ruling, and these folks don’t 
even know how much it’s going to cost. They have no idea. 
They seem to treat the government coffers as if it’s an open tab, 
especially when it comes to law costs or lawyers’ costs. And 
I’m amazed at that. So we will take some time. We will take 
some time to think this through. 
 
I do want to get to a couple of other points I want to make 
because I know we want to get to committee this afternoon. But 
the point is about being affordable. Often when we talk about 
tax and tax reform, we want to make sure it’s affordable for the 
people who live in Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to make sure I get on the record two concerns that I 
have. And one was the fact during the budget debate we did not 
have, and the Minister of Finance did not mention, the 
anti-poverty strategy. And that’s something that’s pretty key. 
And it’s been pretty key because it was part of the 
recommendations from the Children’s Advocate that this 
government do something about poverty here in Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at the tragic circumstances now that we know 
since 2010, 97 children have died, a large part of that is related 
to circumstances of poverty and early childhood education, and 
we know that this government did nothing for early childhood 
education. It did not even mention poverty in the budget. 
 
So when we talk about tax reform and income tax, that is a big 
thing. We know for a fact that this government has seen since 
it’s come to power a 17 per cent increase in the caseloads in 
social assistance and SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] and TEA [transitional employment allowance]. 
 
[14:30] 
 
This is something that should be concerning, should be 
concerning this government. And we also know that this 
government leads the country when it comes to food bank 
usage, leads the country when it comes to food bank usage. 
That is something that we need to take seriously, and while this 
government just thinks it can just focus on one side of the 
ledger. 
 
I’ve got to tell you this is all about, this is all about the people 
of Saskatchewan and everyone, you know, because today I 
asked questions about children who died in care — 97 children 
who died in care — and they’re important. 
 
We hear the Minister of Social Services say herself and we 
agree, both the minister and I agree that those children are 
valuable and they’re most important, but we cannot forget them. 
And when we talk about bills like this, the questions will be, 
how are they served? How are they served? How are they 
served? We cannot just take this off as one-offs. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that many on our side will 
have lots to say about this, and we’ll get this to committee in 
due time, but I will want to adjourn the debate for today. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees both this 
afternoon, I guess just this afternoon, I would like to move that 
we do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:32.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6979 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6981 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Wheelchairs in the Assembly Day 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6981 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6981 
 Recognition for Marshall Volunteers 
 Remembering Lloydminster Fire Chief Todd Gustavson 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6981 
 Earth Day Hopes for Environmental Progress 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6982 
 National Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6982 
 Homesteading Constituents Featured in Television Series 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6982 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6983 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6983 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6983 
 First Nations Senior and Ambulance Service Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6985 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6985 
 Protection of Children in Care 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6986 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6986 
 Sour Gas Emissions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6987 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6987 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6988 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


