






















































Hansard: May 13, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 64A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 13, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7223 
 May 13, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker is not 
present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, in accordance with section 
38 of The Ombudsman Act, I table a report titled, Taking Care, 
an Ombudsman’s investigation into care provided to seniors. I 
do now lay that on the Table. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
three introductions actually, and I’ll begin with the very special 
group that’s seated in the west gallery that have made the trip in 
from Swift Current. In your gallery from Ashley Park School in 
Swift Current, Saskatchewan, Canada — and they’re all waving 
now — are 46 grade 4 students that are here. I’m looking 
forward to having a chance to meet with all of them a little bit 
later on and having a visit about what they saw here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re joined by a group of chaperones 
and parents and teachers, and I’m just going to go down the list. 
There’s quite a large group of chaperones, parents, and teachers, 
so permit me to introduce Elizabeth Klassen, Keri White, 
Lindsay Munro, Shannon Reid, Janessa Ljunggren, Leah 
Coulter, Melanie Arntsen, Heather Carleton, Daryl Byers, 
Dawnell Wiebe, Michele Jagga, and Patty and Gary 
Nykolaishen are here as well. Mr. Speaker, it’s always great 
when we have students from our constituency here and I’m very 
happy these students could come from Ashley Park. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s an honour 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, again in the west gallery, a special entrepreneur, a 
special gentleman from right here in the Queen City of Regina. 
Kevin Dureau has joined us. Kevin was born and raised in 
Regina. He’s married to Tricia. Tricia, who was a Prychak — 
that’s her maiden name — was actually taught by the Deputy 
Premier’s wife. They grew up not too far from the Krawetzes. 
That’s a quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I’m permitted to use the 
surname, although I may have been quoting myself. 
 
We really want to welcome Kevin here. He’s the Saskatchewan 
Party candidate in Regina Rosemont. He’s a partner with the 
Press Box Sports Bar, Check-it Solutions, and On Course Golf 
Marketing. He’s involved with the community in various 
fundraising events and we all want to be mindful as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that he tragically lost his brother Brad very 
recently. And our hearts go out to him and our thoughts are 
certainly with Kevin and his family as well. Would all members 
please join me in welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 

And finally while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 
might be hearing from this guest a little bit later in what’s 
termed an inaudible interjection because little baby MJ has 
joined us. And MJ is the son — Malcolm Jack is his name — of 
Sarah Mills and Chef Malcolm who’s well known to us, 
Malcolm her husband. Sarah, of course, is a long-time member 
of the journalistic community in the province and has covered 
the affairs at the legislature. And we had a chance to introduce 
Brianna Rose — that’s MJ’s little sister — when she came to 
visit shortly after her arrival. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Big sister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes, big sister. That’s right, on account of 
she’s older. So we want to welcome Sarah and her husband, 
Malcolm, and especially MJ. It’s good to see her back at the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier welcoming Sarah and baby MJ. It’s always a 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, when our larger legislative family, when 
there’s an addition to it, and to have a baby in the Assembly. 
And I hear another baby in the Assembly as well. It’s just 
wonderful to see the little ones here. We congratulate Sarah and 
Malcolm on this addition to their family and wish them all the 
best in the months and the years ahead as they live life and love 
their family, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all members to join me 
once again in welcoming Sarah and baby MJ here. 
 
And I’d also, Mr. Speaker, like to introduce someone who’s 
seated in the east gallery, a gentleman who’s no stranger to 
Regina, no stranger to Saskatchewan, and that’s Mr. Ted Jaleta. 
And Ted has a remarkable life story. He was born into a farm 
family in lush northwestern Ethiopia, and when he was a bit 
younger he was on track to be a world-class long-distance 
runner. But civil war broke out in Ethiopia in the 1970s, and 
Ted was caught in a peaceful protest. He was imprisoned. He 
was tortured. And then, Mr. Speaker, he spent considerable time 
in a refugee camp but came to Canada in 1982 as a refugee. 
And he credits Canada and its people for giving him a second 
chance. 
 
And Ted, time and time again throughout his life here in 
Canada, has been giving back in so many ways with his 
message of hope, courage, positive thinking, and hard work. 
Ted is a public servant. He’s the coach of the Jaleta Pacers. 
He’s a former coach of the U of R [University of Regina] track 
and field and cross-country teams, volunteers with the Open 
Door Society, the Paul Dojack Youth Centre, Saskatchewan 
Sports Hall of Fame, and the CRA [Canada Revenue Agency] 
income tax volunteer program. He’s led fundraising initiatives 
for the Regina Early Learning Centre, Chili for Children, the U 
of R Jaleta Pacers scholarship fund, and has helped build a 
school in Africa as well. And he’s received many awards 
including an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the 
University of Regina. 
 
Deana Driver wrote an award-winning book about his life 
called Never Give Up: Ted Jaleta’s Inspiring Story. But, Mr. 



7224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

Speaker, I think Deana’s going to have to add a chapter or two 
to that book, as the next chapter, I believe, will have him as the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in this Assembly 
for Regina Coronation Park. I’m so very pleased, Mr. Speaker, 
to say that he’ll be our candidate for Coronation Park in the 
upcoming election. I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Ted to the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
a privilege to introduce to you, and through you to the rest of 
the Assembly, 22 public service employees, Mr. Speaker, that 
are seated in your gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re here to take part in the parliamentary program for 
public service. They represent a number of different ministries: 
Advanced Education, Agriculture, Economy, Education, 
Environment, Health, Labour Relations and Workplace Safety, 
Social Services, and the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re here to spend the day I guess throughout the legislature, 
certainly learn more about the proceedings, sit through question 
period. I have an opportunity to speak with them or to meet 
with them after, as well as the opposition and I guess as well as 
yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would just like all members to 
welcome these public servants to their legislature but also, in 
doing so, thank them for the great work that they do in our 
province each and every day, that allows this province to 
function as well as it does. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’d like to join with the Minister Responsible for the Public 
Service Commission in welcoming these public servants to their 
Legislative Assembly and to congratulate them on taking this 
keen interest in the political side of public service, how the 
legislature works. The outreach program always does such a 
great job, and I look very much forward to having a visit with 
them later on this afternoon. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to 
introduce a group from the Southeast Regional College and 
Piapot Urban. I’m talking about a group of 13 adult learners in 
the east gallery, and they’re here with Brian Binns and Bev 
Kulach. And Bev, as a teacher with the program, has been 
bringing the students here for many years, and it’s always great 
to see her here, and the learners as well, because of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the adult learners are folks that made a decision to 
come back and improve their learning and their lot for their 
families, as is often the case. So it’s always pretty inspiring 
meeting with this group. So I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these important guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, we 
hear throughout the year members from both sides of the House 
profess to have the best CA [constituency assistant] in the 

province, but I would like to introduce to you and through you 
what I believe is the best CA in the province, Lillian Robinson, 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with her husband, 
Archie. Lil is a compassionate CA for me. She handles a great 
volume of calls and I think she does it very professionally and 
very efficiently, and I appreciate everything she does while I’m 
away. So let’s have everybody please welcome Lillian 
Robinson to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the sound stage was a very busy facility last weekend. It was the 
hosting venue for Saskatchewan Fashion Week. Hundreds of 
individuals pulled together to create an . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member, we are still in introduction 
of guests . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, okay. Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . I was just preambling right into a big finish, a big finish 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker: designers from all over the country, 
with several retailers from our own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in the west gallery we have a few guests 
who are closely involved with Saskatchewan Fashion Week. 
Please raise your hand as I introduce you. Chris Pritchard is 
executive director and co-founder of Saskatchewan Fashion 
Week. Candyce Fiessel, co-founder; Chelsea Petterson, 
co-founder; Christina McFaddin who’s the fashion designer of 
the Year of the Ram design label and the 2015 Fashion Forward 
Emerging Designer of the Year award recipient. Dean Renwick, 
fashion designer, Dean Renwick Design Studio, and Melissa 
Fiacco, public relations and communications specialist. 
 
I’d like to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll wrap it up here. I’d like to 
congratulate everyone involved with the success of 2015 
Saskatchewan Fashion Week, and I ask that you all join me in 
welcoming these guests here today to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission, and 
there’s a couple of individuals that I worked with over the years 
but I’d like to welcome them as well: Jennifer Scullen who’s 
now with Education, and Seema Saroj, both in Education. 
Because we all worked together in provincial immigration. But 
I’d like to welcome them to their Assembly today as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the next member 
I’d like to apologize to the minister from Parks, Culture and 
Youth. We have a lot of visitors here today so it would be 
helpful to the Chair if members would indicate whether they 
have more than one introduction. And with that I will recognize 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 
the individuals here from Fashion Week. We have Chris, 
Candyce, Chelsea, Christina, Dean, Melissa. Congratulations on 
a job well done and certainly on representing us, Saskatchewan, 
in the fashion world. 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7225 

As you know, any use of the sound stage is important for us 
because we know it’s largely unused at this time. And so having 
this kind of opportunity and to celebrate the space that we have 
is certainly welcome. And not to take away from the efforts of 
these people in promoting their particular industry. I think it’s 
very important for them to come to the Legislative Assembly 
and be welcomed here by all members. And so on behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to do that. Please welcome 
them. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one introduction 
involving four individuals this afternoon. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, my first introduction is the 
most probably loving and generous and, some would argue, 
tolerant woman in the world. My wife, Leone, is up in your 
gallery, as well as my eldest daughter, Katelin. The other 
individuals are in the Assembly today because we celebrated 
her pinning ceremony, graduating the registered nursing 
program, graduation from the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] and the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] Polytechnic combination 
course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also my youngest daughter, Rayanne Krahenbil, is up in 
the Assembly. Moved back from Ottawa about a year ago with 
strict conditions from her mother: if they were going to have a 
family, they had to be close to home. So I’m grateful that 
they’ve moved back to Saskatchewan from Ottawa. And they’re 
helping to grow the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s 
my pleasure to introduce, for the first time in this Assembly, our 
first grandchild, our granddaughter, Wynnslet Elizabeth 
Krahenbil. So I’d ask all members to welcome these individuals 
to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Just a short little story about Wynnslet, she was actually born 
March 26th during question period, so I wasn’t really paying a 
whole lot of attention during question period. I was getting 
updates on my text as to her birth that happened at 10:54, I 
think, right after question period was over. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome my family to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 
and through you and to all members of the legislature, I am 
pleased to stand today to introduce most of the staff from Silver 
Sage Housing Corporation. Silver Sage Housing Corporation 
manages over 450 social and affordable housing units for low- 
or moderate-income residents in Regina, Swift Current, Fort, 
Qu’Appelle, Indian Head, and Sintaluta. 
 
Joining us today is president and CEO [chief executive officer] 
of the Silver Sage Housing Corporation, Maynard Sonntag; 
along with Tina LaRose; Christina Zhou; Gina Lerat; Stephanie 
Matechuck; Nicole Henry, Erin Bitternose, Alana Moshenko, 
Angela Kote, Tanis Cote-Lartey, Tyler Jones, Steven 
Desnomie, Stuart Dustyhorn, Delbert Alexson, Quincy 

Dustyhorn, Leon Pelletier, and Darcy Eagles. And I’ll apologize 
for . . . anybody I’ve mispronounced your name. 
 
I ask all members today to join me in welcoming this group to 
their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to join the member opposite in welcoming the folks from 
Silver Sage here. It’s great to see you here and taking an interest 
in the politics of the province, particularly under your 
leadership of your CEO. He has some insights into the goings 
on in the legislature here, but it’s great to see you all here. You 
do such great work in housing. It’s an important area of our 
province. So thanks so much. I’d ask all members to welcome 
them to their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to rise in my place today to recognize a former colleague 
and of course a member of this Assembly, and that is none other 
than Maynard Sonntag, Mr. Speaker. Rumour had it, at one 
time there were several people that started a rumour that Mr. 
Sonntag was a better hockey player than the member from 
Athabasca. Now, Mr. Speaker, he was good, but I’d advise him 
not to exaggerate. 
 
But I just wanted to point out that it’s always a pleasure to see 
former colleagues come to the Assembly. As we all know, Mr. 
Sonntag served the people of the Meadow Lake area with 
distinction and great pride and got a lot accomplished for 
Meadow Lake area, Mr. Speaker, something that has not been 
matched as of today. So again I want to thank Mr. Sonntag for 
coming into the Assembly and to share with him my thanks for 
his past service and his continued service to this great province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, I also have an introduction. 
Seated in the Speaker’s Gallery is our Provincial Ombudsman, 
Ms. Mary McFadyen, along with two of her staff, or at least one 
of her staff I see. I would ask all members to welcome her to the 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to present a petition in support of better schools here 
in Saskatchewan. And we know that too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced and that the 
Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions, and students often don’t get the one-on-one 
attention they need. And the condition of our schools are 
rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and this government has 
refused to release information on the $1.5 billion of known 
repairs that are needed in our schools. And none of this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is acceptable given the record revenues this 



7226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

government has had over the last eight years. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who signed this petition would like the 
Assembly to know that there is a definite need for a long-term 
care facility in Creighton, Denare Beach, and area and that the 
health region is in a code red when it comes to senior care beds. 
And they want the Assembly to know that most seniors in the 
North cannot afford private care homes and the lack of service 
in Creighton-Denare Beach puts a huge financial burden on the 
elderly and their families. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitions will humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 
citizens with respect and dignity and to immediately invest 
in a long-term care facility in the Creighton-Denare Beach 
area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again we stand in our place to present a petition that calls for 
greater cell coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan, and this 
particular petition, Mr. Speaker, relates to the communities of 
Michel Village, Dore Lake, Dillon, St. George’s Hill, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake, Mr. Speaker. As you know, we’ve been 
presenting petitions from all throughout the region, especially 
the Far North. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide a similar quality of cell 
service as the southern communities. This would provide 
support to our northern industries as well as mitigate 
safety concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
all throughout the province, but some of the pages in particular 
are people from Michel Village, from Michel Point, from Dore 
Lake. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise again today to present a petition in support of safe 
staffing levels in long-term care facilities. The petitioners point 
out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that many aspects of long-term care 
are deteriorating under this government. They point out that the 
government has removed the regulations requiring a minimum 
standard of care for seniors, which has resulted in neglect in 
many cases, and they point out that chronic understaffing in 
long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions 
including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 
rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of maintaining hyperbaric services 
at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The petitioners point out that 
hyperbaric treatments are essential for the proper treatment for 
many people living with diabetes, cancer, and other conditions. 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly require 
the Sask Party government to reverse its decision to scrap 
the hyperbaric chamber and instead ensure that this service 
continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to present a petition in support of retaining the Yarrow 
Youth Farm. We know that the government has closed Yarrow 
Youth Farm recently, and what they tried to do is create an 
open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a secure custody 
unit for youth considered a greater risk to their communities, 
and this was to accommodate the Yarrow Youth residents. 
 
We know that the provincial Advocate for Children and Youth 
declared that he can’t endorse such a rationalization because 
low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs and that also Kilburn Hall is a more 
institutional environment that can intimidate and alienate teens 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7227 

that have committed minor offences. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences, and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Sexual Assault Awareness Week. It is a chance to bring special 
attention to the needs of the victims and to bring awareness 
about this important issue. Sexual assault is a terrible reality for 
too many people living in Saskatchewan. It’s up to all of us to 
take a stand and to support the victims of sexual assault. It’s up 
to all of us to hold the perpetrators of these crimes accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, together with the many workers and volunteers of 
sexual assault centres right across the province, we are raising 
awareness and providing important services to sexual assault 
victims. I’d like to thank the Sexual Assault Services of 
Saskatchewan and the numerous other organizations in the 
province who act compassionately for victims and survivors by 
providing vital support in times of their great need. Their work 
is of tremendous and critical service for the victims. 
 
This morning the Regina Sexual Assault Centre hosted an event 
to honour these groups. Our government was pleased to 
announce the allocation of $1.2 million in the ’15-16 budget to 
sexual assault centres in six locations right across the province. 
That’s a 22 per cent increase in funding over the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must work together to ensure that the sexual 
assault victims never face these challenges alone. I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing Sexual Assault Awareness 
Week and supporting victims and survivors and the workers 
who care very much for them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Royal Road Race 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This past 
Saturday, myself and the member for Regina Rosemont had the 
pleasure of taking part in the Royal Road Race organized by 
Ted Jaleta and the Jaleta Pacers, in partnership with the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police Depot Division. This was the fifth 
year for the race, and the $23,000 raised will be benefiting 
Mountie House, a great partnership build between Habitat for 

Humanity and the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
and Chili for Children, a community organization well known 
for its decades of work and dedication around food security in 
inner-city Regina. The total funds raised for local charities over 
the last five years is now more than $100,000. 
 
Each year the Royal Race has three goals: to raise money for a 
local charity, to promote fitness, and to provide an affordable 
and accessible way for families to take part in running. In many 
races, fees can be quite expensive, and the Jaleta Pacers do their 
best to keep the fees low through generous support of sponsors 
such as North Face Regina, Phoenix Group, Rona, Brown 
Communications, NWL Contemporary Dresses, Postcard 
Portables, and Kenlin Design Group. The RCMP also plays a 
critical role in supporting the race, and this year Sergeant Jeff 
Comeau and Inspector Bill Long made an especially great 
contribution. 
 
I ask that all members join me in thanking Ted Jaleta, the Jaleta 
Pacers, and everyone who played a part in making the 2015 
Royal Road Race such a great success. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Fashion Week 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fashion 
industry is growing in Saskatchewan, and this is demonstrated 
through events such as Fashion Week which showcases and 
celebrates the artistic, entrepreneurial, and creative talent that 
are producing award-winning fashion in our province. From 
May 7th to 9th the sound stage in Regina was transformed into 
a world-class production of fashion, creative design, 
entrepreneurship, and music, and attracted more than 1,200 
guests including the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport who 
attended the runway show on Saturday. 
 
Fashion Week has been established through the hard work of 
Regina-based entrepreneurs that were the vision behind the 
event and who continue to drive this industry forward. SFW 
[Saskatchewan Fashion Week] was established in 2012 to 
influence the development, enhancement, and growth of our 
fashion and creative design industries. 
 
Fashion Week, along with the growth and success of the 
Saskatchewan fashion industry and designers, is an example of 
our growing and diversified economy. Twenty-five Canadian 
fashion designers showed original men’s and women’s 
fall-winter 2015 collections and seven local retailers showed 
emerging spring-summer 2015 style trends. Thirty volunteer 
committee members, more than 100 event volunteers, and 180 
contributors worked tirelessly to bring the event to life. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the designers and all those 
involved in planning and hosting Fashion Week on another 
successful year showcasing Saskatchewan’s design talent. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 



7228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

La Ronge Fire Chief Honoured 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, earlier last month the 
Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs held a conference in 
Swift Current where Ron Pratt, the Fire Chief for the La Ronge 
regional fire and rescue services, received the Fire Chief Merit 
Award. 
 
Originally from Kamsack, Ron has served the communities of 
La Ronge and the adjoining communities of Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band and Air Ronge for 17 years. In 1998 Ron started 
working in a small fire hall in La Ronge. Since then, the three 
communities have been able to work together and funding has 
been shared by three communities. Under Ron’s leadership, the 
communities have built a new fire hall on the highway that 
allows faster response time when every second counts. 
 
Ron plans on retiring on May 31st, 2016, but his years of 
leadership and experience will be missed by many in the La 
Ronge area. He has been a mentor for many young firefighters 
and he has helped to build the firefighting capacity in 
northern-east Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating Ron on his well-deserved award and 
in thanking Ron for his years of service, dedication, leadership 
to northern Saskatchewan and to the people of the Cumberland 
constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Saskatchewan Physical Education Association Conference 

 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last 
Thursday I had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of 
government at the Saskatchewan Physical Education 
Association’s annual conference. The conference, titled Moving 
With Synergy, was held in Regina from May 6th through the 
8th. Keynote speaker was Mr. Reg Leidl who has an impressive 
background, including more than three decades of experience as 
a physical educator and coach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of awards were handed out at the 
conference to honour outstanding physical educators from 
across the province, including Brent Adam of Regina, Donna 
Mackenzie of Stanley Mission, Dwayne Petrinchik of Pense, 
Michael Bradford of Saskatoon, Bob Mayo of Lemberg, Dan 
Manning of Estevan, and Shannon Kekula of Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, these are just a few of the many outstanding physical 
educators who work tirelessly to promote the health and 
well-being of Saskatchewan children and youth. 
 
Physical educators help students develop invaluable skills like 
teamwork, determination, leadership, commitment, citizenship, 
organization, problem solving, and many more. Mr. Speaker, 
this event provided an excellent opportunity for physical 
educators to network and learn from one another, learning 
which ultimately will benefit our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Saskatchewan physical educators association on another 
successful conference and in thanking physical educators for 

their dedication and for continuing to put students first. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Chief Justice Honoured 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. After a lifelong 
career in our province’s justice system, Chief Justice John 
Klebuc retired from the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal last 
month. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Chief Justice Klebuc has been an 
influential leader and valued member of the judiciary, with an 
impressive career spanning 50 years. He’s originally from 
Meadow Lake and has always been very proud of his roots. He 
graduated from the University of Saskatchewan in 1964 and 
soon after began his law career in private practice with a focus 
on commercial and corporate law. In 1993 he was appointed to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench as a trial judge. Several years later 
he moved to Regina to become the Chief Justice of 
Saskatchewan and Court of Appeal. 
 
He was committed to improving access to justice and efficiency 
in the system through technology and alternative dispute 
resolution procedures. He played a key role in the 
implementation of eCourt, a major project supported by the 
province. For the first time, judges and lawyers were able to 
access files electronically. The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 
was the first court in Canada to become fully digital. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I would like 
to thank him for his exceptional contributions to the people of 
Saskatchewan and wish him all the best in his retirement. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Potash Contract Announced 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have heard 
too many times on this side of the House from the members 
opposite that travel does not matter, that building relationships 
with international partners like India is a waste of time. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the uranium sale to India was proof that building 
these business partnerships is not a waste of money. 
 
Last Friday an announcement by Canpotex provided even more 
evidence that the members opposite do not pay attention to the 
economy. Canpotex, a marketing arm owned by Saskatchewan 
potash producers Agrium, Mosaic, and PotashCorp, announced 
a successful deal with India for 1.3 million tonnes of 
Saskatchewan potash. This new contract will also see the price 
per metric tonne increased an additional $10 US [United States] 
to $332 per tonne until the end of March 2016. Furthermore, 
with this new deal, Canpotex is planning to expand its Indian 
market development program this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t want to talk about the economy. Not a single question 
was asked during estimates. Unlike members opposite, we do 
have a plan for the economy: strong manufacturing, the lowest 
unemployment in Canada, record number of exports, and an 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7229 

all-time record for wholesale trade. This side of the House will 
continue working to keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Ombudsman’s Report and Provision of Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — When Margaret Warholm’s family first came 
to the legislature on November 19th, they were treated to 
disgusting heckling from the member from Estevan and the 
member from Martensville, Mr. Speaker. Those members said 
that we were just creating drama by raising their mother’s tragic 
death. The Ombudsman released a report today, and it’s clear 
that Margaret was let down by her care facility, by the health 
region, and by this government. 
 
Margaret’s family is back here today, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
Premier apologize to this family, not only for how they were 
treated when they came here back in November, but especially 
for how their mother was so horribly let down? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
the question. I don’t necessarily agree with the characterization 
of some of the members he’s referenced in terms of what may 
or may have been said, but I would say that if anybody comes 
to the legislature and feels in any way that they weren’t 
provided with respect or a good hearing from both sides of the 
House, then that should be a concern. That should always be 
our priority. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank the Ombudsman for 
the good work that has been presented here today, in part 
because of the case that came forward, which was a tragedy, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s no question about it. The 
Ombudsman has done a lot of very good work for which we’re 
grateful. I think about 89 cases came forward one way or the 
other for vetting and for review. We know that review took 
place earnestly, 19 recommendations: I think 14 specific to the 
Santa Maria situation, which we know well; four generally, 
across the province; and I think one with Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region. 
 
We’re looking at those recommendations very seriously. I point 
out that there are well over 8,000 seniors in care in the 
province, and so 89 is a very significant number and of concern. 
But I also want to be thankful to those on the front line 
providing good-quality care across the province for literally 
thousands of seniors. We’ve tried to add to their number. We’ve 
increased the complement of front-line workers in seniors’ care 
from what was happening prior to our government by 700 plus. 
There are more nurses in the system, more doctors. We’re 
building facilities. But we know more needs to be done, and the 
Ombudsman has helped. With respect to her work, we’ll take it 
seriously, and we’ll look at the recommendations provided. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Margaret’s family is here today as 
they were in November. Mr. Speaker, they identified those 
members and they told me how hurt they were to the core to be 
heckled on that day when they came back in November and 
their mom’s concerns were raised. Margaret died malnourished, 
with broken bones and a painful bedsore covering her back, and 
the family had to fight for answers and accountability every 
step. The Ombudsman said, “. . . over the course of our 
investigation, we came to the conclusion that this was not a 
unique situation.” The Ombudsman says 89 other families from 
all over Saskatchewan came forward with stories “. . . very 
similar to the concerns Margaret’s family raised.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the Premier today continue, and we’ve 
heard the two Health ministers continue to fail to recognize how 
widespread this is and how many people are being affected, Mr. 
Speaker. They continue to say that these are extremely rare and 
isolated cases. My question to the Premier: is he willing to 
admit that he was wrong? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the characterization 
that was just offered by the Leader of the Opposition is just 
fundamentally wrong. I just was on my feet explaining that 89 
complaints to the Ombudsman after the initial investigation is a 
significant number. The context is important though, and the 
recognition of what the system is providing in terms of care to 
8,000 seniors across the province is important. 
 
There are issues that we recognized, shortly after we had the 
good fortune and the honour of being elected, in seniors’ care. 
There remain issues today. Those issues eight years ago 
significantly were the fact that beds had been closed by the 
previous government. That was an issue that we had to begin to 
deal with, and we’re not quite there yet. There was an issue of a 
lack of front-line workers.  
 
And I think what would be a welcome thing for this particular 
debate today is for both sides to recognize they need to do more 
work and for both sides to recognize, especially members 
opposite, that where we were eight years ago just wasn’t 
acceptable and put us a bit behind the eight ball. We were short 
nurses. We were short care aids, front-line staff. Some of that 
. . . In the facilities, we had beds closed. That’s what we 
inherited. 
 
So we have done a lot of work since then. We’ve invested 
significant resources and hired more staff and innovated in 
terms of home care — more money for home care, more money 
in this budget we just passed this spring session for seniors’ 
care — all the while recognizing that if there’s 89 folks come 
forward, that’s serious. We know there are common issues that 
were pointed out by the Ombudsman as well, similar in each 
case, and so that’s why there’s extra dollars in this budget. 
That’s why there’s a recognition and admission on the part of 
the government that we need to do more. We’ve come a long 
way in eight years but more needs to be done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



7230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have no way seen the actions 
from this government that match the reality and the need in 
seniors’ care homes. We’ve actually seen this government 
remove minimum care standards. We’ve seen steps backwards 
when it comes to ensuring that seniors are properly cared for. 
 
The Ombudsman says the care facility failed miserably, 
miserably to properly manage Margaret’s bedsores, to ensure 
she had adequate nutrition and hydration, to follow up on 
changes in her weight, to ensure safe lifts and transfers, and to 
manage her pain. And again the Ombudsman says, “. . . over the 
course of our investigation, we came to the conclusion that this 
was not a unique situation.” She said, we have seen the same 
type of complaint from all over the province. So it’s not just an 
issue of one health region or one long-term care home. 
 
It is alarming, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not surprising because we 
have had family after family after family come to the legislature 
to speak out about major problems with the care for their loved 
ones. And every single time those families have come forward 
to the legislature, we’ve seen this government minimize their 
concerns and try to claim that they are isolated — without fail, 
Mr. Speaker. Does the Premier recognize that major problems 
in seniors’ care are widespread? Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to join with the Premier and thank 
the Ombudsman and her dedicated staff for the work that 
they’ve done in reviewing the case of Margaret Warholm and 
providing recommendations not just to the province but this 
particular facility and the regional health authority. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Ombudsman does indicate in her 
report on page 7 that the guidelines that we have put in place do 
include over 100 individual standards dealing in a number of 
areas. In terms of the recommendations that are directly related 
to the region, what we will be doing is ensuring that we do have 
an operational plan for those standards and that we will be 
working with the regional health authorities so that we can be 
able to work with them to report back to the public just how 
well our facilities are doing when it comes to maintaining those 
standards, not unlike what we’re doing with personal care 
homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That was a move made by this government, that we wanted to 
be able to publicly report how our personal care homes are 
doing so that the public are well informed. We’ll do that with 
our special care homes. We accept the recommendations and 
look forward to continuing to work with her, her office, as well 
as the regional health authorities and our facilities to ensure that 
our seniors have the care that they deserve and that they need in 
this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Question to the Premier to the question that, the 
question that was asked once again: does the Premier believe 
that problems in seniors’ care are widespread in Saskatchewan? 
Yes or no? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note that the Ombudsman’s 
report is very thorough, especially as it relates to the case of 
Margaret Warholm. I think it details in frankly a great deal of 
detail the complexity of care that is required for some of our 
residents in long-term care, and I would urge all members to 
read the report in its entirety. I think it’s very compelling and 
it’s a very good, thorough report. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Ombudsman does conclude the report 
by talking about a system that is under strain. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I can’t imagine what that system would be like today, 
under strain as it is, if we had 800 less full-time equivalents 
working in the system like we did not that long ago in this 
province. 
 
[14:15] 
 
I can’t imagine the strain in the number of facilities like Marian 
Home in Radville, the old facility that is just being replaced, the 
strain that that would have been in that facility that for far too 
long was neglected and should have been replaced. And that’s 
one facility, not counting the other 12 facilities across this 
province. I can’t imagine the strain that we would be in in 
Saskatoon if we didn’t have the 100 beds at Samaritan Place, 
which the members opposite opposed when that project was 
brought forward by the government just a couple of years ago. 
 
So we acknowledge that there are challenges. There are issues 
within long-term care. We have dedicated resources in each and 
every year on the capital side and on the operational side, but 
there is more work to be done. But I think the past practice 
shows that it’s the members on this side that will do that work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Margaret’s family is here today 
and these are the answers that we have coming from the 
government. Silence from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, about 
whether or not he believes that the problems in seniors’ care are 
widespread, can’t answer a yes. The Ombudsman clearly shows 
that Margaret’s situation is not unique. We know that, Mr. 
Speaker, the public has heard of at least seven premature deaths 
in care facilities: Margaret Warholm, Jessie Sellwood, Lorne 
Rowell, Fern Chingos, Irene Hohne, Lois Rein, and the elderly 
gentleman with dementia in Moose Jaw who died after he ate 
laundry detergent pods. 
 
And we’ve heard of many other tragic stories that haven’t been 
made public, where families haven’t come forward, but they’ve 
experienced loss and pain. This report, Mr. Speaker, should be 
final notice to this government — no more delays, no more 
minimizing, no more excuses. My question to the Premier: will 
he at least guarantee us that today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I can tell the members of 
the House and the public is that we accept the findings of the 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7231 

Ombudsman. We asked the Ombudsman’s office to look into 
this specific case and provide recommendations back. I think 
the Ombudsman’s office has done a good job of identifying the 
issues in this one case, thoroughly reviewing this one case, as 
well as providing recommendations beyond this one case. 
 
I will say that in terms of the 14 recommendations, as it relates 
specifically to Santa Maria, we have a quality oversight 
committee in place. That oversight committee will continue 
until I’m satisfied that that facility has been able to move 
forward after this and has put in place changes based on those 
recommendations as well as changes they were making even 
before these recommendations came out. 
 
We will work as a ministry on the four specific 
recommendations, as it relates to the Ministry of Health, that 
will ensure that there is an operational of the guidelines, an 
operational plan of the guidelines, and a reporting back to the 
public. Mr. Speaker, we had that in the past where as a ministry 
we could go in and inspect long-term care facilities. That was 
taken out by the members opposite when they were the 
government, in the legislation. So we’re going to have to look at 
how we can ensure that there is that accountability. 
 
But we absolutely take the recommendations of the 
Ombudsman, the Provincial Ombudsman. We take them very 
seriously. We’re reviewing them and we’re looking for ways 
that we can implement all of those recommendations in the 
coming months. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if they’re taking it seriously, I 
don’t understand how the Premier can’t recognize that the 
concerns and the problems in seniors’ care are widespread 
throughout the province. 
 
I don’t know how he can’t apologize to Margaret’s family for 
being heckled back in November and for the huge failure and 
tragedy that their family experienced and the pain that they’ve 
gone through. I don’t understand why, if they accept the 
recommendations, why that apology can’t come forward. 
 
On page 29 of the Ombudsman’s report, she talks about another 
senior who was confined to a wheelchair for 10 years and never 
had a bedsore. Then he went to a care facility. He wasn’t 
properly cared for, and he ended up in the hospital where nurses 
found two massive bedsores. Mr. Speaker, that senior died a 
few days later because of blood poisoning as a result of those 
bedsores. 
 
Does the Premier know how many other seniors have died 
prematurely and painfully because of neglect in seniors’ care? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re working with all of our facilities when it comes to 
ensuring that we have a community-of-care model in our 
facilities, as certainly that is a focus of Santa Maria as they’ve 
made some changes in their specific facility. 
 

As members will know, we monitor a number of quality 
indicators. We’re seeing facilities, and Santa Maria would be 
one of them, that is actually increasing the amount of time that 
they are monitoring them — monitoring them more closely, 
more real-time monitoring — so that they can make 
adjustments to care plans. Those are some of the things we need 
to look at to ensure that we are providing that care, that we are 
being responsive in that care to ensure that our seniors are 
provided with quality, safe care in our long-term care facilities. 
 
We will take the recommendations of the Provincial 
Ombudsman. We take them very seriously. We’re reviewing 
them to see how we can implement those in the province. That 
is our plan to implement those recommendations. We’ll be 
working very closely with the sector, our regional health 
authorities, all of our facilities to ensure that these 
recommendations are implemented and that the standards that 
are in place, the standards that are in place in this province, 
because we do have minimum standards, that they are being 
acted upon by our regions and our facilities, and we can report 
back to the public just how well they’re doing in keeping to 
those standards. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if this Premier and the Health 
ministers were taking these recommendations seriously, we’d 
see an apology to the family, and we would see a recognition 
that problems in seniors’ care are indeed widespread throughout 
the province. We would have that recognition. But we are not 
getting that, Mr. Speaker, and I am concerned that this 
government is still failing to understand the severity of the 
situation. When the Ombudsman says that Margaret’s situation 
is not unique, that needs to be a wake-up call to this 
government. 
 
And we’ve had, on many occasions, this minister and the 
Premier try to claim that their guidelines are sufficient. We 
know, we know that they are not sufficient because we keep 
having these tragic stories come forward. 
 
The Ombudsman says that the government’s guidelines are far 
too vague. She says: 
 

The Guidelines are generally non-specific and high-level, 
such that they are open to wide interpretation. To 
effectively implement them, much more work needs to be 
done to develop specific rules and requirements . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what we have been calling for: 
minimum regulated care standards that seniors can count on, 
Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: when will he finally 
commit to develop specific rules and requirements for care 
facilities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to make it clear, in 
fact what the Ombudsman report, as I understand it, as I’ve had 
a chance to look at it, that it does indicate that we do have 
guidelines. I’m quoting from page 7: 



7232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

The Guidelines include over 100 individual standards 
dealing with topics such as standards of care, resident 
rights and responsibilities, special care-homes rights and 
responsibilities, resident abuse, staffing requirements, 
special care aides, incident investigations and reporting, 
and quality of care concerns. 

 
The recommendations go on further to recommend to the 
Ministry of Health, as a part of our four recommendations, that 
we do have an operationalized plan in place to operationalize 
those standards to ensure that in fact the regions and the 
facilities understand what the standards are that are already in 
place and that they have a plan to make those operational. 
 
The recommendations also recommend that we develop a plan 
and a process to publicly report on meeting those standards, 
how those are being met. We accept that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’re going to work with the regional health authorities. The 
ministry will lead this work to ensure that we have a plan in 
place on how we actually operationalize the standards that are 
already in existence in this province and how we’ll publicly 
report on those. And so we do accept the recommendations 
made by the Ombudsman. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, she describes these guidelines as 
vague, just as the minister’s former chief of staff did in an email 
saying these are very general, Mr. Speaker, and lacking 
specifics. That’s very clear. This government still has its head 
firmly planted in the sand. The Ombudsman heard a lot of 
concerns about inadequate staffing levels and a very poor 
quality of care. She notes that regulations for personal care 
homes specify a clear staffing ratio, and the handbook for 
personal care homes outlines minimum care hours that residents 
in those homes can count on. 
 
But this government doesn’t specify staffing ratios or minimum 
care hours for special care homes, the special care homes where 
the most vulnerable seniors live. That doesn’t make any sense. 
My question to the Premier: will he finally commit to 
implement adequate staffing ratios and minimum care hours 
that seniors can count on? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would just say I guess we know, from the example of 
members opposite, previously when there was care hours that 
were assigned through legislation and regulations that were 
written in the, I believe, 1950s or early 1960s and were never 
updated to take into account the changing needs of seniors in 
this province. And we know it didn’t even matter what was in 
the legislation under the members opposite because they didn’t 
have the adequate staffing anyways. 
 
So it’s fine to have hours in legislation, but if you don’t have 
the staff like the members opposite didn’t have when they were 
in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure how that 
actually helps the seniors in this province. 
 
Staffing in long-term care facilities is up year over year under 

this government. In terms of the strain on the system, as I said 
before, I can’t imagine what that strain would be like today if 
we didn’t have the nearly 800 full-time equivalents working for 
the same number of residents that are in our care that were 
under the care of the members opposite seven years ago. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll also say in terms of putting these 
standards in regulations or legislation, that’s not the 
recommendation. The recommendation is that we ensure that 
we have development, develop and implement policies to 
operationalize the standards that are clearly acknowledged in 
the report, and that we identify and track measures and 
outcomes, and as well we publicly report on those. Those are 
recommendations 12 and 13, and we will be following those 
recommendations. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no commitment to putting in hard 
specific rules and guidelines and specifics when it comes to 
proper staffing ratios. No recognition that this is a widespread 
problem in the province. No apology, Mr. Speaker, to 
Margaret’s family. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. I just asked the 
Premier to apologize to the family and he hasn’t and he won’t. 
This should be basic. The family is here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman identifies that seniors are afraid 
to speak up. Families are afraid to speak up. Care aids and 
nurses are afraid to speak up because of a culture of fear within 
our seniors’ care system. This government, Mr. Speaker, has 
made it worse. We’ve seen it made worse by heckling families 
that come to the legislature. We’ve seen it made worse by 
minimizing the concerns that family after family after family 
have brought to the legislature.  
 
And I think the culture of fear has also been made worse, Mr. 
Speaker, by the Premier’s very own actions to intentionally leak 
confidential information on the only care aid who came to the 
legislature and raised concerns, the Premier’s direct attempts to 
besmirch him and to drag his reputation through the mud. The 
Premier’s actions have contributed to this culture of fear. My 
question to the Premier: does he have any regrets yet about his 
role in creating this culture of fear within our seniors’ care 
system? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, I would just point out 
to the public that there’s a bit of a different . . . Well there is 
quite a difference in the approach of members opposite on that 
side of the House compared to this side of the House. 
 
I have met with Margaret’s family. I believe that I have met 
with every family, every resident of this province that has come 
forward with a health concern to this legislature, I think except 
for one who turned out not to actually be the guardian of the 
parent, as alleged by the Leader of the Opposition. But I’ve met 
with all of them. In this case, I’ve expressed my regrets and my 
sorrow to the family to be meeting with them under these 
circumstances. 
 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7233 

That is in a direct contrast to the members opposite. When they 
were the government, you couldn’t find a Health minister to 
talk to in this province. I remember, as a member of the 
opposition when I was an MLA, I brought a constituent of mine 
who their cancer drug wouldn’t be funded by the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. And do you think that the Health minister of 
the day would meet with them? No way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that’s the approach we take. It may not always be the answer 
that people want to hear. We may not be able to fix every single 
problem, but we will meet with these individuals. And we will 
talk to them about their issues, as opposed to what the members 
opposite did when they were the government. 
 
With respect to this report, I thank the Ombudsman for her 
work. I think that they did a great job in reviewing this case, a 
tragic situation. We will take these recommendations very 
seriously. We will work with our regions and our facilities to 
implement them, all in a timely manner. And I want to thank 
her for that work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Gay-Straight Alliances 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Education minister 
admitted that he’d heard a number of instances in which 
students have been too afraid to ask for a GSA [gay-straight 
alliance] or they’ve asked and been declined. And he even 
admitted that students are far too afraid to identify themselves, 
so he’s been unable to follow up. Shockingly, this is what the 
Premier calls “a happy circumstance.” Why won’t the 
Education minister stand up to the Premier and start properly 
protecting vulnerable kids? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a GSA, by definition — 
I’m quoting from mygsa website — is a “. . . student-led safe 
space group, is primarily a club for students, and so it’s 
important that students lead in its creation.” 
 
We intend to work with school divisions to ensure that they are 
made available. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re doing three 
things. One, we’re reviewing all of the complaints or issues that 
have come forward. And we understand people’s reluctance to 
give their names, give their phone numbers, but we are working 
through to try and find out if there are any places in the 
province where GSAs have been requested that have not been 
provided. 
 
[14:30] 
 
But to take it further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to do 
two other things. We have asked the ministry to develop a list 
of all of the division schools and to see which ones are already 
providing GSAs and whether there are any issues so that we can 
look at them on a school-by-school basis. 
 
Finally, we’ve talked to the president of the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] this morning and 

I’ve said, would your school nurse, would they be willing to 
provide a designate in each school, either a counsellor or a 
teacher whose name would be put on a school handbook, on a 
sign, or a website so that a student that’s interested in starting a 
GSA would have a contact person to go to? We know that these 
are vulnerable students and we want to do everything we can to 
help them. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Time has expired for question 
period. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
apologize to the House for not being ready. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 
the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now read the third 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill now be read the third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 
Act, 2014 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



7234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to 
report Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Finance minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. I move that this bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
seventh report. I move: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Committee of Finance. I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I will call the committee to order. The 
business before the committee are resolutions for financial 
supply. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Chair, I move the following resolution, no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2015, the sum of $87,574,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
resolution no. 1: 
 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 
granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 
March 31st, 2015, the sum of $87,574,000 be granted out 
of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7235 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Chair, I move the following resolution, no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2016, the sum of $11,999,269,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
resolution no. 2: 
 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 
granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 
March 31st, 2016, the sum of $11,999,269,000 be granted 
out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 
move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 
committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave 
to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that the committee rise and that the Chair report that 
the committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 
Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall these resolutions be read 
the first time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 
move that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of these resolutions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Next 
sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — In accordance with rule 32(1)(d) and 
34(1)(d), the minister shall now move first reading of the 
appropriation bill. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 182 — The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 182, The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 182, The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, under rule 
32(1)(e), I move that the bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 182, The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) 
be now read a second and third time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 
reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to order 



7236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

the answers to questions 946 to 955. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered 
answers to the questions 946 to 955. 
 
[14:45] 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and certainly it’s my honour to be able to rise in the Assembly 
today to speak to Bill No. 179, An Act respecting the Licensing 
and Operation of certain Facilities providing Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging Services and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. Certainly it’s a curious bill to bring 
to the Assembly at this stage of the life of this Assembly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and one really has to wonder what the real 
agenda of the government is at introducing it at this point in 
time. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I mean certainly we know that with the way the legislative 
agenda is set up, is that this order, this bill will likely die once 
prorogation takes place in the fall, which is the normal process. 
So unless they have some other ideas about how the rules will 
be looked at in the fall, you really have to wonder why this bill 
was brought at this point in time at all. I mean certainly there’s 
other ways to have a public discussion about this, and we’ll 
have a number of questions about it. But before I get into those, 
I just want to take a quick look, overview, at this bill and the 
provisions that are in there so that people who are looking at it 
can follow along and either agree or disagree with my 
interpretation of it, but just have a quick look at the bill and its 
structure so that we know what we’re talking about. 
 
So this is a bill that is set up to license facilities that would 
provide MRIs, or magnetic resonance imaging services, and as 
you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a very popular and useful 
diagnostic tool for physicians and other health care providers. 
And it’s a very important part of our health care system and 
also — and everyone knows this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — it’s an 
expensive way. It’s very expensive to not only install and 
purchase and install these machines, but the staff requirements 
for operation are a very expensive part of our health care 
budget. 
 
Certainly we also know that the demand for these types of 
diagnostic services has increased exponentially in the last few 
years, and because it is such an important tool for diagnosis to 

physicians, I believe that’s one of the main reasons. But there 
are other questions about the explosion in use of these types of 
diagnostic services. 
 
So what’s going to happen in this bill? The first two sections 
have just some definitions that are typical in a bill like this. So 
let’s look at the definition for MRI facility. And the bill says it 
means: 
 

any place or facility where magnetic resonance imaging 
services are provided to an individual, but does not 
include: 
 

(a) a place or facility operated by the minister, a 
regional health authority or an affiliate, as defined in 
The Regional Health Services Act; or 
 
(b) any prescribed place or facility. 

 
So you see right here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not really 
sure what we’re talking about because until the regulations are 
in place in the prescription section of this clause, we don’t 
really know exactly what MRI facilities we’re talking about. 
We do know with certainty that it’s not ones that are operated 
by a regional health authority or affiliate or the minister, so 
certainly it does not include any publicly owned MRI facilities 
that exist in the province today. But we don’t know what the 
second piece is going to be, and we won’t know until this bill is 
law and then the regulations are then in force. And certainly the 
minister hasn’t provided us with any indication as to what type 
of prescribed place or facility would not be included in here. So 
again we’re left guessing, and it’s really difficult. Without 
further information from the ministry and more disclosure, it’s 
really difficult to really know with certainty what we’re talking 
about here. 
 
But if we go to the second section, there’s one, two, three, four 
parts of this bill. The second section refers to the licensing 
section. What this sets up is the way that someone can come to 
get a licence to operate an MRI facility outside of the public 
health system. There’s a whole number of clauses, and I would 
say the bulk of this bill is really about the licensing provision. 
So it starts at section 3 and it goes all the way to section 19, 
which is pretty much over half of the bill. 
 
So what happens? We have somebody who applies. There’s 
going to be rules, again under the regulations, so we don’t know 
exactly what that’s going to look like. And then what’s going to 
happen is that the application is received by the minister. Then 
it will be reviewed, and then he’s going to, the minister — he or 
she, whoever the minister will be — shall forward the 
application and all the information and material to someone 
called an accreditation program operator and the regional health 
authority. So then there’s going to be a review of the proposal 
or application for the licence by this person called an 
accreditation program operator. And I believe that too is a 
definition and that really that’s a person that we find in 
section 5. 
 
So the minister is going to approve someone as this deemed 
accreditation program operator, presumably an official of the 
ministry who will understand how these MRI machines work 
and sort of the needs in the health care system for yet an 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7237 

additional machine. At that point then, under section 6, when 
they’re reviewing this application, the regional health authority 
also will review the application and all their supporting 
materials, and if they’re applying for a licence . . . Now this is a 
bit of a difficult clause to understand, but if the minister 
receives an application he will forward all the information and 
material to the regional health authority. And under (3) . . . I’m 
not sure how the structure of this bill works, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think (3) says: 
 

The regional health authority mentioned in clause (1)(b) 
shall: [this is section 6(3)] 
 

review the application and accompanying information 
and material; and 
 
if the applicant is applying for a licence to: 
 

provide MRI services . . . that are to be paid for by a 
regional health authority . . . report to the minister 
[whether or not they need one] . . . 

 
And then the second part I think which is a complete change to 
the way services are provided now by our public system is 
whether or not they will: 
 

provide MRI services to beneficiaries or to other 
individuals that are not paid for by a regional health 
authority or by any prescribed public funding source, 
report to the minister with respect to the expected 
effect of the MRI facility on the operations of, or the 
health services provided by, the regional health 
authority. 

 
So when we have a private enterprise that applies to build their 
own facility, they go through this accreditation program 
operator. We’ll see what the rules are once we see the 
regulations, if and when this bill actually ever gets to third 
reading and Royal Assent.  
 
Secondly then they would go to the regional health authority. 
And the health authority has to make a report to the ministry, to 
the minister with the effect of that particular facility. Now we 
don’t know exactly . . . Again we have very little detail, and 
certainly this is something I hope that the ministry will provide 
at some point in terms of what kind of factors the health region 
will be expected to examine when one of these licensing 
applications comes forward. 
 
Now they say, “. . . the expected effect of the MRI facility on 
the operations of, or the health services provided by, the 
regional health authority.” Now it doesn’t speak at all to the 
funding or the costs that this will have for the regional health 
authority, so we don’t know if they even have to review that. 
And that’s an important piece, I think, and certainly one of the 
driving factors that the minister has indicated is behind this bill. 
So we will be certainly looking for more clarity and explanation 
on what it is the regional health authorities will need to examine 
when an entrepreneur comes forward with a plan to install one 
of these MRIs in a particular health region. 
 
I guess the other thing, Mr. Speaker — and this is something 
clearly in the background information that you can find on these 

types of situations — is that whenever a private entrepreneur 
comes forward with one of these programs, there’s a serious 
concern about poaching of skilled technologists and 
radiologists, and it’s not indicated in this bill whether or not 
health regions need to take that into effect. I certainly hope that 
that would be one of the major considerations, the major 
factors. As we know from some of the information I’ll be 
talking about later, about the serious shortage of radiologists 
and technologists in the system already . . . How is this going to 
impact the services that our health regions can provide? That’s 
one of the major concerns that we see coming out of this hastily 
proposed concept and proposal in this somewhat short bill, but 
it’s certainly a bill that proposes a radical change to current 
delivery of health services. 
 
Now section 7 is an interesting clause as well, and the marginal 
note for this is the decision to issue or refuse licence. So we’ve 
gone through the application. We have all this information 
being looked at by the health authority and the accreditation 
program operator. The operator has reported to the minister I 
guess that in their consideration it is conforming to the 
standards of the program. That’s all they report on. 
 
Secondly, the health authority has provided a report with “. . . 
the expected effect of the MRI facility on the operations of or 
the health services provided by the regional health authority.” 
So the minister now has this information in front of him. He or 
she would have to then take a look at it and decide whether or 
not to renew the licence. 
 
There are six requirements under section 7(2) that the minister 
has to look at in order to determine whether or not to issue this 
licence. The first one — most of these are fairly straightforward 
— the applicant has complied with the Act. Well that makes 
sense, and I’m hoping that they have complied with the Act. 
That’s totally sensible. 
 
Secondly, whether: 
 

the applicant has complied with any other Act, any 
regulation made pursuant to any other Act, any Act of the 
Parliament of Canada and any regulation made pursuant to 
any Act of the Parliament of Canada. 

 
Well we know that these things have been challenged under the 
Canada Health Act in the past, and certainly we need to know 
that these types of facilities would comply with the national 
laws in relation to health delivery as well. 
 
Thirdly, “the MRI facility will [also] be operated in accordance 
with this Act, the regulations and any terms or conditions 
imposed on the licence.” So again, not only the applicant has to 
comply with the Act, but so does the facility. That’s fairly 
straightforward and makes sense. 
 
The fourth is that if the licence is to provide services mentioned 
in subclause 6(3)(b)(i), which is the services to beneficiaries 
that are paid for by the public health system, then the licensing 
. . . whether the licensing is an effective and efficient use of 
public resources. And here’s the rub, Mr. Speaker. This kind of 
language is one that’s subject to interpretation, and I mean 
obviously the English language is always subject to 
interpretation. But what does that exactly mean? 



7238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

I think you will find a lot of debate on both sides of the House 
and within the legal and health community as well in terms of 
what is an effective and efficient use of public resources. 
Within a day of this bill being introduced here in the House, we 
had a number of commentaries that I will be looking at shortly 
that actually talk about whether the bill itself is promoting an 
effective and efficient use of public resources. So depending on 
who you agree with, this bill itself is moot because it doesn’t 
provide for an effective and efficient use of public resources. So 
it’s a curious conundrum and I think one that this ministry and 
this minister hasn’t fully thought out and hasn’t taken the time 
to really carefully think about the impact of this type of decision 
and this type of licensing. 
 
The next one again, I think 7(2)(e) is also subject to 
interpretation because it says the minister can issue a renewed 
licence only if he or she is satisfied that “the licensing of the 
facility will not significantly affect the operation of similar 
services provided by a regional health authority or an affiliate.” 
So what does “significantly affect” mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Those are the kinds of interesting words that we find in 
legislation that actually keep lawyers employed, which I guess 
in some ways is a good thing, but it certainly causes a drain on 
the public purse when we have to continually debate what these 
words mean. 
 
What does that mean, that “. . . will not significantly affect the 
operation of similar services”? We haven’t got much indication 
from the minister in his comments in his speech following the 
second reading of this bill, and I think that’s something that will 
be the source of debate. How are these facilities going to affect 
the delivery of public or affiliate operations and services? Again 
as I indicated, I will be referring to some material very shortly 
that has indicated some serious concerns about the significant 
effects of this type of regime. 
 
And the final one in section 7(2) is subclause (f) which says 
“the issuing or renewing of the licence would not be prejudicial 
to the public interest.” Again, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge 
you to find 20 people who would agree on what that actually 
means, “. . . be prejudicial to the public interest.” Already we’ve 
seen a number of commentaries that suggest this entire bill is 
prejudicial to the public interest, and so what exactly does 
“public interest” mean? If you look it up in the dictionary, it 
says things like — there’s a number of definitions you can find 
online — the welfare or well-being of the general public. Well 
when you’re allowing people to jump the queue, I don’t think 
that really talks about the welfare or well-being of the general 
public, and it certainly is going to have a negative impact on the 
general public if this type of regime goes forward. 
 
So this is the kind of debate that I wish the minister would have 
thought of before he hastily introduced a bill like this in the 
waning days of this particular legislature and this entire term, 
because we know that this bill’s likely going die off when we 
prorogue in the fall if we follow the normal procedure as set in 
the rules. And so you really have to question why we’re having 
this debate now, why this wasn’t properly presented to the 
public in a discussion paper before we see the minister moving 
forward with this type of bill. So there’s lots to say about it, but 
we have to question why we’re having a debate right now. And 
certainly I think one must wonder, with the timing of an 
election coming upon us, that you have to look at the 

introduction of this bill in that light. So it’s a very, very 
interesting move on the part of the Minister of Health, and the 
cabinet of course, at this point in time. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So in the rest of this section, there’s a number of other technical 
and administrative provisions, but I think section 7 is the one 
that really will be the crux of the bill. And it’s whether or not 
the minister decides to issue a licence to one of these private 
facilities that wants to provide MRI services to people who are 
willing pay for them outside of . . . out of the fact that we’re 
already paying for our MRIs through our taxes. 
 
So there’s other clauses. The terms and conditions of the licence 
on section 8 of course are going to be found in the regulations, 
which we have not seen any sign of, so we have no idea what 
that’s going to look like. 
 
Clause 9, the licensee shall display their licence in a prominent 
place. That’s kind of like when you get a liquor licence for a 
dance, you’ve got to make sure that the liquor licence is 
prominently displayed so the inspectors can find them when 
they need them. You know, terms about the transferability of 
the licence — it’s not transferable. 
 
Section 11 talks about how long the licence is going to be for 
and, of course, we don’t know, because it says the licence is 
valid for the period specified in the licence. So again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have no idea how long these licences are going to 
be issued for. 
 
It does go on to say, if there is no period in the licence, then it’s 
going to be for three years after the day it was issued. So it 
looks like there’s a general indication by the government that 
they’re looking at a typical frame might be three years, but 
because of clause 11(a) it could be for 20 years, and this 
operator could operate for that long and there would be no 
ability for the minister to revoke it unless it was in extreme 
circumstances like a breach of the licence. 
 
Section 12 talks about the responsibilities of the licensees. 
Again they have to comply with the law. They’re responsible 
for activities of everybody who’s providing these MRI services 
at their facility and they cannot — and this is an important piece 
of the legislation — they cannot provide MRI services to an 
individual unless they’ve been referred by a physician 
possessing the prescribed qualifications. 
 
So any of these facilities that are licensed to operate must have 
. . . Any individuals who get these services have to be referred 
by a physician. It’s not clear in what order they’re going to be 
taking in these clients and whether they can actually jump their 
own internal queue by a graduated payment schedule. Those 
kinds of things are not dealt with at all in this bill. 
 
The licensee shall also provide services in accordance with 
prescribed standards. So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
prescribed standards are good. We don’t know exactly what 
they’re going to be right now, but one would assume that they 
are similar to the standards that we see currently in place with 
MRI provision through the public health care system. 
 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7239 

And finally, the last responsibility of the licensee is that they 
shall not charge or permit any other person to charge any fee to 
a person for services except as may be permitted by this Act or 
the regulations. So it’s clear that the fees are going to be 
controlled by the regulations. But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we have no idea what the regulations are going to say because 
we have not seen them and will not see them until after this bill 
has passed. So it’s very difficult to debate these kinds of clauses 
when we don’t have any idea what the real requirements are 
going to look like. 
 
Section 13 is a clause called critical incidents. And we hear 
about critical incidents in the health care system, and we know 
there’s a reporting system for that through long-term care 
facilities and also through the hospital system. And these are 
very serious incidents that, you know, we all take very, very 
seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so those have to be built 
into these too. If something happens and goes terribly wrong, 
we need to make sure there’s a process that the reporting will be 
done properly. So there’s a whole clause, an entire page, that 
describes how the critical incidents will be dealt with, so I 
won’t go into detail on those at this point. 
 
Section 14 deals with the annual returns. Again that’s a typical 
administrative clause. 
 
And then section 15 is additional information where the 
minister can actually ask for additional information that he or 
she would reasonably require for the purposes of the Act and 
that the licensee has to provide that information when 
requested. 
 
Section 16 is the suspension and cancellation clause. So 
obviously the minister can suspend or cancel or even amend the 
licence if the licensee has failed to comply with provisions of 
the Act, the regulations, the term in the licence, or a standard of 
the accreditation program, or any other law, including federal 
laws. And obviously they would be able to suspend the licence 
if they were operating the MRI facility in a manner that was 
prejudicial to the health, safety, or welfare of any person, which 
is important, and needs to be in a bill of this sort. 
 
Section 17 allows the licensee the opportunity to make 
representations if and when they’re being censured under 
section 8(2), which is an amendment of the licence by the 
minister, or under section 16 which is the suspension or 
cancellation of the licence. So there’s just rules in place in 
terms of days, how many days they have to give notice that they 
want to make a representation about this action by the minister. 
And then there’s some other provisions. The minister’s not 
required to give an oral hearing to any licensee, but the minister 
must consider the representations from the licensee and then 
issue a written decision. 
 
Section 18 provides for an appeal to the court, so that’s a very 
useful, well and necessary, I guess, part of the procedure when 
there is a dispute between the licensee and the minister. There’s 
a whole section devoted to that. 
 
Part III of the bill, which is the next main part, is the 
administration of the program. Section 20 is interesting, 20(1), 
and this is agreements with the licensee and the program 
operator. It says that: 

The minister or the regional health authority may enter 
into any agreements with a licensee that the minister or the 
regional health authority considers necessary respecting 
the administration of the licensee’s MRI facility, including 
an agreement to make payments to the licensee for the 
MRI services provided at the MRI facility. 

 
And this is where I think a lot of the questions are going to 
come in in terms of the administration of this type of regime, 
because what you have is people who, for whatever reason, 
have decided they need to jump the queue on the MRI, which I 
think most people would want to be able to do that if they can 
afford it or if they can find enough money to be able to do that. 
Then they have to administer a second list. So there’s a list of 
the people who have come forward with a cheque in hand or a 
credit card in hand and they want to be on the paying list. Then 
they have to administer a second list of people who aren’t 
paying through extra cash. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all pay for every 
MRI in this province because it’s called taxpayers’ dollars. So 
every one of those MRIs that are currently being done are paid 
for by us — by you, by me, by all of us who pay taxes in the 
province. So those are already paid for once, but now there’s 
people who are willing to pay extra to have one done sooner. 
 
So how are physicians going to decide who gets on the list or 
how is the regional health authority going to decide who gets on 
the list for the free MRI that the facility is going to be paying 
for? And this is where it gets unclear in terms of what the 
minister has said, because he’s saying that the facility will sort 
of tack on those extra costs for the second free MRI to the costs 
of the extra paid-for MRI. 
 
So you can see right away that we’re into an administrative 
nightmare, and the reporting back and all the extra decisions 
that have to be made in terms of managing this process are 
going to be extremely expensive and possibly prohibitive in 
terms of managing. And we’ll need extra staff. We’re going to 
need a lot of extra resources just to manage this double line 
queue that the minister is creating with the introduction of this 
bill. And again I’ll have some further comments about some of 
the criticisms of that concept as well as I go through it. 
 
At any rate, there’s this agreement that will be entered into 
regarding whatever people think are necessary for 
administration. And we don’t know who’s going to pay for that, 
who the staff people are going to be. Are they going to be 
public health employees that are making the decisions? Is it 
going to be the Saskatchewan Medical Association? Is it going 
to be doctors? And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think the 
minister’s put a lot of thought into some of the administrative 
nightmares that will be created by this type of double provision 
of MRI imaging services. 
 
There’s other things in the administration section. Section 21 
deals with inspectors and section 22 deals with inspections, so 
when they can go in and inspect. Section 23 is a warrant by a 
Justice of the Peace or the court of Saskatchewan, Provincial 
Court of Saskatchewan, whether or not that’s necessary. It 
provides authority for officials to go in with a warrant if 
necessary. Section 24 talks about copies of records, and 25 is 
obstruction, so nobody can instruct an inspector in the 



7240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

performance of their duties. 
 
There’s a fairly hefty offence and penalties section here, Mr. 
Speaker. If in the extreme event, I would hope, that there was 
somebody who did not comply with the Act or the regulations, 
they could be fined up to $20,000 and “. . . in the case of a 
continuing offence, a fine of not more than $20,000 for each 
day or portion of a day during which the offence continues.” 
 
So hopefully, Mr. Speaker, we will never see it come to this. 
But I think a hefty fine is important and I think that’s certainly 
. . . I don’t even know if 20,000 is enough. And again I would 
be wanting to hear what other folks say in terms of what they 
think an appropriate fine would be for some failure under this 
Act. Maybe there’s different levels of failure. Obviously the 
fine goes up to 20,000, so there could be small offences, but 
there could be very serious consequences under some of these 
facilities providing MRIs. So we want to make sure that the fees 
are appropriate or the fines are appropriate in that circumstance. 
 
Section 26 is a just limitation of prosecution clause, which is 
pretty standard. And then section 28, if the minister wants to, he 
or she could apply to the court for a number of things, 
compelling people to comply, which is kind of interesting 
because if they don’t comply they are out of . . . they are not 
following their licence. But anyways you can compel people to 
apply by an order, or enjoin them, any person from proceeding 
against the Act. Again these are sort of administrative and 
technical clauses that I assume the Ministry of Justice felt were 
necessary in this type of circumstance. 
 
Section 29 deals with immunity, and so this is just allowing the 
Crown, the minister, the regional health authority, an inspector, 
and an accreditation program operator to have some immunity 
from proceedings against these individuals that will be 
operating these facilities. Again it’s a standard I think immunity 
clause that you would find in a number of government bills and 
pieces of legislation. 
 
The regulations clause is full of a long, long list of things that 
will be dealt with through the regulatory process. And again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve heard me say this before and I’m 
sure I’ll say it again: when we have this length and depth of 
material and requirements that are to be dealt with through the 
regulatory process, it makes it very difficult to engage in debate 
in this legislature on those regulations, because that’s not 
something that’s brought forward to the House. It’s within the 
purview of the Lieutenant Governor in Council and the 
executive side of government. So unfortunately when it comes 
to debate on these kinds of matters, these are simply things that 
don’t come forward in the discussion. 
 
Typically we receive these regulations after they’ve been passed 
by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and they are in fact law. 
So there’s, the number of things that are found in the 
regulations is something like section 30(f), which says, “for the 
purposes of clause 6(3)(b), prescribing public funding sources.” 
So if we go back to 6(3)(b), these are the applications, and this 
is where the regional health authority is being asked if they are 
applying for a licence to provide publicly paid MRI services, so 
it’s private facility providing publicly paid MRIs. That would 
be a prescribed public funding source. 
 

So we need to see regulations, and until we see these 
regulations, we have no idea where the public funding source 
will come from for the provision of public MRIs at this private 
facilities. Again it’s difficult to comment on when we don’t get 
the opportunity to see the details of something of that sort. 
 
There’s other kinds of fees that are going to be found in these 
regulations. For example, section 30(j) is regulations 
“respecting the fees that may be assessed for MRI services by 
licensees.” So it appears that the government intends to set the 
fees that will be assessed for these services by the licensees, but 
again we have no idea what they’re going to cost, and we have 
no idea of the cost comparison between what these licensees 
will be charging for MRI services or the public system will be 
charging for MRI services. It’s very difficult to make an 
analysis of it in that respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also we will see regulations “respecting the quality and 
standards of MRI facilities.” That’s section 30(k). We have no 
idea what the qualities and standards are going to be. 30(l), 
“respecting qualifications for employees of MRI facilities.” So 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is outside the Ministry of 
Health. We have no idea what these employees requirements 
will be, what kind of qualifications they’re going to have. It 
goes on to talk about the kind of equipment used in these 
facilities, the type of records that are going to be kept, what 
kind of information’s going to be recorded, systems that they’re 
to establish to monitor the provision of MRI services, categories 
of licences for different things for each category, annual returns, 
and the list goes on and on. There’s well over 20 subclauses in 
the regulations section. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So I think when you see this kind of bill come forward without 
any sort of provision of detail by the minister in the second 
reading speech, it’s really difficult to have an engaged and a 
proper debate. And I think it’s really important that we take the 
time. And again I raise the question why the Minister of Health 
and the cabinet decided to introduce a bill like this at this point 
in the life of this legislature because we certainly know that, as 
of tomorrow when we finish up, according to the calendar, our 
spring session, and the requirements for prorogation at the 
beginning of the fall session, that this bill will likely die on the 
order paper, and then they would have to introduce it all over 
again. 
 
So there’s a lot of questions about the timing of this bill, and 
certainly why it’s necessary. I’ll get into some of the public 
debate about the pros and cons of this type of health care 
provision in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just was able to look a little bit about some of the issues just in 
general around MRI machines. And this is something I found 
very interesting. And it’s a bit of a side issue, but it talks about 
where we get the magnetic materials that actually go into the 
imaging machine itself. And I thought it was interesting. 
 
And I don’t know if members know this but the magnets that 
are being used right now use an element called 
niobium-titanium or NbTi. And in one magnet they have up to 
36.9 kilometres of wire for a superconductor containing 
niobium-titanium, and superconducting is the essence of what 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7241 

these images do. They go on to explain that electrical current 
passes through the NbTi or the niobium-titanium wire that’s 
immersed in an ultra-cold liquid helium which creates an 
incredibly strong magnetic field. The patient is then placed in 
this field. And we’ve seen the machines that roll the patient in. 
I’ve never had an MRI but I’ve seen pictures of it on TV. And 
so they’re placed in the field and then the hydrogen nuclei in 
the water of the patient’s body . . . So we have hydrogen nuclei 
in the water of our body that reorient our tiny little magnetic 
fields to be parallel to the applied magnetic field like iron 
filings in the presence of a bar magnet. And we’ve all seen that 
as kids, where you get the iron filings and they all line up. So 
that’s exactly what’s happening in our body when it’s exposed 
to this superconductor that is in the MRI, the imaging machine. 
 
Then it says these nuclear magnetic fields are then manipulated 
using short bursts of radio waves to induce a current in 
specialized antennae. Thousands of these signals are then 
compiled and computed into detailed MRI images of soft 
tissues of the patient. And if that’s nothing short of a miracle, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know what is. And I think it’s 
amazing and incredible that our human innovation, the 
innovation of scientists and medical people to drive forward this 
type of technology is I guess, as I said earlier, it’s nothing short 
of a miracle. And I think it always astounds me what progress 
we’ve made in the provision of medical imaging and any kind 
of imaging. And I’ll talk a little bit more about that, the history 
of it, in a minute. 
 
So anyways, the question this article is talking about is, where 
does this niobium-titanium come from? And I was surprised to 
find out that about 85 — well in 1993, 85 per cent of this 
niobium comes from a mine in Brazil, owned by a company in 
Brazil. It’s still the largest supplier today. But the 
second-largest supplier of niobium is actually in Canada, in a 
mine near Chicoutimi, Quebec, which I found very interesting 
as well. There’s a whole extra layer of things that has to happen 
before these supermagnets are produced. 
 
And so in the next stage what they have to do is create the alloy 
for this wire, and that used to be done in Huntsville, Alabama, 
and in Germany and in the United States. Then they go to two 
companies that create these superconducting technologies, the 
highly purified and engineered composite filamentary NbTi 
wire. And then these things go over to Oxford Instruments in 
the United Kingdom where workers wind the specialized wire 
into a superconducting magnet assembly. 
 
So this is just sort of a bit of the technology that’s involved in 
these machines. This article goes on to talk about environmental 
concerns with the harvesting of these minerals. And there’s also 
security concerns. So there’s a lot of outside issues that come 
with the creation of one of these superconductors that goes into 
the MRI machines. Obviously as years go by, the technology 
becomes more and more refined, and certainly the efficacy of 
the machines and hopefully the costs are becoming more 
reduced as a result of dealing with it as more and more of them 
come online. 
 
There isn’t a lot of information that’s recent in terms of the 
operation of MRIs in Canada, but I was able to find an article 
produced in a magazine called Healthcare Policy in 2007. So 
this from Healthcare Policy, volume 3, no. 1, 2007, electronic 

page e113. And the article is called “Could MRI and CT 
scanners be operated more intensively in Canada?” So we see a 
lot of concern about the proliferation of MRI requests in the 
orders of these diagnostic tests by physicians. We also see a lot 
of concern about the costs of them and whether or not the actual 
machines that are being installed, which are incredibly 
expensive, but are they being operated efficiently and 
effectively and certainly are they being staffed appropriately? 
 
So this article suggests, and again it’s back from 2007 so it’s a 
bit dated and I know that the use of MRIs has exploded even 
since 2007, but this is what the introduction of this article says, 
and I’ll read it: 
 

Although availability of necessary equipment could be a 
factor in wait times for MRI and CT exams in Canada, 
there are other dimensions to this issue. More machines do 
not necessarily mean a commensurate increase in imaging 
services or less time waiting. These machines could be 
underutilized for a variety of reasons, including 
insufficient operating funds, lack of staff to run the 
machines or interpret the results, and technical or clinical 
constraints. 

 
And they go on to say: 
 

It’s important also to consider the level of utilization of the 
existing pool of scanners. A low level of utilization may 
suggest a potential to perform additional exams without 
buying more or newer machines. 

 
And I’ll stop there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what we see here is there’s a whole host of issues that a 
government needs to look at and a health authority needs to 
look at when talking about these medical imaging machines. 
Yes, it would be nice to see a business case. I think my 
colleague raised that and I think that’s exactly what’s not here 
in this minister’s snap announcement of this bill and 
introduction of this bill. Certainly he didn’t make a business 
case for it in his comments in the second reading. There was 
nothing explaining why this is necessary economically, and 
certainly I don’t think we have enough commentary or 
indication from the ministry whether the regional health 
authorities have asked for this, whether this is something that’s 
been called for by anyone, or if it’s just an idea that the minister 
had one day and thought, well wouldn’t that be fun to introduce 
into the legislature. 
 
This article is kind of interesting because it provides a lot of 
data. Again it’s from 2007 so we’d have to extrapolate, and 
there simply isn’t enough current data available to comment on. 
And that’s part of the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But when 
we look at this table on page e117 of this article, table no. 1 is 
the number of MRI and CT [computerized tomography] exams 
per scanner and per thousand population, number of hours of 
operation per week for MRI and CT scanners, the number of 
MRI technologists per million population, and number of MRI 
and CT scanners per million population by province in Canada. 
And this is I think up to 2007, although the data looks like it 
might only be as of 2005. But this was published in 2007. 
 
I think one of the things that we find, one of the stats that I 



7242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

think is very interesting is the column entitled “MRI exams per 
thousand population.” So you might wonder, well where does 
Saskatchewan fit in in the number of MRIs per thousand 
population? And again, this is dated. We don’t have current 
numbers, and I think this is something that the ministry should 
be providing so that we can actually have a look at it and see 
whether or not we are within the realm. 
 
Back in 2007, guess where we fit in, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 
were I think second, third from the bottom in terms of MRI 
exams per thousand population. In Saskatchewan we were at 
16.2, and the only provinces that were lower than that was 
Prince Edward Island at 16.1 and Newfoundland at 8.5. I think 
what’s really telling, Mr. Speaker, is if you look at our 
neighbours to the west and to the east of us, in Manitoba the 
MRI exams per thousand population was 20.8. So we were at 
16.2; Manitoba’s at 20.8. But if you go to the west, it jumps up 
dramatically. In Alberta they had 36.6 MRI exams per thousand 
population, so it was over double in Alberta, the utilization of 
their MRI machines per thousand population. And you really 
have to wonder how would that happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we see that our machines are not being utilized, and I think 
one of the members opposite is saying, that’s the point. Well the 
point is if you’re not utilizing machines well enough, why 
would you go ahead and introduce more machines in the 
province? That’s kind of a backwards way of approaching it. 
Perhaps that member hasn’t considered that yet. 
 
When we look at the number of MRI technologists per million 
population, this is where it becomes very, very telling, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And MRI technologists per million population 
a few years back was 12.1 in Saskatchewan. Now where were 
they in Manitoba? They had 16.2. We were behind and that’s 
just the fact. And in Alberta they had 40 MRI technologists per 
million population. 
 
Now again the minister . . . They’re proud of the 
accomplishments we hear about, but he hasn’t provided us with 
any statistics in terms of how many MRI technologists do we 
have in Saskatchewan now per million population. A few years 
back, it was less than a third of what Alberta had per million 
population. So that’s an across-the-board statistic, which tells 
me that one of the reasons our MRIs weren’t being used as 
much as they were in Alberta is we didn’t have the number of 
technicians that they had. 
 
Now consider this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you allow a private 
enterprise to come in with a business case where they’re going 
to make profit — because they wouldn’t do this if they weren’t 
going to make profit off of it, and I would expect a handsome 
profit for the type of investment that they’d need to make — if 
they’re going to be looking for technologists as well and 
radiologists to provide those services, where are they going to 
find those people? And is there a shortage right now in our 
province of the types of technologists and radiologists that we 
need to actually effectively and efficiently use the machines that 
we have? 
 
The minister doesn’t appear to have made that analysis. He 
hasn’t provided any information. I don’t see any information on 
any of the regional health authority pages about those kinds of 
numbers and the business case that a government should 

provide when introducing a drastic change to provision in 
health care services in our province without any explanation as 
to why these things are needed. 
 
This article goes on to say on page e118 that some of the 
reasons that we see . . . And I’ve addressed this a little bit for 
why we can’t get the same level of utilization of our existing 
MRI machines is . . . they described that at the bottom of the 
page e118. They say, however, and this is a quote: 
 

However, provinces may be unable to achieve these levels 
for various reasons, including supply-side and 
demand-side constraints. Supply-side constraints include 
insufficient operating funds; restrictions in the number of 
hours available for work by medical radiation 
technologists, particularly among female MRTs, given that 
80% of MRTs are women; and an increasing preference 
among MRTs to work day shifts. A further supply-side 
constraint is the limited number of radiologists to interpret 
the results. In 2005, 38.6% of diagnostic radiologists in 
Canada were 55 years or older. Older radiologists, with 
little or no training in MRI or CT, have tended to restrict 
their practices to other imaging modalities. 

 
[15:30] 
 
So again we don’t have current information on that, but we can 
see where the supply of radiologists and technologists is 
incredibly important to the efficient management of MRI or 
magnetic imaging, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So those are the kinds 
of things that you would think you would find in a business 
case. And perhaps the minister has a business case, and perhaps 
he intends to provide it to the Assembly at some point or at least 
publish it on the Ministry of Health’s web page, but we don’t 
see any sort of analysis done of how our current MRIs are being 
utilized. Where are the shortages? Where are the operating 
shortages on the supply side? Are there radiologist shortages? 
Are there technologist shortages? 
 
And then on the other side of the coin is the demand side. And 
the article goes on to say: 
 

On the demand side, the potential increase in exams might 
not be achieved if the demand for services in a particular 
area or region is below the available capacity, or if the 
demand cannot be sustained over longer work weeks. 
Moreover, increasing the number of exams does not 
always improve health status, because not every test is 
necessarily beneficial or appropriate as an enabler of 
improved health status. 

 
And that’s all in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this is an 
important question, I think, that the ministry needs to provide 
information on and some sort of analysis. When they say, 
increasing the number of exams does not always improve health 
status, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s something that’s very 
important to take into consideration here, is just simply 
increasing the number of MRIs that are available will not, 
according to this study that was produced in 2005, will not 
always improve health status because we know that some of the 
tests are not beneficial, and I’ll speak more to that in a minute, 
or they may not be an enabler of improved health status. 
 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7243 

So without that kind of analysis as well, to make this kind of 
significant shift in the delivery of medical imaging testing is 
certainly something, I think, that we need to take a very careful, 
careful look at before leaping into this, you know, user-pay type 
of and jump-the-queue type of health care that we know in 
Saskatchewan people definitely are not in favour of, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The conclusion of this particular article at page e119 says this: 
 

The intensity of utilization of MRI or CT scanners varies 
among the provinces. On average, in Canada, an additional 
31% operating capacity may exist for MRI and 68% for 
CT without additional capital or infrastructure 
investments. However, supply-side as well as demand-side 
constraints may prevent a given jurisdiction from 
operating at full capacity. 

 
And I’ll end there, end the quote. So we know, according to the 
health studies that are being done, we could actually get an 
increase of 31 per cent of our operating capacity in our MRIs 
alone. And it goes on to talk about the CT scans as well, but 
we’re focusing on MRIs today because that’s the bill that’s 
before us. But I think the same kind of discussion could be had 
with respect to CT scans. 
 
So we can do this. We can increase our capacity by 30 per cent 
on average in Canada without additional capital or 
infrastructure investments. But what we see here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a leap to additional capital investments through the 
private sphere, through the private sector, without any sort of 
business case, without any sort of analysis of the operating 
capacity and how we can improve the operating capacity, when 
we see that a few years ago we had a third of the technologists 
that they had in Alberta, and we don’t have any information 
today on the number of technologists or radiologists that are 
here in Saskatchewan and available for service. 
 
We have no idea what the operating capacity of our MRIs are, 
and yet we’re expected to quickly, you know, have a bill 
introduced right at the dying days of the legislature and have the 
proper debate, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest there’s a whole 
host of information that has not been provided. I don’t know if 
it exists. I don’t know if it’s been gathered, but certainly the 
resources need to be put into that to determine whether or not 
there is a business case for this type of scheme and whether or 
not there’s capacity within our existing system to deal with the 
needs for MR [magnetic resonance] imaging and also CT 
imaging. 
 
Another interesting part of the debate, Mr. Speaker, is the actual 
number of MRIs that are being ordered and requested. And 
studies are all over the place on this one, but I think we’ve 
heard at least anecdotally that there is concern about maybe 
overuse of these diagnostic tests. 
 
There’s an article that came out of the Canadian Medical 
Association Journal, CMAJ, and this is in 2012. And the debate 
in this particular article is who should decide whether 
something is medically necessary or not, and as you can well 
imagine, I think medical practitioners are saying, well we’re the 
ones who should decide. But I think there’s a lot of public 
policy arguments about the larger public policy when it comes 

to the costs of these types of diagnostic tests. 
 
So the article opens with this, and I’ll quote: 
 

A decision as to whether something is or isn’t necessary 
depends a whole lot on who’s doing the deciding. A new 
opera house downtown? “Yes,” says the music-loving arts 
community. “No,” says the cash-strapped city council. A 
new 90-inch television? “Yes,” says the sports-mad 
husband. “No,” says the level-headed wife. 

 
So that’s the quote and I’ll close there. So that’s the discussion 
at a public policy level. Who decides whether these types of 
imaging requests are medically necessary? Now what this 
article says, and this is an interesting quote, this is at page 1771 
of this article. It says: 
 

Evidence suggests, for instance, that physicians are far 
more likely to order a test if they own the machine needed 
to perform it, notes Matthews. There is also a tendency 
among some doctors to order expensive tests prematurely. 

 
And there’s a quote there from an individual — I’ll just find out 
what his full name is — Deb Matthews who’s Ontario’s 
minister of health and long-term care. And she said, at this time 
what . . . “‘We do know that some physicians were sending 
people with lower back pain for MRIs before doing anything 
else,’ says Matthews.” And then I’ll end the real quote. 
 
So that’s an interesting point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 
know, statistically know that physicians are way more likely to 
order a test if they own the machine needed to perform it. So 
that’s an interesting element of the debate, I think, that needs to 
be fully addressed and that is, what is the impact of privatizing 
these types of MRI or these diagnostic imaging machines? And 
whoever owns them, if the people that are ordering the tests are 
the ones that own them, evidence shows that they are going to 
be more likely to order the tests. 
 
So those are the kinds of things, I think, that can creep into 
these kinds of decisions. And one would hope that the minister 
is taking a careful look at that as well when he is setting up the 
regulations if this bill gets reintroduced in the fall. And if in fact 
it becomes law and if in fact regulations are passed, that’s 
where we’ll find these kinds of rules. So that’s something I 
think that the Ministry of Health will need to take into account 
is that. 
 
And I think for anyone, you know, if you go to an eye doctor 
and you get a prescription for eye glasses, they’re going to 
encourage you to buy glasses in their shop because that just 
makes sense on a business level for sure. So it’s the same kind 
of thing that we see here, and I think the ministry’s going to 
need to take a close look at that. 
 
Now the question of course is that doctors are saying no, 
they’re the ones who really need to decide whether it’s 
medically necessary. And the article goes on to say: 
 

Academics who have studied processes for determining 
what is medically necessary tend to agree the clinicians 
shouldn’t be the only ones involved. Though medical 
expertise is of course required, the reality is that money 



7244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

comes into play as well. Every public dollar spent on 
health care, after all, is a dollar that can’t be spent to 
provide other types of services to citizens. And nobody 
expects doctors to make decisions about patient care based 
on how it will affect, say, teachers’ salaries. 

 
So the academics who are looking at this are saying that there’s 
a role for public policy in the determination of what’s medically 
necessary. That’s a very thorny issue. I think there’s a lot of 
ethics involved in it, and it’s not an easy determination to make 
on any level, but I think to allow it be only determined by 
doctors could produce some results that are less than 
acceptable. 
 
The article goes on to say: 
 

According to some observers, bringing a wider range of 
experts into the mix is long overdue. [And this is quote 
from a professor that says] “Doctors have had the reins 
completely on deciding what is medically necessary and 
what is not, and that is increasingly going to have to come 
under scrutiny,” says Colleen Flood, a law professor at the 
University of Toronto and a Canada Research Chair in 
Health Law and Policy. [She goes on to say] “It’s 
beholden on governments, who are spending public money 
to take a look . . . The government obviously has to be 
involved in the sense that they set the budgets. Who else is 
going to represent the public interest if not them?” 

 
So these are some of the questions, I think, that needs to be 
examined quite thoroughly by the ministry and by this 
government before they jump into this particular privatization 
of MRIs. And again, you know, we sort of have some questions 
about where that’s coming from and why at this point in the 
dying days of the session. But perhaps there’s a political aim 
here that they’re looking for that wasn’t immediately apparent 
in the comments of the minister when he introduced the bill. 
 
There’s other articles that are available. I think one that I’d like 
to refer to right now is from the Calgary Herald. This is from 
2013, March 24th, and it’s a study. The headline reads, “Alberta 
study finds MRI scans for lower back pain being overused.” 
And then I’ll just quote the first paragraph. The article says: 
 

More than half of the requested MRI scans for lower back 
pain may be unnecessary, new Alberta-based research 
suggests, while noting the procedures contribute to longer 
wait times and are a financial drain on Alberta’s health 
system. 

 
And I’ll end the quote there. The study basically is, what it’s 
saying is that we’re spending a lot of unnecessary money on 
unnecessary tests. And again I would hope that the Minister of 
Health and the ministry will take a very careful look at the types 
of research that’s available now to decide whether the imaging 
that we have in place is being done effectively, and that it’s 
being done with the sufficient number of radiologists and 
technologists, and make a business case with the actual costs. 
Because the minister provided us with absolutely no numbers in 
terms of how this is going to save the public purse, and that’s 
his job is to make sure that this is done as efficiently as 
possible. 
 

The actual article itself. there’s one here from the American 
Medical Association for 2013, and this is entitled, “Overuse of 
magnetic resonance imaging,” so overuse of MRIs, and the first 
paragraph reads: 
 

Overuse of health care services such as magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) has become an increasingly 
recognized problem. We studied the appropriateness of 
requests for outpatient MRI of the lumbar spine and of the 
head for headache, as these are common indications and 
might be frequently inappropriate. 

 
And that’s the end of the quote there. At the bottom, they talked 
about the results of this particular study. And I’ll quote this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

RESULTS 
 

The specialty of the referring physicians and indications 
for the studies can be found in the eTable. 
 
Lumbar spine MRI 
 
Only 443 of 1000 requests were considered appropriate. 
The remainder were split between inappropriate (285 . . . 
[28.5%]) or of uncertain value (272 of 1000 [27.2%]). 

 
So that’s just for lumbar spine MRIs. And I think if you look 
back at the article from Alberta, it says the most frequently 
requested scans in the health care system. 
 
So what we have is a system that perhaps needs a little bit of 
review and introspection before we jump into something that’s 
completely outside the realm of I think what the intent of the 
health care system was. And certainly I think the ministry is 
charged with the responsibility of ensuring that there are better 
ways to do this than to jump into a privatization scheme for 
MRIs, and that there’s a whole lot of work that needs to be done 
before a bill like this should even be introduced, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Another article I’d like to refer to is from the BC [British 
Columbia] Medical Journal, and this is from Volume 55, No. 1, 
January, February 2013. And this refers to the CIHI [Canadian 
Institute of Health Information] report from 2007 that I talked 
about earlier where . . . And I’ll just quote this again because 
they say it better than I can, but anyways: 
 

According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information 
(CIHI), between 2004 and 2007 the number of computed 
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
examinations per 1000 people in British Columbia 
increased by approximately 50%. 

 
I’ll just close the quote there for a second, Mr. Speaker. So we 
have in a four-year period an increase of these two types of 
tests, MRIs and CTs, by 50 per cent in British Columbia. So 
that’s an explosion I think by any standards in terms of 
diagnostic testing or in any other area. When you see an 
increase of 50 per cent over four years, I think that’s pretty 
substantial. So I’ll go on to read the article: 
 

While these numbers can only be truly understood in the 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7245 

context of utilization in other provinces and other developed 
countries, the increase raised concerns about the 
appropriateness of these examinations. 

 
And then I’ll end the quote there. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So the question here, and I think what the article talks about is 
the word “appropriate” itself. A lot of articles are suggesting 
that about 30 per cent of these exams are not appropriate. And 
this actually, this article says . . . Well it’s a much lower number 
that’s actually inappropriate. They’re saying around 2.5 per 
cent, but there’s a very large number of these tests that are 
indeterminate, at 46 per cent. 
 
So I think because again it’s whether you, you know, call a rose 
a rose, either appropriate or indeterminate or not validated 
shows that there are a whole lot of these tests that are not 
serving the purposes for which they’re required. Either they’re 
inappropriate or they’re indeterminate. 
 
And again with the lumbar spine tests that are being done 
through MRI, many of those, according to this analysis, were 
the ones that were in the category of indeterminate, that the 
technology and the imaging isn’t sufficient to make a 
determination. 
 
On page 24 of the article, they go on to . . . Well I’ll just read 
the quote here: 
 

One challenge when analyzing data gathered for the study 
was converting the free text from the requisition forms so 
that the clinical reasons for ordering a test could be 
assessed by computer. The very high number of 
“indeterminate” ratings found in the analysis was a result 
of this challenge, and motivated both the human review of 
data as well as a more detailed analysis of the computer 
program by the software vendor. This analysis revealed 
problems with limited software vocabulary. For example, 
94% of knee MRI exams were called “indeterminate” [so 
94 per cent of these MRI exams for knees were called 
indeterminate], even when a specific diagnosis such as 
“medial meniscal tear” was the provided indication. 

 
Now I’ll just stop there for a second. So although 94 per cent of 
the tests were called indeterminate, it was because there was no 
software language that could match the diagnosis. So it goes on 
to say: 
 

The “indeterminate” rating was thus frequently a reflection 
of the software’s inadequate vocabulary and consequent 
failure to recognize valid clinical reasons for ordering a 
test. The “not validated” cases were the result of situations 
where the information on the requisitions did not match 
coding terminology. 

 
So again I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s the end of the quote and I 
think that indicates there’s a lot of work to be done on studying 
the appropriateness of tests that are being ordered, whether or 
not the language, the software language is appropriate, and that 
we’re getting proper diagnoses and a continuation from that 
perspective. 

There’s other articles I wanted to talk about. One is from the 
Institute of Health Economics and this is an IHE [Institute of 
Health Economics] report that was provided. I’m going to try 
and find a date for Hansard. It was prepared by Dave Hailey at 
the Institute of Health Economics. Unfortunately there isn’t a 
date on this study, but those are the names and the name of it. 
And what they talk about here is value for money from CT and 
MRI services. And they describe value for money “as the extent 
to which payers of CT and MRI have obtained the maximum 
benefit from the services, within the resources available.” And 
this is an interesting quote here. Mr. Speaker, they say: 
 

Reasons suggested for the growth in advanced imaging 
services for Medicare in the US include technological 
innovation, replacement of older invasive methods, patient 
demand influenced by direct-to-consumer advertising, 
defensive medicine, and an increase in clinical 
applications. Other suggested factors was the ability of 
physicians to refer patients to their own practices for 
imaging and lack of knowledge by primary care 
physicians about the most appropriate test to order for a 
patient, with a tendency to order a significant portion of 
imaging tests that would be considered unnecessary based 
on clinical guidelines. 

 
So these are very important factors that I think any ministry of 
Health should be obliged to review and make determinations 
before, as I say, jumping into the privatization pool and 
swimming around in that world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
On the next page, on page 33, they talk about operational 
considerations. And I’ve talked about this a little bit before, but 
the two main things they talk about is utilization. Again 
utilization comes up. Do we have enough technologists? Do we 
have enough radiologists? Are we able to efficiently and 
effectively utilize our existing resources before we start issuing 
licences for additional imaging machines? 
 
And then the other question that they raise is the quality of the 
results. And there are different types of CT scanners. There are 
different types of MRIs that are available on the market, and 
some are better than others, and of course the ones that are 
better, that give better results, cost a lot more money. So in 
terms of value for money, those are other considerations that the 
ministry needs to take into account when they’re considering 
these types of factors. 
 
I just want to take a moment to find one more piece of paper if I 
can, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Sadly it’s not jumping out at me, 
so I will jump on then to . . . Oh maybe that’s it, right there. I 
found it. 
 
A few of the things that I noted as I was preparing today, I just 
want to raise some of these questions. And I know there isn’t a 
lot of time today to continue this discussion, but I do want to 
raise a few more points before I adjourn the debate on this 
discussion. But my number one question, and this is something 
usually that the ministers do provide in their second reading 
speeches, is who asked for this? 
 
And I think that’s a really important question that the public 
needs to have information about. Who has asked the ministry to 
move forward in this fashion? Who has consulted? We know 



7246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2015 

the minister made reference to the SMA, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, but who else? Are there people within the 
ministry that are making this recommendation? Or he did 
indicate that they have actually . . . I think I’m going to have to 
find his comments in the scrum summaries, but I think he 
indicated that they have talked to a particular . . . [inaudible] . . . 
I’m going to find that when I get to that point, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re not sure exactly who the minister has talked to already, if 
it’s the providers of people that are interested in getting into this 
as a business, is it members of the public who are demanding 
access to this kind of service? We don’t know. We don’t know 
who he’s consulted. We don’t know who he’s talked to. And so 
that’s the number one question for me, is who is exactly asking 
for this? 
 
Secondly, one of the questions that comes up in my mind is, 
even though we have two lines for MRI now where people can 
jump the queue and get an MRI earlier, there’s still only one 
line for surgeries. So is the timing of the MRI going to affect 
their position in the line for surgeries? This is not something the 
minister has provided an answer to, and I think it’s a very, very 
critical part of the debate as we go forward on this proposal. So 
those are questions that require answers and I don’t think we 
have any answers here. 
 
Another point that’s been raised, and certainly our leader has 
raised this point, is that when you need care in Saskatchewan, 
the card that you use to get care should be your health card and 
not your credit card, Mr. Speaker, or your bank card. And that 
is a very important point that I think needs to be discussed and 
raised with the public and certainly with whoever the minister is 
consulting with. Is this what he wants to go forward with is a 
health care system that’s determined by the bank card you have 
or the credit card you have? And I think that’s the crux of the 
debate in many ways, is who is going to be able to access this 
particular privatized system for MRIs and what’s the impact 
going to be on the surgical lines? 
 
There’s been commentary, and I think this is something that we 
are certainly supportive of, is that we need to build capacity 
within our system. So if it’s a shortage of radiologists, if it’s a 
shortage of technologists, if it’s an underutilization of the 
existing machines, is it overuse of the diagnostic technique? I 
mean these are all questions that require some analysis and 
some survey and certainly a critical look at what’s going on 
right now in terms of, are we able to use the facilities we have? 
And I think the second piece of that is what impact will adding 
these additional outside-the-system imaging facilities that are 
going to draw away from the ability of our own public health 
care system to provide the services that we require. 
 
Another concern that’s been raised is when you have a 
desperate family or parent who feel that that diagnostic test is 
incredibly important and they need it tout de suite, and they’re 
not able to get it through the emergency system where we know 
that you can get an emergency MRI in a very short order, but if 
people feel the absolute need to pay, they’re going to be 
required to go into debt for some of these services. I think the 
one in Alberta said the cost is about $1,000 per test. There are 
some families that don’t have $1,000, but they will feel a huge 
need to find that kind of money and perhaps have steak night 
suppers or those kinds of things to raise the funds they need to 
get those diagnostic tests, rather than building in the capacity 

within our own system so that those fears are not created for 
those families. 
 
I’ve already talked to . . . One of the things on my list is the loss 
of technologists and radiologists to the private system. There’s 
already a shortage. This is not the way to deal with shortage in 
these types of professionals for the public health care system. 
And then the whole idea of paying for two instead of one, 
people are willing to pay for two, but these are already paid for 
through the public health care system so it’s actually double 
pay. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why that’s important to 
this government to enter into a system that will require a double 
payment, not only for two images but secondly for the fact that 
they’re already paid for through our taxes and our tax dollars. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what we see here is the dying days of a 
legislature, and is this a distraction by this government to move 
us off of issues that are very important to Saskatchewan people? 
We see today the release of the Ombudsman report, the public 
report on care provided to Margaret Warholm while she was a 
resident of the Santa Maria Senior Citizens Home. These are 
very critical. It’s a very critical overview of this government’s 
performance in the provision of seniors’ care in this province. 
That’s an important issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve talked a lot about education and levels of education and 
the requirements. We’ve had lots of discussions and 75-minute 
debate about the need of better support for our students. 
Classroom sizes are incredibly important, respect for teachers 
and ensuring that our children’s teachers are well looked after 
and supported. And then of course just sort of the decision 
around infrastructure for schools where we know that schools 
are, you know, in terrible shape. A lot of them are. We can’t get 
information from the government in terms of who’s on the list 
for repairs. 
 
We know there’s significant infrastructure deficits, not only in 
the education system but also in the health care system. And 
with, you know, the growth in the population, we see growth in 
issues. We see growth in the number of children that need 
English as an additional language supports. I’ve heard from 
people in my riding where . . . these are EAL [English as an 
additional language] teachers who are teaching in closets and 
they’re teaching in hallways and these students are not able to 
get the access they need. 
 
As I said when I was quoting that article earlier, the type of 
public policy debate that ties in to whether or not these 
diagnostic tests are necessary are ones that are driven by the 
public purse and the responsibility of the government to make 
those kinds of decisions for the citizens of Saskatchewan. And 
we know there’s lots of urgent issues on the educational side. 
 
I think again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve talked about this earlier, 
but show us the math. This minister has done nothing to provide 
the public with a detailed accounting of how this proposed bill 
is going to help the public health care system. There’s nothing. 
All we know is it may be a poaching of our existing public 
health care providers. Some of our professional radiologists and 
technologists could leave the system. That’s going to leave a 
gap in terms of our ability to provide. 
 
And I think that’s been the case in Alberta. And so we see 



May 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7247 

Alberta actually going back from the provision of public, 
private . . . private health care provision of MRI services. In one 
of the articles I read they talked about that they’re actually 
going back to using more public use of the health care . . . or, 
pardon me, of the MRI imaging, because their experimentation 
in privatization has failed. So not sure why this minister feels 
compelled to carry on with something when another province 
who’s tried it hasn’t really even proven to be successful. So 
there’s again a number of questions. 
 
There’s a number of issues that perhaps this government wants 
to address as part of their platform for the election coming up. 
Perhaps this is something that they think is an important 
discussion for the public, but I can tell you that we’ve been 
consistent and we will continue to talk about the things that 
matter to Saskatchewan people and not support a bill like this 
which goes backwards. 
 
What we need to be talking about, and what this government is 
not talking about, is things like seniors’ care. And we see that in 
the report today and the cavalier approach of this government to 
the report that we heard today. We see that in education, and 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, in my own critic capacity, I see it in this 
government’s approach to their promises about reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and complete lack of action on that 
level. 
 
So I’ve gone on long enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 
at this point I would like to move that we adjourn debate on bill, 
let me find the bill number. What is it? . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . 180? I’ve got it here somewhere. Everyone be 
patient. 180. 
 
[16:00] 
 
An Hon. Member: — 179. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Sorry. 179. Thanks for the help from the 
Government House Leader. 179, An Act respecting the 
Licensing and Operation of certain Facilities providing 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 179. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To facilitate further work that the legislature needs to 
do, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:01.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7223 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7223 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7223 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7224 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7224 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7224 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7224 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7224 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7225 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7225 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7225 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7225 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7225 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7225 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7226 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7226 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7226 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7226 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7226 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7227 
 Royal Road Race 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7227 
 Saskatchewan Fashion Week 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7227 
 La Ronge Fire Chief Honoured 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7228 
 Saskatchewan Physical Education Association Conference 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7228 
 Chief Justice Honoured 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7228 
 Potash Contract Announced 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7228 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Ombudsman’s Report and Provision of Seniors’ Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7229 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7229 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7230 
 Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7233 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7233 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7233 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7233 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7234 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7234 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 182 — The Appropriation Act, 2015 (No. 1) 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7236 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


