
























































Hansard: March 25, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6753 
 March 25, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the west gallery are 20 grade 5 and 6 students from Punnichy 
Elementary. They are accompanied today by their teachers, Ms. 
Andrea Wiens and Ms. Brittany Gent, and their teacher’s 
assistant, Cathy Crowe-Buffalo. Also with them today, Mr. 
Speaker, is their bus driver, Mr. Cecil Crowe-Buffalo. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them after. They’re here to observe 
question period, and I’m sure they’ll have a lot of questions. 
And I would ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, a couple of people I think I 
may have introduced before, but I’m always happy to introduce 
them when they’re visiting in the Legislative Assembly: 
formerly of Lanigan, sometimes of Lanigan but more over from 
Yorkton at this point, Pastor Kevin and Rachelle Sawatsky, 
LifePoint Church in Lanigan. Currently running the 
DreamCentre in Yorkton, opened the DreamCentre and a 
DreamLand for kids, which is a great ministry opportunity 
providing a lot of activities for inner city and all types of kids 
throughout Yorkton and the surrounding area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And aside from being pastors, Rachelle is also an assistant in 
my office, has been a real blessing coming into that office. The 
capacity of work that she brings, her expertise is really needed 
and very commendable. And I’d just ask all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce two gentlemen seated in 
the west gallery. One is Bill Stevenson. He is a tireless advocate 
for people of north central Regina, and he will be our candidate 
in the 2016, possibly 2015 provincial election in Regina 
Elphinstone. So I’d like to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And beside him is Joel Sopp, a friend of mine that I’ve got to 
know him better over the last couple of months — he moved to 
Regina by way of Shaunavon — who has interesting stories 
from the people down in Shaunavon about people that used to 
sit in this Assembly. And he has very interesting conversations 
that we are able to have. He’s involved in politics and a great 
supporter and a good friend, and I just want to welcome him to 

his Legislative Assembly as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming Bill Stevenson and 
Joel Sopp to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly, Joel Sopp, 
no stranger to this place, and Bill Stevenson, certainly no 
stranger to this place either. I’d like to wish them both well, Mr. 
Speaker, and particularly in the case of Mr. Stevenson, I’d ask 
him to keep on enjoying the view from the gallery for a right 
long time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of greater support for 
education. We know that education is one of the most vital 
services that government provides to its citizens, but this 
government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 
and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence. We know that this government has 
failed to develop a real plan to close the Aboriginal education 
gap, support English as an additional language students, support 
community schools and their communities and students. And 
we know we must build the best education system for today and 
for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources that 
provides the best quality education for Saskatchewan, that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that’s based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 
Moose Jaw and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney 
Avenue by that government with their failure to appropriately 
plan heavy-haul truck traffic, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 



6754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today 
to rise to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. The petitioners point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
many aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 
government; that this government was the one that removed 
regulations requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, 
which has resulted in neglect; and that chronic understaffing in 
long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 
including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 
rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 
the following action: to cause the government to commit 
to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again there’s signatures from a variety of 
places here in Saskatchewan. Folks today are from Wymark, 
Rosetown, Moose Jaw, Kindersley, Clavet, Eatonia, Swift 
Current, Saskatoon, Melfort, and Naicam. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition for real 
action on climate change. The people who have signed this 
want to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan 
produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in 
Canada; and that the Saskatchewan government has failed to 
tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the province’s own 
targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural environment; 
and since 2009 the government has reduced climate change 
funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 
2014-15 budget. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, they ask: 

 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a 
real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Swift Current, 
Moose Jaw, Meyronne, Lloydminster, and Battleford. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Strong Kids Campaign  
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of 
the government to the YMCA’s [Young Men’s Christian 
Association] Strong Kids Megathon Carnival in Regina. The 
carnival’s purpose is to raise awareness about the dangers of 
childhood obesity and inactivity. All money that was raised at 
the event will help more children, teens, and families stay 
healthy and active at the YMCA. This year’s event included 
many fun activities for the kids such as spin the wheel, fishing, 
beanbag toss, parachute games, crafts, face painting, and an 
obstacle coarse, healthy snacks, and much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Strong Kids campaign is very important as we 
know that kids partaking in sports and activities is vital to 
maintaining healthy and active lifestyles. Keeping active is 
important in all stages of life as it can prevent disease and 
chronic conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the YMCA of Regina is to be commended for its 
continued commitment to our community. I am particularly 
impressed with its visions and actions towards building a 
healthy future for our children and their families. The YMCA of 
Regina offers accessible, affordable programming to all families 
within their facilities. Strong communities make strong 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the YMCA of Regina for 
putting this event on and bringing awareness of the importance 
of healthy and active lifestyles for our children. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Remembering Lilly Daniels 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great sadness that I rise 
in the Assembly today to note that Lilly Daniels, a respected 
Elder and all-round extraordinary woman, passed away 
yesterday at the age of 80. And it is with great humility that I 
take this moment to publicly honour Kohkom Lilly for a life 
well lived. 
 
She wasn’t a big person, Mr. Speaker, less than five feet tall, 
and so was given the name of Wapimaskwa Iskwew, White 
Bear Woman, so she would have a strong animal to guide and 
protect her. She said that she grew up in the school of hard 
knocks and her early life was indeed a chronicle of loss, of 
hardship, and injustice. Perhaps the most extraordinary of all 
her many achievements is that, despite those early and awful 
circumstances, she survived and was widely known as a woman 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6755 

who was gentle, kind, generous, and loving. 
 
After the death of her husband, Alan, Kohkom Lilly said she 
began to dream of powwow dancers and caused her to found the 
Rainbow Youth Dancers in 1978. And since then because of 
her, hundreds if not thousands of young people have learned to 
dance powwow, and they in turn have kept that circle strong. 
 
Lilly Daniels began her journey as a kid living with her family 
on a road allowance on the outskirts of Gordon Reserve, and it 
ended here yesterday in the inner city Regina neighbourhood 
she’s called home since the early 1960s. 
 
In the course of that journey, she showed us how to live a life of 
humour, generosity, leadership, and compassion. Kohkom Lilly 
is a woman to be emulated, and she surely can’t be replaced. 
Our condolences go out from this Assembly to the family of 
Lilly Daniels and her many, many friends. Ēkosi. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

President of MD Ambulance Retires 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to recognize the outstanding career of Dave Dutchak. 
On June 17, Dave will retire as president and CEO [chief 
executive office] of MD Ambulance after 36 years with the 
company. The creation of MD Ambulance and the beginning of 
Dave’s paramedic career can be tracked back more than half a 
century. 
 
Dave’s sister, brother, and cousin were involved in a car 
accident just outside of Blaine Lake in 1957. There was no 
ambulance in Blaine Lake at the time, Mr. Speaker, so Mr. 
Dutchak’s father, Michael, used his army first aid training and 
loaded up the kids and transported them to the hospital. Shortly 
afterward Michael started a family ambulance business with a 
station wagon that he equipped with an army cot and a red light. 
 
Dave quickly became involved with the family business, 
helping out with the dispatching and washing of the vehicles. 
He would later move to Prince Albert to help his two brothers 
run their ambulance service before joining MD Ambulance in 
Saskatoon as a paramedic in 1979. MD Ambulance Care started 
serving Saskatoon and district in 1976 with one ambulance 
serving the local horse racetrack. Today MD Ambulance has 11 
vehicles and 180 staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Dave Dutchak on his well-earned retirement and thanking MD 
Ambulance for the vitally important service they provide to the 
people of our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ending Discrimination With Think Good, Do Good 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had 
the opportunity to attend an event along with the Minister of 
Education to mark the International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination, hosted by an interfaith group of 

Saskatoon moms called Think Good, Do Good and the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 
 
Students from five different elementary schools came together 
at the University of Saskatchewan’s Convocation Hall with 
community leaders to celebrate our province’s diversity and to 
call for an end to discrimination. In the lead-up to the day, the 
mothers worked in the classrooms with the students on the three 
Rs: respect, rights, and responsibilities. After a number of 
presentations about the importance of welcoming and including 
those who are different, the elementary students fanned out 
across the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] campus to hand 
out Think Good, Do Good pins and spark conversations about 
racism and intolerance in our society.  
 
Mr. Speaker, in our province we have Jews, Christians, 
Muslims, Buddhists, Sikhs, many others, people who follow 
Aboriginal spirituality, people who aren’t sure about faith, and 
people who follow no religion at all. Think Good, Do Good’s 
message is that good people have good values, no matter what 
their religion. We’ve come a long way when it comes to making 
sure that everyone in our province feels welcome and included, 
but there is so much more that needs to be done to stamp out 
intolerance and discrimination in our society. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
Heather Fenyes, Fatima Coodvadia, and all of the people who 
worked hard to make this event such a success, and to do their 
part in spreading the Think Good, Do Good message 
throughout our province. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Door of Hope Wins Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to congratulate my friend Unita Esau for winning the 
Innovator Award from Food Banks Canada as executive 
director of the Door of Hope in Meadow Lake. 
 
The Door of Hope is a food bank and soup kitchen in Meadow 
Lake which recently began offering health clinics for their 
clients. A nurse practitioner comes in once a week, assisted by 
another health care professional offering flexible services 
dependent on the clients’ needs. Those needs have ranged from 
addictions issues, diabetes care and advice on nutrition, and 
those managing chronic conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Door of Hope’s clients have embraced these 
additional programs, showing that a little help and education 
can go a long way for some of our most vulnerable people. 
Unita and those at the Door of Hope received their award for 
the innovation of having referrals from the clinic to the food 
bank being custom-tailored to a client. This is done by looking 
at their individual needs, such as diabetes or a new mother. 
 
People like Unita and all the staff and volunteers at the Door of 
Hope are truly making a difference in our communities and 
providing people a hand up. I want to thank Unita Esau and the 
Door of Hope for the work they do in our community and 
congratulate them once again for winning this award. Thank 



6756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

Budget Supports First Nations Institutes 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, although 
members opposite have all but ignored last week’s budget, 
Saturday’s headline in the Leader-Post offered an important 
statement regarding Saskatchewan’s balanced budget: “First 
Nations institutes pleased.” 
 
With an additional 24 per cent increase year over year to the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, this means that 
SIIT has seen a 121 per cent increase in operating funding since 
2007. And Riel Bellegarde, SIIT president, is very pleased. On 
budget day, he said that it “sends an important signal” that the 
government recognizes the importance that First Nations 
contributions are helping to meet the current and future labour 
needs of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government knows that we cannot be 
successful if we don’t keep engaging our First Nations and 
Métis students. That commitment helps to explain why we’ve 
also increased operating funding to the Dumont Technical 
Institute by 169 per cent since 2007. And the FSIN [Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] agrees. On budget day, 
Second Vice-chief Bobby Cameron noted that, regarding 
increased funding for SIIT, “The $2.2 million is going to go a 
long way in terms of having our students succeed in 
post-secondary education and the trades.” 
 
We believe in keeping Saskatchewan strong, and our 
partnership with SIIT and others offers real, tangible support for 
our Aboriginal students. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Inspired by the Team Clark Spirit 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Clark Froehlich was a grade 8 
student at L.P. Miller high school in Nipawin who passed away 
after a hard-fought battle with Burkitt’s leukemia not long after 
his 13th birthday. Clark was passionate about everything he 
took part in, and he loved all sports. 
 
While Clark and his family battled, a very unique team was 
formed in Nipawin. This team was inspired by Clark’s battle 
and organized fundraising events all over Saskatchewan. This 
fundraising helped the Froehlich family and the children’s ward 
at the Royal University Hospital. In 2014, inspired by the Team 
Clark story, the under-17 girls’ volleyball club in Nipawin, the 
NVC [Nipawin Volleyball Club] Serve-Ivors hosted a 
tournament raising $2,100. These funds were used to purchase a 
daybed and a fridge for the RUH [Royal University Hospital] 
pediatric cancer ward. In 2015 the tournament raised $3,200. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Clark was a natural leader. He was compassionate, 
had a great sense of humour, and an outstanding work ethic, and 
a determined personality. His courageous battle inspires those 
around him. The Serve-Ivors were classmates of Clark’s and 

have proudly taken on the Team Clark spirit, believing that 
through sport we can inspire people to be better athletes, 
competitors, and leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Team Clark and the Serve-Ivors for their dedication and for 
inspiring people from all walks of life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Maintaining Health Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Broten: — My question is for the Premier. What is the 
latest cost estimate for repairing our hospitals and care 
facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the very specific number can 
be provided to members by the minister here in subsequent 
questions. I will say in a general response to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s questions that our government has invested an 
historic level of money in health care capital in the province, 
including on the maintenance side of things. Mr. Speaker, the 
health care infrastructure deficit left behind was very significant 
and so all the work that we would like to see done has not yet 
been completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s part of the reason why we have budgeted in 
this particular budget a record amount of infrastructure capital 
investment, including in health care, not limited to health care 
but including in health care institutions, Mr. Speaker. This 
government’s going to continue to provide maintenance dollars, 
new capital building. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to 
invest in health care infrastructure in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, sadly it’s not surprising that an 
answer for the figure was not provided by the Premier because 
it actually very much matches the track record that we see with 
this government when it comes to being open and transparent 
about the needs. 
 
We had to fight to get the government to release the report done 
by Vanderwiel Facility Assessors. The government broke the 
law by sitting on the VFA [Vanderwiel Facility Assessors] 
report for eight months. And that report, Mr. Speaker, identified 
$2.2 billion of infrastructure needs. But internal material 
showed that the amount is likely much more than that: “The 
assessments were based on a visual inspection. No invasive 
testing was completed, therefore there may be additional repairs 
required that are not visible.” 

 
So the estimate, the estimate was $2.2 billion, but that was 
solely on a visual inspection back in 2013. So my question to 
the Premier: what is the most recent cost estimate for repairing 
our hospitals and care facilities? What is the number? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6757 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is correct. 
The VFA was prepared, the assessment was done, and then 
released. I mean I’m not . . . He’s talking about laws being 
broken in the intervening months. It was released publicly. 
 
The difference, Mr. Speaker, between what our government did 
and what they did when they were in opposition is they 
prepared, or they had a VFA prepared in terms of an assessment 
of our health care facilities, and they might release that report 
but then they provided zero dollars to address the concerns 
listed in the report. There was no money attendant to the report 
release. And the Hon. Leader of the Opposition should 
remember that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the figure with respect to the assessments 
completed on about 270 facilities was, and it’s been released, at 
about $2.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. Over two-thirds of these 
facilities were constructed in the ’60s, ’70s, and ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker, where previous governments — not just the New 
Democrats, to be fair, but previous governments — would have 
had the chance to do something more than talk about health care 
capital or assess health care infrastructure. They could have 
actually done something about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side of the House, we’ve worked hard to do something 
about it. Since 2007, our government has invested over $1 
billion in health care, Mr. Speaker. I can inform members of the 
House that last year’s budget for health care maintenance alone 
was 23.3 million. This year’s budget for health care 
maintenance alone, only maintenance, 27.8 million, a 
significant increase, Mr. Speaker, which speaks to the record of 
the government understanding there is more work to be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they sat on the report for eight 
months, breaking the freedom of information law, and this is 
something actually that the commissioner will be ruling on in 
the very near future. 
 
The need now is well over $2.2 billion but this government, this 
government is devoting less than $28 million to repair our 
crumbling hospitals and care facilities. That’s not even 1.3 per 
cent of what is needed. At that rate, Mr. Speaker, even if our 
hospitals and care facilities magically stopped getting worse, at 
that rate it would take almost 80 years before this government 
would finally address the existing infrastructure needs in our 
hospitals and care facilities. That approach, Mr. Speaker, makes 
no sense. My question to the Premier: what exactly is this 
government’s plan to fix our crumbling hospitals and care 
facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what makes no sense is for a 
previous government that that member is a member of, his party 
in government, to actually conduct the assessments and then do 
nothing about them. What makes little sense in terms of 
maintenance and capital spending is to close facilities in 
community after community. I guess the NDP theory is you 
don’t actually have to do any maintenance if you close 52 
hospitals. I guess the theory is you don’t have to fix up the 
Plains or worry about its state if you close the Plains hospital. I 

guess their theory is you don’t have to worry about maintenance 
in long-term care if you close over 1,000 long-term care beds, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we do things differently on this side of the House. The VFA 
is out. The infrastructure deficit left behind is very significant. 
The government however has responded with over $1 billion in 
health care capital alone, in fact 1.2 billion in capital funding 
since 2007 in health care alone. And you know, Mr. Speaker, if 
the hon. member wants to do the math and isn’t aware of it, 
that’s a 132 per cent increase over what happened under the 
NDP. 
 
We know there’s more work to be done. That’s why, in this 
budget, this Minister of Finance has tabled plans for record 
investment in capital in the province, including health care 
capital, including new long-term care facilities, including new 
hospitals being completed, Mr. Speaker, and maintenance 
increased in this particular budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, years of record revenue that this 
government has had at its disposal, and nothing but rhetoric in 
this Premier’s response. 
 
Here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, a quote that I think the Premier 
should listen to: “The greatest challenge facing Saskatchewan is 
not the expansion of infrastructure, but rather maintaining and 
adapting what currently exists.” Where is that quote from, Mr. 
Speaker? Well it’s from this government’s very own internal 
documents. It says the greatest challenge is keeping up with 
maintenance. This is what’s prepared for the ministers. They 
have this information. The Premier knows it. 
 
If that is the greatest challenge, keeping up with maintenance, 
which is what the Ministry of Health identifies as their biggest 
challenge, then how is this government’s 1.3 per cent, 
drop-in-the-bucket approach remotely acceptable? Where is this 
government’s plan to fix our crumbling hospitals and care 
facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, oh what a smoking gun the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition has discovered. He’s discovered 
what the government has said publicly over and over again. 
 
He’s discovered what the government has said in respect of 
what was left behind by members opposite in education, which 
was a complete ignoring of education maintenance, Mr. 
Speaker, of health care maintenance. They would do the 
assessments, they’d do the reports, and nothing would get done 
save of course for closing facilities. That was their capital plan 
for the province, and closing long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course maintenance is important. That’s why in this very 
budget . . . If the member opposite is asking for us to spend 
more on maintenance and health care capital, duly noted. The 
budget for increasing maintenance funding and health care 
capital buildings, capital structures across the province, in this 
budget now being debated in this Assembly, is an increase of 20 
per cent. So the question goes back to the member opposite: if 



6758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

this is his priority, will they do the right thing and vote for the 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is appalling that this 
government has absolutely no plan and no sound answer on 
how it is addressing the problems in our care facilities. Their 
approach of 1.3 per cent addressing the over $2.2 billion would 
take 80 years. And all we get is the Premier popping up and 
patting himself on the back, Mr. Speaker? It is unbelievable. 
 
If this Premier, if he doesn’t want to listen to what the Ministry 
of Health identifies as their biggest challenge, perhaps he’ll 
listen to what other leaders within the health sector have had to 
say. We can hear what the former CEO of the Saskatoon Health 
Region had to say. Now before they got rid of her, Maura 
Davies said this: 
 

It’s like when you’ve got an old house and you haven’t had 
the money or been unable to borrow the money to repair 
the roof, windows, flooring, mechanical, ventilation 
systems. It’s basic infrastructure that’s our biggest priority. 

 
So the Ministry of Health says that the infrastructure needs are 
the biggest challenge. Senior Health officials say that it is their 
major, top priority, Mr. Speaker. But this government has $28 
million, 1.3 per cent of what is needed to address it. 
 
And look at this contrast, Mr. Speaker. The Finance minister is 
talking about millions here. They have $40 million, they have 
$40 million for John Black’s consulting fees, but $28 million to 
address the infrastructure problems and crumbling buildings. 
Talk about mixed-up priorities, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Premier: how can he justify that? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition’s talking about, on one hand, four-year budgets, and 
on the other hand, annual budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about what’s appalling. What is 
appalling in this province is the state of health care we found in 
2007. What was appalling, Mr. Speaker, was the shortage of 
nurses left behind by the NDP [New Democratic Party], of 
1,000 nurses short in the province of Saskatchewan that was left 
behind by the members opposite. That’s appalling. 
 
What was appalling, Mr. Speaker, was what the NDP left 
behind in terms of doctors. There was an acute shortage of 
doctors in rural and urban Saskatchewan. There was an acute 
shortage of specialists, Mr. Speaker. That was appalling. 
 
The infrastructure deficit in health care left behind by the NDP 
was appalling. They closed 52 facilities including the Plains 
hospital, and in long-term care, something the member I know 
cares about — he asks questions about it every day, and so he 
should — they closed beds. That’s their record. Over 1,000 
beds, long-term care beds closed in the province, and the 13 
facilities we’ve replaced were in terrible, terrible condition, Mr. 

Speaker. That is what is appalling about the NDP’s record. 
 
Now on our side of the House, what we’ve done is prepared the 
assessment. We’ve released the assessment. We’ve begun 
historic investments in health care capital, maintenance, and 
new construction. We know that our job’s not done. We know 
that this is going to take a long time to recover from what was 
left behind. But if the member . . . Again I point out to the 
member, this is not patting on the back; this is the fact of the 
matter. The member’s asking about whether or not the 
government will improve and increase maintenance funding for 
health care facilities. The answer to the question, in this budget 
that they’ll have a chance to vote on tomorrow, is that the 
maintenance budget for health care is up 20 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not done yet, but that’s progress. I’ll hope he’ll 
at least admit that and maybe even consider voting for this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government has had record 
revenues. This year they are providing 1.3 per cent of what is 
needed. My question to the Premier: what is the plan for the 
rest? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the plan for the rest is 
that we’re going to continue with the capital projects that have 
started. We’re going to avail ourselves of the P3 [public-private 
partnership] model in the case of Swift Current, in my 
hometown where a new long-term care facility’s being built. 
We’ll do the same thing in North Battleford where this budget 
keeps the promise to build a new Sask Hospital. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if he would check on the budget, I think it’s 
page 24, he’ll see that there is a longer term view of the 
maintenance issue, specifically a budget to increase 
maintenance funding in health care, Mr. Speaker, starting at 27 
million as pointed out, actually $28 million in this current 
budget year, moving up to $47.5 million, Mr. Speaker, in three 
years. 
 
We are going to continue to make progress, Mr. Speaker. I hope 
that the Leader of the Opposition would stand up and continue 
certainly to hold the government accountable on this longer 
term plan, whether it’s enough or whether it isn’t. But I hope he 
might also stand up just once and admit to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan that when it comes to health care 
capital and human resources, his party in government let this 
province down. 
 
We’re going to have to work on this problem together. We’re 
going to have to make the key investments. Well he’s chirping 
from his seat because he never likes this but, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact of the matter is we are still dealing today with what was left 
behind by members opposite. 
 
The good news is there are 2,600 more nurses of every 
designation practising in the province, 400 more doctors, 
historic investment in capital, Mr. Speaker, continuous 
improvement under way in the health care system, the shortest 
wait-lists in the country for surgery, not the longest as we used 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6759 

to have. And we’ll continue to make progress in these areas. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Conclusion of Lean Contract 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Can the Minister of Health please tell us how 
much taxpayers’ money is going towards the John Black 
appreciation tea party on Friday? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand 
in this Assembly and talk about the improvements that have 
been done through continuous improvement in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have stated time after time that the total John Black contract 
in this province has been a total of $40.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 
And again restating a fact that we’ve spoken about many times 
in this Assembly, $125 million of identified savings to this 
point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s not including . . . They might want to listen. It’s not 
including patient safety improvements, Mr. Speaker, and other 
unidentified, uncalculated savings to this point, Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to additional space that would have been 
required in facilities for storage, for other types of service, Mr. 
Speaker. Quick stocking of rooms, you can’t put a specific 
dollar on, Mr. Speaker, less stocks that are needed because of 
efficient use of stock and efficient stocking of supplies, Mr. 
Speaker. But also cases like I will be glad to talk about in the 
next question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps this 
government needs to be reminded of what senior health 
administrators say about John Black: “Our experience with JBA 
has been one of lack of respect, tattling on leaders if they 
question, expecting rigid conformity in a militaristic style, 
gossiping, and undermining.” 
 
This government should be saying good riddance to John Black 
and tossing out his whole approach to lean. It should not be 
wasting even more time and more money on John Black events. 
To the minister: how many other tea parties and appreciation 
events are taxpayers paying for, and what’s the total cost, 
including John Black’s expenses, staff time, travel, cake, and 
balloons? What’s the cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll state it again. The 
member must have heard my last answer, but $40.5 million is 
the total cost of the John Black contract. And I guess I’ll have 
to restate again that only a few short days from now, March 
31st, Mr. Speaker, is the end of the John Black contract. Mr. 
Speaker, there are a few unfulfilled contract obligations that are 

being finished off at this point, Mr. Speaker, but again their 
contract ends March 31st. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in following up on my last answer talking about 
the improvements of lean, a story I love to talk about and 
specific to when it comes to patient safety, Mr. Speaker, patient 
services and falls, up at a northern facility talking to some of the 
lean staff there, the lean leader in particular, Mr. Speaker, who 
admittedly wasn’t overly engaged off the start, but the story she 
told us, Mr. Speaker, about a senior citizen that had been falling 
almost daily, Mr. Speaker, and at the time of our visit up there, 
attributing strictly to the lean processes of staff management, 
Mr. Speaker, that patient had not fallen once in the previous 
month. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Support for Low-Income Families 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
listened very carefully to the Finance minister’s speech last 
week, and there wasn’t one mention of poverty, even though 
this government is supposed to be developing an anti-poverty 
strategy. Instead the budget contained less funding for the rental 
housing supplement, less funding for the child care parent 
subsidies, less funding for the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, and it decimated the budget for Sask Housing. To 
the Social Services minister: why are poor people in our 
province bearing the brunt of this government’s financial 
mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And last 
night, had the member been listening, I explained that the 
reduction in the Saskatchewan employment supplement was 
quite minimal and it won’t affect the existing families that are 
on that supplement. 
 
However because of this government, those very same families, 
Mr. Speaker, will benefit because this government has 
increased minimum wage by 28.3 per cent since we formed 
government, Mr. Speaker. It was this government, quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, that introduced the child drug program, and that 
will benefit these very same families. It is this government that 
introduced the active families benefit, and that will benefit these 
very same families. 
 
It was this government that eliminated the PST [provincial sales 
tax] for children’s clothes, and that will benefit these very same 
families. And it’s this government that doubled the low-income 
tax credit. That will benefit these very same families, Mr. 
Speaker. It is this government that increased the rental 
supplement that also benefits these very same families, Mr. 
Speaker. And it is this government that made record-setting tax 
reduction, personal tax reduction, that also benefits these very 
same families. So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot in this budget that 
will help these low-income families as they transition out of the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the employment 



6760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

supplement is supposed to give a little extra money to 
low-income, working parents with children. But this 
government is cutting that supplement for parents whose 
children are over the age of 12. Peter Gilmer of the Regina 
Anti-Poverty Ministry says, and I quote, “. . . at a time when we 
are now tied [tied] for the lowest minimum wage in the country, 
losing that support is going to have a significant impact.” He 
questions how committed this government is to the anti-poverty 
strategy, which the minister forgot to mention in that answer, 
because this kind of cut, and I quote, “doesn’t move us in that 
direction at all.” 
 
To the minister: does the minister really think that teenagers are 
cheaper to raise? Why is she cutting this vital support for 
low-income, working people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the number one cost to 
raising children, quite frankly, is the child care cost, which a lot 
of parents have brought to my attention. That is a significant 
cost to parents, and that is the child age that will be covered, 
continued to be covered under the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement. 
 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement, Mr. Speaker, is not 
a long-term program. It is a transitional type of program. The 
average time that any family is on that program is seven 
months, Mr. Speaker, so it isn’t a program that families get on 
and stay on for long periods of time. So it will be minimal 
effect. 
 
It was a tough budget. There was choices to be made, Mr. 
Speaker. We felt that with all of the other programs that we 
have introduced that will aid those very same families, Mr. 
Speaker, if they had a choice of losing all of the rest of the 
programs — and that would be the choice of the NDP because 
the NDP didn’t implement any of those helps for those families, 
Mr. Speaker — then that is what we chose to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, by slashing the employment 
supplement, this government says it will save about $1 million. 
But this government has spent $3 million on the Premier’s 
American lobbyist. It has spent $4 million on travel and 
accommodations for its $40 million American lean consultant. 
It’s handed $5 million for research grants to the failed 
American smart meter manufacturer. Yet this government is 
cutting the employment supplement for low-income, working 
families, just to save a million bucks. That’s shameful, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s shameful. To the minister: how can she 
possibly justify such horribly misplaced priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I can go through 
the whole list of programs that we have available that will help 
those very same families, Mr. Speaker. It is a fairly minimal 
cut, as the member opposite said. It is a small amount that is 
being reduced and it will affect not all that many families, but it 
will affect some. We’ll be grandfathering the existing families 
that are in the program so no one family that’s in the program 

will see a reduction. It will however affect the new entrants, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting that he mentions about the poverty strategy 
which our government has embarked on. Even though our 
poverty levels are not the lowest in the country, we have seen 
improvements in our poverty levels within this province which 
is very positive, but we think there’s more work that needs to be 
done. But we didn’t just talk about it, Mr. Speaker. We put 
together a very credible panel that is going to undergo 
consultations, to come forward with recommendations that we 
can form a strategy around. And do you know what the 
members opposite did when they had the chance to make those 
decisions? Nothing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Management of Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yesterday the Finance minister was 
asked what he thinks of Norway having over $1 trillion in a 
sovereign wealth fund and that the interest exceeds that of our 
provincial budget. Here’s what he said: “It’s interesting. I 
looked at some of the stats of Norway, and Norway actually has 
a debt as well.” So he stands there, pats himself on the back, 
and says, oh we’re like Norway, sort of. They have some debt 
and we have debt too. And by the way, our debt is increasing in 
massive ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the lesson this minister was supposed 
to take from Norway. Norway has a sovereign wealth fund 
worth over $1 trillion. This government doesn’t even have a 
rainy day fund, and it hasn’t saved a single penny; has presided 
over boom times, and it has added debt. 
 
Has the Finance minister come up with a better answer 
overnight? Seriously, what does he think about Norway and its 
sovereign wealth fund of over $1 trillion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, we are supportive of the report 
that was produced by Peter MacKinnon. The report asks for the 
establishment of a Saskatchewan futures fund, and that is a fund 
that will be put in place when certain parameters are reached. 
 
One of the options, Mr. Speaker, one of the options that the 
member of Rosemont ought to listen to is from the report, and 
it’s under no. 10, the timeline for establishing the fund. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. MacKinnon says 
this: 
 

Given the priority on debt reduction in the Plan for 
Growth: 

 
one option could be that non-renewable resource 
revenues in excess of the cap be committed to 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6761 

elimination of the debt and thereafter to the 
Saskatchewan Futures Fund. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a great plan. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s become abundantly 
clear to the people of Saskatchewan, when it comes to the 
long-term savings fund for this Premier, Mr. Speaker, he has 
more positions than the evening class at Yoga Mala, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What Saskatchewan people deserve is a long-lasting benefit for 
the people of this province. What we recognize in Alberta is 
Premier Prentice, despite hard fiscal conditions, is actually 
committing to that long-term heritage fund. 
 
But not this Premier, not this government. This Premier and this 
government have blown through record revenues as fast as the 
money comes in. This Premier and this government have 
drained the rainy day fund despite governing during boom 
times. This Premier and this government are racking up debt, 
$1.5 billion this year alone. And this Premier and this 
government haven’t saved a penny for the future, and they have 
no plan, no serious plan of doing so. 
 
How can this Premier, how can this Finance minister honestly 
justify this failure of leadership? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is rich. This is a rich line 
of questioning from members opposite because the other thing 
they left behind was a big, giant orange credit card, Mr. 
Speaker. That was operating debt for the province of 
Saskatchewan unsupported fully by the payments. They left 
their credit card that was not being retired in any given time. It 
would just continue forever — the kind of credit card 
management our parents said we should never undertake, Mr. 
Speaker. How much was on that big orange credit card? $6.8 
billion in debt, Mr. Speaker. Our position has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont asked the 
question. Why won’t he listen for an answer? Please come to 
order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, our position’s been pretty 
clear and the position of the Finance minister’s been clear as 
well. Let’s pay off that credit card. Some of the borrowing’s at 
9 per cent. Some of their borrowing that we’re paying off is at 9 
per cent. So what did we do with some of the money, with some 
of the record revenues? We reduced the credit card by $3 
billion. We paid off 44 per cent of that big, terrible orange 
credit card. We inherited that credit card debt that that 
government passed on to this government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t stop there. We took some of the 
other revenues and we doubled infrastructure investment, 
something the Leader of the Opposition earlier was just asking 
us to do. That’s where some of the money went. 

What else did we do with it, Mr. Speaker? We thought that a lot 
of that money belongs back in the pockets of Saskatchewan 
people and small businesses, so we cut property tax and we cut 
income tax and we cut the small-business tax. We’ve invested 
billions for the disabled, Mr. Speaker. We’ve hired more nurses 
and more doctors, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the money went. 
But first and foremost, before we get to the savings account, 
we’re going to pay off that NDP credit card. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, yesterday evening 
the Opposition Deputy House Leader raised a point of order 
concerning the remarks made in debate on the budget motion by 
the member for Estevan. The Opposition Deputy House Leader 
stated that certain comments made by the member for Estevan 
are not accurate and contravene rule 51. To support his point, he 
asked the Speaker to review the video record of debate on 
November the 4th, 2013. I have reviewed the comments made 
by the member for Estevan last evening, especially in 
connection to remarks made during the address in reply debate 
on November the 4th, 2013 which I surmise is at the heart of 
the point of order. 
 
It would appear that the situation I’ve been asked to consider is 
based on the interpretation by various members of remarks 
made both on and off the record. This puts the Speaker in a very 
difficult position, especially when not all the remarks are on the 
record. Furthermore, members know that it is impossible for the 
Speaker to determine the accuracy of comments made in debate, 
let alone the intent of remarks thrown across the floor. 
 
Through debate members have an opportunity to question and 
explain comments made in speeches and to say when they feel 
they have been misquoted or misunderstood. This of course 
should be done within the bounds of decorum and respectful of 
one another. I think all the members have honourable 
intentions, but on occasions we do end up with situations when 
misunderstandings cause hard feelings. This appears to be a 
misunderstanding that goes back a considerable time. 
 
As Speaker, I appreciate the sensitivity on both sides of this 
matter, but I cannot find a breach of order. I encourage 
members to resolve differences of this type by talking to one 
another, rather than letting wounds fester. The problem is only 
exacerbated when hurt feelings seep into debate. This is an 
example of that. 
 
I also want to strongly remind members about rule 47 with 
respect to loud private conversations and guffawing. I ask that 
members conduct themselves in a manner that respects the 
member who has the floor. I offer this advice for reflection by 
all members. 
 
In summary, I find that the point of order is not well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



6762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter the debate on the budget and the amendment as well. With 
respect to the budget, that will go down in the archives of 
Saskatchewan in a very important period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
We look forward to that at some point in time. 
 
I’m going to start off the traditional way with offering some 
thank yous to people that have done a great service to myself 
over a number of years, Mr. Speaker. You would know that I’ve 
had the pleasure of being in this Assembly for a very long time. 
I have had the pleasure of having the support of the people of 
Kindersley for a very, very long time and it’s greatly 
appreciated. 
 
I also have a very strong team of people that provide support on 
a daily basis, whether it’s in my constituency with two 
constituency assistants, Susan Maedel and Sherri Flanagan, who 
do a tremendous job on my behalf in the constituency, 
representing the Government of Saskatchewan, I think, in a 
very, very competent and very, very forthright fashion in that 
constituency. 
 
I’m also supported as well in the legislature here by a very 
strong team in my office with Cam Baker, the chief of staff; 
Lain and Dustin and Elaine, all are great people that I’ve had 
the pleasure of working with for a long period of time, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I’m deeply grateful for the efforts that they 
provide on an ongoing and daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to say thank you to my colleagues in the legislature 
here for the support that they have shown over the number of 
years throughout my career as well. I also want to offer a thank 
you to the members of treasury board for the hard work that 
they do on presenting and developing and putting forward the 
budget and, as well, to my honourable friend and colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, for the tremendous job that he does in 
bringing all of that together and presenting a budget at the end 
of the day. 
 
The Minister of Finance and I go back a long ways, you know, 
and he’s learned a tremendous amount over the years. I 
remember from the auspicious start of forgetting to make an 
amendment to the budget a number of years ago, to now 
presenting budgets in the legislature. Time after time, archived 
after archived events in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
it’s a great tribute to the Minister of Finance. This budget is his 
last budget. I think it has also set Saskatchewan on a continued 
positive direction for the people of this province. 
 
The only thing I ever wonder about his judgment on is his 
choice of hockey teams, Mr. Speaker. He’s a diehard Leaf fan, 
as everyone on this side of the House knows. I guess his loyalty 

is admirable; his judgment is a little bit shaky at times, Mr. 
Speaker. But I always say to him, and I think members of the 
opposition would probably agree with me, that there’s no one 
more optimistic in Saskatchewan than a Leaf fan, at least prior 
to Christmas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but it certainly has been a pleasure to work 
alongside the Minister of Finance for a long time. I sit right 
beside him in cabinet and have since our government formed 
office. We get to have a lot of private conservations as to what 
we’re seeing happening in Saskatchewan. And it is his wisdom 
and his, I think, very generous advice that he provides to all 
members of this Assembly from time to time that we all can 
take a lot of . . . I think we all understand very clearly that it’s 
very, very forthright and given in a manner that is never 
personal, that’s always in a manner of trying to assist in terms 
of moving the province forward, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
thank him for that ongoing . . . [inaudible]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, long after, long after this budget is archived in 
Saskatchewan, long after that, and long after other budgets are 
archived here in the province of Saskatchewan as well, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, this represents a turning point for Saskatchewan.  
 
You know, the criticism, the criticism of this government has 
always been that they can manage through the good times; what 
can they do when things are a little bit tougher? What can they 
do when things are little bit tougher? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 
this budget speaks to that in the many, many ways. When you 
see a significant loss of revenue like the Government of 
Saskatchewan saw as a result of a significant and ongoing drop 
in oil prices, not a short-term blip as the Leader of the 
Opposition likes to characterize it, but nevertheless a very, very 
deep and pronounced drop in oil prices here in Saskatchewan, 
how is the Government of Saskatchewan going to manage? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the reviews are coming in from across 
Saskatchewan. They’re coming in from across Western Canada, 
and I would say well beyond that as well, Canada and North 
America, where I think people are looking at this. And they’re 
saying that it’s amazing that the Government of Saskatchewan 
could still come forward, under all of those trying 
circumstances, with a balanced budget, with no tax increases, 
and yet still maintain a significant amount of spending in terms 
of infrastructure here in Saskatchewan. And I think that’s very, 
very important, Mr. Speaker, given the very difficult nature of 
the budget that was presented here just a week ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We were all asked as ministers by the Finance minister and by 
the Premier, all challenged to look for savings within our 
ministry to try and make sure that we stayed on track as a 
province because one of the things that we think is extremely 
important, Mr. Speaker, is maintaining an edge for 
Saskatchewan, a competitive edge when it comes to seeking 
investment from around the world to our province. And I dare 
say as Minister of the Economy, that this budget makes and 
continues to make my job even easier because of the very, very 
challenging nature of the budget but because the fact that the 
Finance minister met those challenges head on. And we 
continue to see our province driving forward in a very, very 
strong fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6763 

Another balanced budget I think is very, very important. And 
when companies start looking at . . . And I’ve had the occasion 
on many, many times to sit down with companies from around 
the world. They’re looking at making investments in 
Saskatchewan. They say there’s a number of things that they 
look for. They look for governments that are being responsible, 
whether it’s in terms of resource development, whether it’s in 
terms of infrastructure, whether it’s in terms of taxation here in 
Saskatchewan, whether it’s in terms of keeping our young 
people in the province so that they’ll have a quality workforce 
going forward. It’s those kinds of things. They look for political 
stability, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to all of those kinds of 
things as well. And they say to me on every occasion that we 
meet with them, Saskatchewan meets that mark in every way, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a dramatic turnaround from what we have seen in the past 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. You know, it wasn’t all that 
many years ago here in Saskatchewan when we witnessed 
things by the previous administration that drove people from 
our province, Mr. Speaker, where they raised taxes 17 times 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I note today that they’re talking about poverty strategies. 
Well I would like to know from the member opposite that was 
raising those questions on poverty, how did it help people that 
were suffering in poverty when you raised the PST three 
different times, when you raised income taxes? Mr. Speaker, 
how did it help those people when you were doing all of that? 
What kind of increases did you provide to income supports 
during that period of time for those people that you advocate so 
strongly on behalf of today? You did nothing. You did nothing 
on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. And that’s precisely the reason 
why there are just a rump of a party left over there, Mr. 
Speaker, and nine seats. 
 
Now I believe the member’s earnest in his comments around 
this. Absolutely he is. I think he means well, but I think he 
should also check the record, Mr. Speaker. I think he should 
check the record of the Social Services minister here in this 
province, the Finance minister here in this province, and see 
who has done more for people in need in Saskatchewan. No one 
in the previous history of this province has done more, and you 
know it, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, arrogant? Mr. Speaker, How? All I ask you is that the 
members of the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan 
check the record. The record speaks for itself. It has nothing to 
do with arrogance. It has everything to do with actually doing 
the right thing rather than just saying you’re going to do the 
right thing and not doing anything at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s the record of the members opposite, and 
they know it. 
 
Today in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition gets up and says, what are you going to do about the 
health care deficit that we have in Saskatchewan in terms of 
infrastructure? All right, a legitimate question. Legitimate 
question; everybody would agree with that, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why we’re putting more and more money into health care in 
terms of infrastructure here in our province. 
 

I guess, I surmise that the continuation of that argument on his 
behalf would be, do you want us to spend more? Okay. Well 
that’s a legitimate argument. We look forward to debating that 
over the next number of months as we lead up to the next 
general election. He wants us to spend more. 
 
But then not more than a few minutes later, the member that’s 
sitting beside him, the deputy leader gets up and says, you 
should be saving more at the same time. Mr. Speaker, it just 
doesn’t make any sense. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan understand that, because the NDP seems to be all 
over the map. They don’t have any general direction that they 
seem to be going, Mr. Speaker. They don’t seem to know what 
they want to do in terms of advocating on behalf of people here 
in Saskatchewan. We’re waiting and I think everybody in this 
province is waiting, Mr. Speaker, to find out when they’re 
going to present their plan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was sitting in 
opposition as leader of the opposition, a significant period of 
time, I think it was about 18 months prior to the election in 
2007, he presented what he saw as the vision for Saskatchewan. 
And we laid it, he laid it out in very, very distinct terms for 
everyone to take a look at and judge accordingly. And they did. 
And they did. They supported the Premier and they supported 
the Sask Party in the 2007 election and in a resounding fashion, 
and then re-established it again in 2011, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the reasons why is because they understand one 
very, very fundamental thing about this government and about 
this Premier. We do what we say we’re going to do, Mr. 
Speaker. We do what we say we’re going to do, whether it’s in 
terms of adding income supports for people that are vulnerable 
in society, Mr. Speaker, whether it comes to trying to attract 
business to our province, whether it comes to providing 
infrastructure in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those are all of 
the things that we have said we’re going to do. And we’ll 
continue down that path, Mr. Speaker, because we think it’s 
important that the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what 
our plans for this province are going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I think they look at this budget 
and they say, well we agree with the fact that we need to build 
infrastructure in Saskatchewan. I think anybody in this province 
that travels around Saskatchewan understands that, Mr. 
Speaker. We see hospitals that are, you know, 50 years old, in 
some cases older than that, and 40 and 30 and 20 years old, Mr. 
Speaker, that are in need of repair or a replacement. Very much 
so. And I think we can all point to examples within our 
constituencies of that, as well as schools, Mr. Speaker, as well 
as highways. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think we are moving Saskatchewan forward 
in terms of meeting all of those challenges through the 
Saskatchewan Builds capital plan, where we see twinning of 
highways, where we see passing lane projects happening in 
Saskatchewan, where we see significant interchanges being 
built at Warman and Martensville. We see the next phase of the 
Regina bypass being put in place here over the next number of 
years, Mr. Speaker. These are important developments for the 
development of our province going forward. 
 
I’m always amazed that when we hear petitions every day, Mr. 



6764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

Speaker, from the members opposite, the member gets up and 
says he wants to have no traffic on Dewdney because he doesn’t 
I guess support the fact that they were the ones that initially 
started the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. They certainly 
were the ones that put it in place. We’re carrying that on, Mr. 
Speaker. We think it’s good. We’re increasing it. We’re getting 
more and more people there all of the time. More and more 
companies are establishing there all the time, Mr. Speaker, but 
he doesn’t want truck traffic to go there. 
 
I mean, the intermodal facility, the intermodal facility was 
downtown, Mr. Speaker. It’s now out at the GTH west of the 
city here. They still have some operations down there. Trucks 
still have to move from downtown out there, and I would be 
interested in the route that he thinks they should be moving on 
if he doesn’t want to move them on Dewdney. If they don’t 
want to move them on Dewdney, Mr. Speaker, what route does 
he want them to take? 
 
I’ve asked him time after time after time to present the map that 
he wants. What neighbourhood would you prefer they went in? 
What neighbourhood would you prefer they went in? Which 
one would you prefer they go in, Mr. Speaker? Because if 
they’re not on one street, they’re obviously going to be on 
another street, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, it’s all of those kinds of contradictions by the 
members opposite that I think people here in Saskatchewan, I 
think people here in Saskatchewan are picking up, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s the reason why I think that they are skeptical of the 
NDP’s ability to manage . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . I 
didn’t hear what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to move Saskatchewan forward. 
We’ll continue to try and make sure that this budget doesn’t 
have and budgets in the future don’t have tax increases. We’ll 
control spending here in this province, Mr. Speaker. We will do 
infrastructure investments, because we think it’s very, very 
important in Saskatchewan. We’ll continue to work on job 
creation here in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
You know, and it’s unfortunate. In the news today we see a 
company that is laying off here in Saskatchewan. And you 
know, my heart goes out to the families that are in that 
situation, Mr. Speaker, and we will be doing everything we can 
as a government to try and ensure that as quickly as possible 
they’re integrated back into the economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would say to those families, there’s some hope out there, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s hope in the very fact that we have the 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and as a 
result of that there should be a good opportunity for them to be 
relocated into another job or move directly into another job in 
whichever location they happen to be in, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s important, I think, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be doing 
everything we can to assist in that. 
 
And at the same time we see a company laying off, we on the 
other hand see a company like Mosaic making a $1.7 billion 
investment here in Saskatchewan. So obviously there’ll be some 
need for people to take up the job challenges that will be, job 
opportunities that will be there as well here in Saskatchewan. I 
think we’ll be seeing some more significant announcements in 

terms of employment opportunities over the next number of 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan as well. And we are 
certainly looking forward to that as well. 
 
You know, on saskjobs.ca, there’s about 10,000 jobs on that 
website as of this morning I understand. And so there’s a good 
opportunity for people that are challenged by layoffs these days 
to be able to find opportunities here in Saskatchewan as well. 
So we’ll be certainly doing everything that we can to assist in 
that regard, Mr. Speaker, with that going forward. We’re 
encouraged as well that when we’re speaking to companies here 
in Saskatchewan, they are seeing the . . . Even though they’re 
seeing revenues drop in Saskatchewan, they’re also seeing, and 
we are seeing continued investment in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s a very, very positive sign for any economy, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think as a result of balanced budgets, it certainly helps to 
do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite will stand in their 
place day after day after day and say we should spend more, 
and then later on in question period they will say we should 
save more, I think it’s those kinds of things that are making 
people wonder about the ability of the opposition to present 
themselves as a credible opposition and a credible 
government-in-waiting, shall we say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will, before a very, very short period of time, perhaps as 
early as this fall, be moving into an election time frame, Mr. 
Speaker. Depending on what happens with the federal election, 
we could see a provincial election as early as November of this 
year. Now I think everybody is kind of suspecting that the 
federal government will likely go with an election in October 
sometime, so we’ll be likely moving on to the next time frame. 
And I think that’s important because I think it gives the Leader 
of the Opposition ample time to present a plan for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because it’s not just simply about opposing 
what you’re doing over there, members of the opposition. It’s 
just simply not about opposing. It’s presenting alternatives. 
What would you do under the circumstance? What would you 
do in Saskatchewan if you had the opportunity to present the 
budget, as my honourable friend has presented here just a week 
ago? What would you have done different? 
 
Well you know, when I listen to the Leader of the Opposition, 
he says he would spend more. I think he probably is genuine 
with respect to that, because after all, in the last election he 
authored the campaign platform for them. There was about $5 
billion worth of spending in that. I assume that’s what he would 
do with respect to the budget here in Saskatchewan if he had the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. So I think that that’s what we will be 
looking forward to seeing from the members opposite, from the 
Leader of the Opposition, is a big spending budget proposal 
coming forward from them in the next election campaign. 
 
And then it will be up to the people of Saskatchewan to judge. 
Do they want a government that believes in fiscal 
responsibility? Do they want a government that continues to 
build infrastructure in this province? Do they want a 
government that continues to seek opportunities for the people 
of Saskatchewan? Do they want a government that continues to 
see spending in terms of hospitals, in terms of schools, in terms 
of highways in Saskatchewan? Or do they want $5 billion worth 
of deficits from the members opposite? 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6765 

Mr. Speaker, I think it will be an interesting campaign when it 
takes place, Mr. Speaker, because I think those are going to be 
the parameters of what the next election will be all about, Mr. 
Speaker. Are you going to continue to try and attract and keep 
and retain the young people here in Saskatchewan, or are you 
going to continue to try and drive them out of Saskatchewan as 
we saw year after year, decade after decade, under the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think all of us have had, as members of the legislature, 
opportunities to attend graduation ceremonies. And I’ve 
attended many of them over my years in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, various communities in my constituency, and had the 
opportunity to meet many, many graduates. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, it wasn’t all that many years ago, about 10 years ago, 
every time you talked to young students they were saying they 
couldn’t wait to get out of Saskatchewan. They couldn’t wait to 
seek opportunities elsewhere. Their parents had given them 
luggage and now off they were going to Calgary or Edmonton 
or Vancouver or elsewhere to seek those opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And now it’s so incredibly good to see the kind of difference 
that we see in Saskatchewan these days, Mr. Speaker, where we 
see young people staying in Saskatchewan, believing that 
there’s opportunity here in Saskatchewan. And time after time 
after time, they’re joining their friends here in Saskatchewan 
and making opportunities for themselves. And now we’re 
seeing a province that is growing in terms of population, Mr. 
Speaker, a population that has reached record levels under this 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, we’re very, very 
encouraged by that, Mr. Speaker, to see that kind of 
development happening in Saskatchewan where the greatest 
population increase — we should all be very, very thankful of 
that, Mr. Speaker — the greatest population increase in 
Saskatchewan has been under this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why we see communities growing in leaps and bounds in 
Saskatchewan. That’s why we see new neighbourhoods 
popping up all over Saskatchewan. That’s why we see housing 
starts at very high levels, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan. 
And it’s great for our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the choice will be clear: do you want more 
of what you’ve seen from this government in terms of moving 
Saskatchewan forward or do you want to go back to the dark 
old days of the NDP, Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
precisely the reason why I will not be supporting the 
amendment and wholeheartedly supporting this budget. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
an honour to be able to stand in this House and support the 
budget that was brought down by the Finance minister just a 
week ago today. 
 
There’s a few thanks that I would like to express, and mostly to 
my constituents for the faith that they have put in me as their 
elected official. I’d like to extend a thank you to my 
constituency assistants, Judy Hatfield and Rosalie Boots, who 

do a fantastic job of handling all the casework that comes in 
there. Also my family, and our families are very important as 
we go into this business. And, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . We say 
a little prayer as we start the proceedings every day but I think 
we should take a minute to just thank God for the opportunity 
he has given us with the resources in this province and say his 
praise as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is optimism in this province. This budget 
affirms the optimism we have in support of citizens, in support 
of families and businesses, our seniors, our children, and those 
with disabilities. This budget is an investment in infrastructure 
to keep this province moving forward. It is a balanced budget 
with no tax increases and it will keep Saskatchewan going 
strong — investing in people, investing in infrastructure, 
controlling spending, and training for job creation, with no tax 
increases and being a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a great contrast between the Saskatchewan 
Party government that we see today in this province and the 
former NDP that was dysfunctional for a long time. You see, 
government needs to be there to create an atmosphere for 
growth, an atmosphere that will attract investment and attract 
people, and people will create products and provide services 
which in turn support government through taxation while 
employing programs to assist and look after the people that 
need their services. 
 
You know, it really isn’t a funny business, but I was taken 
aback when I seen the humorous attempt of the opposition, the 
member from Rosemont, as he cut out the soles of shoes to 
make some kind of point with the government. I realize, Mr. 
Speaker, it was only a pair of shoes, but the very uncaring 
attitude that he had in destroying something to try and make a 
point, suffice it was a lack of respect. Like I said, it was only a 
pair of shoes, but cutting out the soles of shoes really 
epitomizes what that government did for the people of 
Saskatchewan for years, just really cutting to the souls of 
people, keeping the province poor and somewhat misinformed 
so that they could hold on to power. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t work anymore in this province. 
 
The NDP philosophy is that government tax the people and they 
invest into businesses and run it by government, virtually 
discouraging any kind of investment. And that was a story that 
was very dysfunctional — the programming of the NDP — and 
cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan very dearly while private 
enterprise and private investment moved out of the province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as they move out, they take their people with 
them, their workers. They take their investment, the workers, 
and their families. So all that moves out of the province, and 
there’s a reluctance to move anything back in. 
 
We look through the history of the socialist thinking that cost 
taxpayers millions and millions of dollars and forced citizens 
out of the province. In their 16 years, the NDP increased taxes 
17 times trying to justify that ill-thought-out program of taking 
over a business and establishing industry. Businesses like 
SaskOil, how can they compete with Exxon and Shell and some 
of these bigger companies, costing the people thousands of . . . 
millions of dollars in doing it? Having the land bank so the 
government can buy the land, how can the private, small farmer 
compete with the government in that respect? 



6766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

Mismanagement, waste, over-taxation and misleading 
principles and, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats covered a lot of the investments they made in 
Uganda and the US [United States] and Australia with the 
potato business. They even owned a pig farm at one time. Mr. 
Speaker, the over-taxation and the misleading principles of the 
NDP were just terrible. 
 
I had occasion . . . And I think the member from Melfort quoted 
Winston Churchill at one point saying — and I would like to 
quote him as well — saying, “Socialism is a philosophy of 
failure, the creed of ignorance, and the gospel of envy. Its 
inherent virtue is the equal sharing of misery.” I think Margaret 
Thatcher was a little bit nicer to him and says, “The problem 
with socialism is that you eventually run out of [spending] other 
people’s money.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has 
worked hard for the past seven years to see this province in 
considerable growth in almost every sector, leading the nation 
in a lot of economic growth and providing for its citizens. And 
the forecast for Saskatchewan is to keep that economy strong. 
This government and this budget is presented to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. It will do that by keeping taxes low, 
investing in people, investing in infrastructure, controlling 
operating spending, and creating incentives for new jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has delivered the largest tax cuts 
in Saskatchewan history, which will assist our citizens as well 
as attract investment into our province. This budget continues 
building the province and providing care for our citizens with 
no tax increases. This budget is keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
This budget invests in advanced education with $46.6 million of 
infrastructure to help ensure Saskatchewan post-secondary 
institutes continue to meet the challenges of growth and 
accommodate the needs of students. This is a 43 per cent 
increase over last year. We’re keeping the graduate retention 
plan which remains at $20,000, now a tax credit expanded over 
10 years. We have the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 
going to post-secondary students that are going into 
post-secondary education and the advantage grant for education 
savings for parents helping to save for their children’s 
education. 
 
To keep Saskatchewan strong, we must continue to invest in 
infrastructure that will support growth. This budget continues to 
invest in health facilities like the Moose Jaw Hospital that the 
NDP refused to consider. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move a little bit ahead here and talk a 
little bit about some of the stuff that is happening in Moose Jaw 
that this government is instrumental in helping. First and 
foremost of course is the income tax cuts and the tax cuts in 
general. The income tax is indexed for saving Saskatchewan 
people $10.6 million, and that includes every citizen in 
Saskatchewan, including the good people in Moose Jaw. We’ve 
seen lower taxes, lower property tax as well as lower income 
tax, lower corporate taxes. 
 
We’ve seen great investment in Moose Jaw in social housing. 
Ninety-six social housing units were announced in 2013, and 
many families have moved into these units as these units are 

completed and will continue to do so as construction is set to be 
completed this summer. 
 
There are 184 daycare spaces that were established in Moose 
Jaw since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to the no tax increase, this budget contains no 
reduction in the revenue sharing with the municipalities. 
Municipal sharing has provided an increase of $8.3 million to 
provincial municipalities. This year, Moose Jaw will receive 
$7.1 million. That’s an increase over last year and more than 
double the $2.8 million that was received by the government in 
2007. So going from 2.8 to 7.1 in seven years, Mr. Speaker, that 
was good for our city. Mayor Higgins is very complimentary 
for the revenue sharing to remain as it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on the hospital, and 
in doing that, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring the attention of 
something that was in the newspaper that was a quote from the 
Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, in this quote he said, 
particularly about the member from Moose Jaw North and 
named me in the statement . . . And the Times-Herald actually 
did quote it in their article. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s another case 
of the members opposite saying something, and we on this side 
have to correct them. Mr. Speaker, there was no truth in what he 
said about the member from Moose Jaw North. In the article, he 
said that the member from Moose Jaw North does not care 
about the people in this constituency. That needs to be 
corrected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Hospital, back in the 1990s, there 
was a group of people that wanted to build a new hospital. They 
did the studies. They did the feasible studies and looked at the 
need, and they came with a plan. At least what they could do, 
Mr. Speaker, was to have the thing that they had to ask for at 
least: a simple addition, a new wing put on there. They did all 
of the studies in that, Mr. Speaker, and when it came down to it, 
the government of the day, the NDP government, said they 
couldn’t do it. At that time, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw was 
served by two cabinet ministers of the NDP, two cabinet 
ministers, and the premier himself was from Moose Jaw. My 
comments at that time were that we are building a hospital. 
 
I found the . . . Here’s the quote from the Times-Herald, and it 
says, and I quote, “Broten says his questions received 
dismissive answers from the Sask. Party and MLA for Moose 
Jaw North, Warren Michelson, who allegedly ‘heckled him’ 
and claimed the hyperbaric chamber ‘wasn’t a big deal.’” Mr. 
Speaker, that needs to be corrected. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition should look at the history 
of the Moose Jaw Hospital and say that their government did 
not do it. My heckling to him at the time was simply, that we 
built the hospital. We built it, Mr. Speaker. That government 
under that premier or the premier at that time wouldn’t even 
offer a paint job to the Moose Jaw Hospital. But since then, 
under this government, we’ve improved the hospital facilities 
by building a hospital in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6767 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you today in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, some 
community leaders from the great northern village of 
Pinehouse. We have in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mayor Mike 
Natomagan and councillors, Greg Ross and Conrad Misponus. 
Also with them is Alex Ross who is the supervisor of operations 
for Pinehouse Business North; Garrett Schmidt, engineer and 
advisor for Pinehouse Business North; and Glen McCallum, the 
head of social development in Pinehouse. 
 
They’re in town today for a number of meetings, Mr. Speaker, 
including one later this afternoon that’ll involve the Minister for 
Rural and Remote Health, the Minister of Education, and 
myself. I’m looking forward to having a chance to chat with the 
folks at that meeting and to have a visit afterwards. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please give 
them a warm welcome to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will conclude my comments on the budget speech. The 2015 
budget supports the people of Saskatchewan. It really does. It 
supports Saskatchewan infrastructure. It provides our citizens 
and encourages investment in our province. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget supports growth and it’s keeping Saskatchewan strong. I 
will not be supporting the amendment, but I certainly am in 
favour of the budget. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
once again to be able to wade into the budget debate. I believe 
this is my fifth occasion, Mr. Speaker, and it is always a 
privilege to provide the opposition’s take on the budget and a 
little bit of analysis from our perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As is customary, I have a few thank yous. Actually I have a 
birthday wish. It is my oldest daughter Hennessey’s 17th 

birthday today. This time 17 years ago, I was actually on the 
cusp of becoming a mom and an activist. It really was the birth 
of Hennessey that ignited the spark for activism for me. So 
thank you to Hennessey for that, and I hope that the things that 
I’ve done up till now will make things better for Hennessey, for 
Ophelia, and for all other kids going forward, Mr. Speaker. So 
happy birthday to Hennessey. I’m sorry that I’m not there for 
birthday cake tonight, but we will celebrate on Friday night. 
 
As well, I only have about 20 minutes, Mr. Speaker, and as you 
can see by my desk, I have many, many things to say. I will 
keep the thank yous short though. I want to thank my 
constituency assistants Vanessa and Judy who serve the people 
of Saskatoon Riversdale incredibly well. The staff in our caucus 
office are amazing. They put in long hours. They work hard and 
try to really support us to bring the issues forward that people 
are bringing to us, Mr. Speaker. All the legislative staff, 
everybody from the cafeteria to the library to the security 
throughout the building, the legislative staff, the committees 
branch . . . I’ve had the pleasure of being the PAC [Public 
Accounts Committee] Chair now for a year and a half, and I’m 
grateful for the support the committees branch offers us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are no shortage of people to thank. I feel like I’m up at 
the Academy Awards, Mr. Speaker. As least you won’t play the 
music. At least I don’t think you will. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Anyway I also would like to thank my family, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
keep this part fairly short. There are many people who make 
this possible for me to be able to serve the people of Saskatoon 
Riversdale. My mom and dad who I talk about an awful lot in 
here, 82 years old. They’re both 82. They live just down the 
street from me and provide a huge amount of support to me and 
to my children. Ophelia walks to Grandma and Grandpa’s every 
day after school, and Hennessey during session will make her 
way over to Grandma and Grandpa’s for supper as well. My 
sister, Michelle, is a huge support, she and her husband, John. 
Blair, Ophelia’s dad, and Darren, Hennessey’s dad, I appreciate 
all that they do to make sure that our kids are good.  
 
A whole host of people, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’m sure I’m 
missing someone, but I want to get to the budget debate. So if 
anybody feels like they’re off the list, just read previous budget 
and Throne speech thank yous. I think that that would probably 
cover it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do have one point that I’d like to address very quickly here. 
Last night, pertaining to the point of order on which you ruled 
today, Mr. Speaker, last night there was an opportunity . . . One 
of the members, the member from Estevan had made some 
comments pertaining to a previous speech that I had made on 
November 4th, 2013 about an incredibly sensitive topic in my 
life, my nephew’s passing, Mr. Speaker. And in the member’s 
speech yesterday she said that I had heckled her . . . or had not 
heckled her. She had said that I stopped my speech and called 
her out and said that she was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 



6768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe I 
hear the member opposite commenting on a ruling that the 
Speaker made earlier today, which of course is not allowed. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve been paying attention to what the 
member has been saying. She has referred to the point of order 
as the term “point of order,” and I wish to allow her to proceed 
somewhat further. She hasn’t questioned the point of order. I 
want to get an understanding of where she’s going with this. 
The point of order is not well taken. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I did appreciate 
. . . I just want to put on the record that there are many things 
that get said in this House and it’s important that what we say is 
. . . I’m just trying think of a parliamentary term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My point is, I just would like to point out to the members 
opposite that they should, before they start clapping like trained 
seals and say things like despicable, Mr. Speaker . . . I was 
referred to as despicable last night by the member from 
Martensville. I was told that I should apologize because the 
member from Estevan was heckling me, Mr. Speaker, and I 
didn’t, I did not respond. I would advise the members opposite 
to take a look, to take a look at the November 4th, 2013 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The point of order was raised last night 
regarding the comments that were possibly made on November 
4th, that were made last night. The ruling has been made. I 
would ask that the member move on and carry on her debate. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the things 
that I would like to talk about is mental health in this budget 
speech. And this pertains to the fact that this government, with 
great fanfare about almost two years ago, announced that they 
were going to have a review of mental health services in 
Saskatchewan. It took them a year and a half, Mr. Speaker, to 
produce a report, which they announced relatively quietly 
actually this fall, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that they at some 
point bragged about the number of people who had participated. 
Thousands and thousands of people, stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, 
people who have experienced mental health challenges 
participated — the government was very proud about the 
numbers of people who participated in this review. 
 
So this fall we come and see, we have the Working Together for 
Change: A 10-Year Mental Health and Addictions Action Plan 
for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Did you hear the word mental 
health at all in this provincial budget, Mr. Speaker? Not a single 
word, total silence on mental health and addictions, Mr. 
Speaker. So we have a mental health and addictions plan, an 
action plan with no action, Mr. Speaker. That is reprehensible. 
This is an issue of life and death for many people. 
 
People in Saskatchewan, one in five people in Saskatchewan 
are living with mental health challenges, Mr. Speaker. So the 
number in here, we think about all of us in this Chamber and 
think of who in our lives is impacted, Mr. Speaker. Not a single 
thing in the budget. So why, why was there not a single mention 
of mental health and addictions in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
because we sure have a long way to go in this regard. Not a 
single word. Speaking to stakeholders? 

Since that budget, Mr. Speaker, we look at the Saskatoon 
Health Region; 4.1 per cent of that total budget is on mental 
health. That is on the low end in Saskatchewan. So the largest 
health region in Saskatchewan only has the opportunity to 
spend about 4.1 per cent of its budget on mental health, Mr. 
Speaker. The national average is about 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We think about housing. That’s one of the biggest challenges. 
There were many recommendations out of the mental health 
and addictions action plan, Mr. Speaker. There were many, 
many recommendations out of this action plan. One of them:  
 

5.1 Enhance supportive housing options available in the 
community and ensure appropriate intensive team-based 
supports accompany their development. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that goes hand in hand actually with documents 
from several years ago that this government was part and parcel 
of putting together, Charting a New Course for Mental Health’s 
Most Vulnerable, A Provincial Approach to Replace 
Saskatchewan Hospital and Address Complex Needs Care. Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about complex needs, we’re talking 
about step-down beds, supportive housing beds. It’s great that 
the government is replacing the North Battleford hospital. That 
is long overdue, but that is only a small fraction of real support 
for people who have mental health needs. 
 
We need to be able to support people in the community when 
they leave a facility like the North Battleford hospital, or when 
they leave a facility like the Dubé Centre, Mr. Speaker. Those 
are incredibly important things, putting in place supportive 
housing. So you leave after six weeks, the Dubé Centre, and 
perhaps you don’t have family supports. You end up on the 
street, Mr. Speaker. Many of, a high percentage of the people 
who are living on the street in Saskatchewan and across Canada 
are people who are suffering from mental health and addictions 
issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You would think at a time when you’ve got champions like 
Clara Hughes and others who are really trying to raise the issue 
of mental health and decrease the stigma and have mental health 
treated like any other illness . . . If I had cancer, Mr. Speaker, 
people would rally around me, or many other illnesses, physical 
illnesses that you can see and get behind. But, Mr. Speaker, 
when someone has mental illness, we completely shut the door 
on them. There’s huge stigma and not the supports. And this 
government has failed the people of Saskatchewan by not 
addressing mental health. We have an action plan with no 
action, and that is completely reprehensible. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6769 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join my colleague the minister in welcoming the northern 
guests from the northern community of Pinehouse. I want to 
welcome of course Mayor Mike, and Conrad Misponas, and of 
course Greg Ross with his son Alex, and Glen, and their 
engineer friend. I just want to point out these are very exciting 
leaders for a very promising, exciting community. And I just 
wanted to take the opportunity, and I didn’t want to interrupt up 
my colleague because her speech was going so well, but I 
wanted to take the opportunity before they leave the Assembly 
to welcome them to their Assembly and hope that their meeting 
with the government was productive and certainly fruitful. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a piece of 
advice actually that I will pass on from John Black, actually 
from a piece of wall walk advice. It says, Mr. Speaker, stop 
admiring the problem and fix it. I think that that speaks volumes 
to this government’s approach to seniors’ care here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And actually I would take it a step back. This government isn’t 
only just admiring the problem, they are neglecting to, or 
unwilling to, admit that we have real issues in our seniors’ care 
homes here, Mr. Speaker, mostly due to short-staffing. We have 
incredible staff who work in our long-term care facilities here in 
Saskatchewan, but when you’re run off your feet and can’t 
provide proper staffing or proper services to people, it’s an 
incredibly stressful experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the government continues to ignore the core essence of the 
seniors’ care crisis, which is a lack of staff in our long-term care 
facilities. The government has its own CEO report which it was 
dragged kicking and screaming to enter into. This time two 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, the government was saying — despite 
the fact we were raising these issues and people from the 
community were raising these issues — they were saying, 
nothing to see here. They were finally goaded and felt like they 
finally had to do something. And they embarked upon a CEO 
tour, Mr. Speaker, which highlighted story after story across the 
province, in large measure due to understaffing, where call bells 
were going unanswered, people were left on toilets, continent 
people were having to go to the washroom in their pants, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

So the government has its CEO tour, and then they ask for, they 
say they’ve got an Urgent Issues Action Fund. Just a 
drop-in-the-bucket approach, Mr. Speaker. This government 
received hundreds of pages of urgent issues from health regions 
across the province. They got the first iteration and then asked 
the health regions to scale it back. We can talk about Saskatoon 
Health Region who identified needing 450 continuing care aids 
to be able to provide the service in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
They only asked for 38 and they only received 19, Mr. Speaker. 
That is a far cry from meeting the needs in long-term care. 
 
We can think about Lois Rein yesterday, Margaret Warholm, 
Art Healey, Irene Hohne; the list gets longer and longer. We 
have the Ombudsman looking into long-term care, and she’s 
identified that many of the complaints that she’s received have 
to do with short-staffing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are measures in this budget, I think that are positive 
when it comes to supporting seniors. I think about my own 
parents who are 82, and home care at some point will be 
something that I think will be beneficial for them. But I would 
argue that that’s tinkering around the edges. Yes, we need to 
keep our seniors out of long-term care; long-term care is mostly 
for the frail elderly in which most people won’t be, Mr. 
Speaker. But the fact of the matter is you still have to staff the 
long-term care facilities that you have today for those living in 
them. So you can’t say, oh well we’re just going to keep people 
out of long-term care, and then ignore the folks who are in 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have staffing ratios, I’m thinking of one centre in rural 
Saskatchewan, at night, Mr. Speaker, two CCAs [continuing 
care assistant] for 55 residents, Mr. Speaker. Many occasions 
you have to do two-person lifts. So how, if there are multiple 
issues going on for 55 people, do you meet their needs in a 
timely fashion, Mr. Speaker? During the day when people are 
up and about and more mobile, 1 to 11 in this particular facility. 
Those are not unusual staff ratios, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had some folks from the Premier’s own constituency here. 
Three people, Mr. Speaker, last week, coming to tell us about 
their concerns around short-staffing. And the minister got up 
and said, oh well the staffing has increased for this particular 
model of care. Well it sure as heck better have increased, Mr. 
Speaker. Those people aren’t just CCAs. They’re doing the 
cooking, the cleaning, all the personal care. But families 
identified that those needs were still not being met, Mr. 
Speaker. So this government is tinkering around the edges. 
There are positive things that will support some seniors when it 
comes to long-term care, but this government, when it comes to 
the seniors’ care crisis in long-term care, could only find $1 
million, Mr. Speaker, which I think is unacceptable. 
 
We can talk a little bit about families, Mr. Speaker. I think 
about the Saskatchewan employment supplement. And one 
thing that’s tied to the employment supplement that we haven’t 
heard, Mr. Speaker, are the family health benefits. I find it 
interesting in the budget documents that they actually say the 
family health benefits are going up this year, despite pulling 
back to peeling off people from the employment supplement. 
So the whole idea of the employment supplement, Mr. Speaker, 
is to provide supports to low-income earners. It was all about 
addressing that welfare wall, Mr. Speaker, to make it more 



6770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

productive or more affordable for people to be able to be 
employed because there was a time where, when you leave 
social assistance and take a low-paying job, Mr. Speaker, you 
lose all your benefits. So for many people who have profound 
health issues, this was a positive program. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The employment supplement isn’t necessarily tons of money in 
people’s pockets, but it was a little something. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can speak from experience. When I was a single 
mother in — it’s many years now; 14 years, Mr. Speaker — I 
received the employment supplement. And I can tell you that I 
counted on that money every month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the other piece that’s absolutely critical is the family health 
benefits. I remember two years ago I had a family, she was a 
day home provider. He was a custodian, I believe, at the school 
board. He got a small raise, like a $30-a-month raise, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’d been bumped off the employment 
supplement. They had four children, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
because this government hasn’t raised the threshold for the 
employment supplement since 2008. So that’s a problem, Mr. 
Speaker. So they were disappointed about losing the 
employment supplement, but they were most disappointed 
about losing the health benefits, the family health benefits. The 
father was diabetic, Mr. Speaker. The mother had health issues. 
 
And you might want to know that some of the benefits for 
children are most dental services, eye exams once a year, basic 
eye glasses, emergency ambulance — so this government is 
cutting back on ambulance for children, Mr. Speaker — basic 
medical supplies, 12 chiropractic services per year, and 
prescription drugs in the Saskatchewan formulary. So that is for 
children, but for parents or legal guardians, we’re covered up to 
12 chiropractic services, an eye exam every two years, drug 
coverage with $100 semi-annual family deductible, and 35 per 
cent consumer co-payments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this $1 million mean-spirited hit has a far 
greater impact than the $1 million, Mr. Speaker. So those 
children, or those parents who have children over 12 will take a 
financial hit, Mr. Speaker, and these are the lowest earning 
people in Saskatchewan. These are people making minimum 
wage, Mr. Speaker, and a little bit more who are already 
struggling. That is completely unacceptable. 
 
When we talk about families, we can talk a little bit about child 
care. It was interesting, I heard the Minister for Highways last 
night heckling. She actually wasn’t heckling. She said on her 
feet, she was talking about the member from Rosemont, saying 
that the member from Rosemont didn’t have all his information 
correct when there weren’t new child care spaces, but where in 
the heck would we think that, Mr. Speaker? In the minister’s 
own comments, where he says . . . This is from the minister’s 
message, Mr. Speaker: “The 2015-16 budget will see a pause in 
the expansion of both child care spaces and Pre-K programs, 
due to the fiscal constraints of this budget.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so for the member from Martensville, she needs to 
maybe look at some of the information in her own budget 
document, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this was a broken promise. 
This government has committed in the last election to 500 new 

child care spaces every year for four years, so putting these 500 
spaces on hold is a problem unto itself, Mr. Speaker. But there’s 
more with the child care issue, Mr. Speaker. There is much 
more. 
 
Talking to child cares across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they 
identify that new spaces are important, but the existing spaces 
need to be funded well, Mr. Speaker. This government has not 
done that. They’ve directed money to the front lines which 
turned out to be, Mr. Speaker, about 6 cents an hour, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s to support employee wages, but that does 
nothing to support the increasing operating costs for child cares, 
Mr. Speaker, for increased rent, increased utility, the 
opportunity to enhance child care facilities, to paint facilities, 
Mr. Speaker, all those kinds of things. 
 
As well the minister talks about the number of spaces that are 
going to be opened at the end of this fiscal year, and I look 
forward to asking him a bit further in estimates about that 
because I’m not entirely sure that the number of 14,400 will in 
fact be open spaces or just committed spaces, Mr. Speaker. So I 
look forward to digging down a little bit deeper in that. But 
another issue is around the subsidy, Mr. Speaker. The turning 
point, the amount that a family can earn before they lose the 
maximum subsidy, has not changed since 1983, Mr. Speaker. 
We have people who are earning not much over minimum wage 
who aren’t eligible for the full subsidy, Mr. Speaker. That is not 
acceptable. I have many more things to cover here, Mr. 
Speaker, and a limited amount of time, so I look forward to 
digging down a little bit deeper in child care, but that is an issue 
where I think the government is letting down people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We can talk about the changes to the seniors’ drug plan. It’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. In 2012, in March, you know what the 
then Health minister also said? This is about sustainability of 
the program. And they changed the deductible from 15 . . . or 
the cost of the prescriptions from 15 to $20. I think this 
government, Mr. Speaker, is going to make programs 
sustainable right to their non-existence, is this government’s 
end goal. This government’s ability to manage programs, and 
manage a budget for that matter, is entirely questionable. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about health capital. We talked about 
that in question period today. It took several freedom of 
information requests, me asking the minister in estimates some 
very detailed questions, and then still two months later until we 
finally got the VFA report. 
 
This government has 1.3 per cent, is spending 1.3 per cent of 
what is actually needed in infrastructure, health infrastructure 
maintenance, Mr. Speaker. At this rate, Mr. Speaker, it’ll take 
80 years for this government to deal with its $2.2 billion 
infrastructure deficit. 
 
In the meantime, we’ve got health care facilities with mesh 
holding them up from falling down. We’ve got cancelled 
surgeries because HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air 
conditioning] systems aren’t working. We’ve got women 
delivering babies with no hot water present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no shortage of this government having its priorities all 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. $40 million and the tab kept running, Mr. 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6771 

Speaker, for John Black and the continued approach to his style 
of lean, Mr. Speaker. There’s no shortage of money for 
consultants, Mr. Speaker. This is about priorities, and this 
government’s priorities are all mixed up. With that, I will be 
supporting the amendments and will not be supporting the 
budget speech. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly an honour to enter into the debate on this budget, a 
budget that required some difficult choices. As the Finance 
minister had said, that was one of the toughest budgets our 
government had to face. I believe we came up with some very 
wise choices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand there’s a number of other members that would like 
to speak this afternoon so I will try and keep my comments 
fairly brief. I would simply like to acknowledge the good work 
of my constituency staff and say a thank you to my family for 
all the years they’ve supported me in this, enabled me to do 
this. 
 
As I have said many times before and members would know, 
we have a couple of granddaughters. That keeps our life 
interesting. I just thought I would mention that the oldest 
granddaughter who is in grade 12 is currently in Ottawa on the 
Forum for Young Canadians. She’ll be coming back on Friday 
and we certainly look forward hearing her experiences. The 
youngest granddaughter and her grandmother, my wife 
Marlene, are currently on their way to the local vet clinic to take 
our old dog who requires stitches. So they’re busy, Mr. 
Speaker. But they seem to manage quite well without me, Mr. 
Speaker, which is . . . Sometimes I wonder whether perhaps 
they’re managing too well. 
 
As far as constituency issues, Mr. Speaker, in my reply to the 
Throne Speech I had outlined the challenges that we had in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood with the mid-summer flooding. And I 
received my first phone call yesterday from a constituent raising 
an issue with a flooded municipal road that leads to the dairy 
farm. So we’re working with the . . . There’s a highways issue 
there and we’re working with that to hopefully get that 
resolved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I had said, this budget, as many other members have said, 
with the decline in oil revenues and the impacts that that has 
had, the price of oil being less than half of what it was a year 
ago, certainly created some challenges. And so some difficult 
decisions needed to be made, and they were made, Mr. Speaker, 
and I believe they were the correct decisions to be made. One of 
the things that governments in the past have done and this 
government could have done is simply just said, look we’re not 
. . . We’re going to cut back on . . . I’m wondering if those 
members would like to enter into the debate, Mr. Speaker. I 
think some already have and they’ll have their chance. 
 
As I was going to say, you know, we could have as a 
government just said, look we’re going to just throttle back 
spending completely and not continue to build the necessary 
and much needed infrastructure, and put that off and pushed it 
off into the future and just made do. Well I don’t believe that 

would have been a wise decision, Mr. Speaker. So as the 
Minister of Finance said, we’re going to continue to build. And 
I believe that history will show that that was a wise choice. 
 
But having said all of that, there were some difficult decisions. 
The member opposite raised the seniors’ drug plan, and that the 
eligibility for the seniors’ drug plan was some $80,000 of 
annual income and we lowered it to $65,000, Mr. Speaker. The 
figure that seniors need to look at if they are looking at their tax 
return is line 236, which is their net income figure. So it’s not 
the gross figure, it’s not the gross total income. There are a 
number of deductions, some of which may apply to seniors, and 
it’s the net income figure. 
 
And I’d like to thank the member from Melville-Saltcoats for 
getting me a copy of this letter that he received from Sask 
Health dealing with the seniors’ drug plan. I would’ve used my 
own, but I’m not quite old enough to get one of those. But 
seniors, towards the end of the year, get a letter from Sask 
Health outlining whether they are eligible for the seniors’ drug 
plan or not. And in the letter received in last October, the figure 
was given of $80,256 and now that figure is going to be 
adjusted to about $65,500. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, you know, if you look at the figures, 
really a senior with a net income of over $65,000, you know, 
should in most cases not have a great deal of difficulty looking 
after their drug costs because, Mr. Speaker, also seniors get a 
letter before the end of the year — and I’m looking at one dated 
November the 1st — which indicates that if seniors have 
exceptionally high drug costs, there is a special support 
program that kicks in. So after a certain number of dollars spent 
on prescription drugs, it is reduced so where they only pay 35 
per cent of the total costs. So there are measures in place to help 
seniors who have exceptionally high drug costs. Over and 
above that, I believe there’s exceptional drugs which seniors 
and other people can qualify, so it’s not all doom and gloom. 
 
One of the other decisions that was made, Mr. Speaker, is there 
was a change to the eligibility for the active families benefit, the 
tax credit that families could receive for some of the activities 
that their children are involved in, whether it be hockey or 
piano lessons or dance lessons and so on. That program was 
never income tested in the past, but this year it is going to be 
income tested. 
 
I think there is a certain amount of logic and good management 
there. You know, I know of young families or families that have 
young children involved in many activities who are very 
fortunate and do very well for themselves. I know families that 
have income, family incomes of 150 to $200,000. Well I’m sure 
those families can manage to keep their children involved. 
 
So now the income testing has been put in place with a figure of 
$60,000. Families who don’t have an income of $60,000 will be 
eligible for the active families benefit this coming year, the 
same as they’ve always been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the big item in the budget that has had some discussion 
in the media and here in this House — there’s been much said 
about it, particularly in the media — is our plan to borrow $700 
million for infrastructure for capital spending. 
 



6772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

[15:30] 
 
I was interested to read an article on the editorial page by the 
Leader-Post’s political analyst or reporter. And I’ll quote from 
a March 21st article titled, “Sask government can’t rely on oil 
to pay bills.” The writer says, and I quote, “The core of what’s 
wrong with the 2015-16 budget is the unprecedented decision to 
borrow $700 million, which will help grow debt by $1.5 
billion.” Mr. Speaker, I can say that I certainly do not agree 
with that statement, Mr. Speaker. And I know I’ve heard 
members opposite mention that too. 
 
So I look at what other jurisdictions and other provinces that are 
in Canada are doing, and particularly I looked at British 
Columbia, Mr. Speaker. They brought their budget down in 
February of this year. And if you go to page 2 of their budget 
document under a heading “Capital Spending,” and I’ll quote 
from it. It says that “Taxpayer-supported infrastructure 
spending on hospitals, schools, post-secondary facilities, transit, 
and roads will total $10.7 billion over the fiscal plan period, and 
will be financed by $7.6 billion in borrowing . . .” 
 
So this is nothing new that we’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there are other people who are saying — people whose 
credentials I certainly respect — who are saying that to 
governments, not only to governments but to businesses, that in 
view of the historically low interest rates that governments and 
business should look very seriously at taking advantage and 
locking in those low interest rates, Mr. Speaker. And one such 
person is the former governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. 
David Dodge, who is currently a senior adviser with the law 
firm of Bennett Jones. Bennett Jones is a law firm that was 
founded in the early ’20s in Calgary and former Alberta premier 
Peter Lougheed was a partner in that firm, a very well-respected 
firm, and David Dodge is certainly a respected individual. 
 
And every so often he will issue, along with some of his people 
there, will issue some reports. The one that I’m referring to is 
an economic outlook paper that was issued in June of 2014. 
And I happened to hear David Dodge being interviewed about 
that report. And he was asked, why are you recommending 
governments and businesses to borrow at this point in time? 
And he started his comments — and I’m going to paraphrase, 
Mr. Speaker — he started his comments by saying, he says, you 
need to understand what I’m saying, he said. I’m a fiscal hawk, 
he said. He said, I do not advocate borrowing for operational, 
for day-to-day expenses. He says, those absolutely, that is 
absolutely the wrong way to go. He said, but what I am saying 
in view of where we are here in history and with historically 
low interest rates, that businesses and governments should be 
taking advantage of that and locking in those low interest rates 
over a long period of time because, Mr. Speaker — and if I can 
find the quote here I will read it. This is a quote from that 
interview. He says, he says, and I quote: 
 

. . . in part because governments can go out and borrow 
money for 30 to 50 years now at extraordinarily low real 
rates of interest, and the economic value of those 
investments in infrastructure over time going forward is 
certainly far greater than the extraordinarily low rate of 
interest that governments are paying right now. 

 
I think that speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker. And when you hear 

people with those kind of credentials saying those kind of 
things, I think we need to sit up and take notice. 
 
So what does our budget document say? And I’m looking at 
page 18 of the budget document, and this is where we talk about 
that borrowing. About the middle of the page on the right-hand 
column it says, “A key aspect of the borrowing plan is the debt 
repayment plan.” And that is critical, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 
going to borrow money, you’d better figure out how you’re 
going to pay for it. 
 
That’s what we are doing, Mr. Speaker. We’re setting up a 
sinking fund where every year 2 per cent of the amount owing 
will be put into that fund so that when that loan matures, the 
money will be there to repay it, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s wise 
management. Businesses do it all the time, and we are going to 
do it. I think that is absolutely the right way to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally I would just like to talk a bit about the overall budget 
process. I had the privilege to serve on treasury board this year, 
working with the Minister of Finance and other treasury board 
members. The phrase, seeing how sausage is made, comes to 
mind. It’s this long, arduous process. We were very ably helped 
in that process with the Finance officials: Deputy Minister Clare 
Isman, Associate Deputy Minister Denise Macza, and their 
analysts and all their staff. They did a tremendous job in getting 
the information that we required so that analysis could be done. 
And they would present their analysis, and treasury board made 
a recommendation to cabinet, and cabinet finalized the budget. 
 
And all of the whole process, Mr. Speaker, was led by our 
Finance minister, someone who is the member from 
Canora-Pelly, who is dedicated, who takes his work very 
seriously and has the best interests of the people of this 
province at heart, Mr. Speaker. I can only say that I certainly 
admired his leadership and fully supported him. We did 
occasionally, as the process is, we sometimes would have a 
different opinion on certain issues, but we always . . . and other 
members. And it was a very rewarding experience, Mr. 
Speaker. And we arrived at a consensus, and we arrived at this 
budget which I think history will show is a sound, wise 
direction for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I would just like to say a 
couple more words about the member from Canora-Pelly and 
tell you about the first time we met. That was back on a stormy 
winter’s evening back in 1999. That’s the time when the 
original eight were getting the Sask Party going and they were 
out looking for candidates. And prior to that, a few weeks prior 
to that, there was three seniors from Wynyard drove into our 
yard one afternoon to have coffee. They were the executive of 
. . . Sask Party executive of Last Mountain-Touchwood. And 
they came and talked to Marlene and myself and they said, well 
would you be interested in buying a membership? And we said, 
well yes, it’s not too much money. I guess we could afford it. 
We’ll buy a membership, okay, and hopefully say that would be 
the end of it and we wouldn’t hear from them for a long time. 
 
Well lo and behold, a couple of weeks, a week or so, maybe not 
even a week passed and they phoned and said, look, the party 
would really like . . . We need to have an information meeting 
and you’re part of the constituency, and would you organize 
that? I said, well we’ve done some organization with other 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6773 

activities in our area. We’re both, Marlene and myself, we’re 
very involved in community organizations. So I said, I’ll tell 
you what I’m going to do. I’m going to look for the smallest 
hall in the area. I’m going to print some posters — because 
we’d just got a new computer and a printer and so we could 
print these posters, and it looked pretty good we thought, you 
know — and we’ll put them up and we’re not doing anything 
else. We’ll phone one person; that’s the former Speaker of this 
House, Mr. Tusa. And we thought we’d at least let him know 
what’s happening. 
 
So we did that. Well the day of the . . . The meeting was 
supposed to take place at 7 o’clock. The day of that meeting 
was the only blizzard we had that winter and it just . . . I mean, 
you couldn’t see your hand in front of your face all afternoon. 
But about 6 o’clock it kind of let up, so we thought, well okay. 
Let’s go over to . . . Actually the meeting, the smallest hall in 
the area was over at Dysart so that’s where we had the meeting. 
So we drove over to Dysart. Well there was five people showed 
up — myself; my wife, Marlene; the fellow that . . . the senior 
that unlocked the hall for us; Arnold Tusa; and the member 
from Canora-Pelly. He drove out, I believe, from Regina, and I 
apologized to him. I said, look, I thought there might be at least 
10 people here. And he said, no that’s fine. So we just sat 
around and visited and had some coffee. 
 
And so I was walking out to his car and he says to me, he said, 
would you consider letting your name stand for the nomination? 
And I says, don’t be crazy. But you know, going home, we 
talked about it a bit. And a few phone calls and so on, long 
story short, here I am representing the people from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. So as I said, that was my first meeting 
with the member and I will always remember that. And I 
certainly appreciate all the hard work he’s done, and I know 
we’re all going to miss him, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the 
people of the province are going to miss him. But we certainly 
wish him . . . And he’s still going to be here, so we’ll have some 
time to wish him, give him all the best wishes in his retirement. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I won’t be 
supporting the amendment but I will be supporting the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
thank the people of Thunder Creek for the opportunity of 
allowing me the honour and the opportunity to come to work 
every day in this place, this great place where many of my 
mentors have served before me. The history in this place is 
special and it is a beautiful building. It’s probably the most 
beautiful legislative building in the country. And it’s just a great 
honour to represent the people of Thunder Creek and have the 
privilege of coming to work in this place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This political life can be difficult for families. And I want to 
talk a little bit about mine, maybe a little bit more than usual. 
We always mention our families, but you know, sometimes I 
don’t think we give them the credit we should, and I want to 
take a little more time for that today. 
 
My wife, Linda, just retired at the end of the year and so she has 
more time to come up with jobs for me to do, and that’s great. 
My daughter Stephanie, who’s the oldest of my children, just 

turned 40 on Monday, which makes me feel way older than 
that. And she and her husband, Gabe, live in Ottawa and have 
three children. My next one, Alison . . . Stephanie was a great 
basketball player when she was younger. Alison was a great 
hockey player playing for Team Canada and Cornell University. 
She lives in Ottawa as well with her husband, Sean, and their 
daughter. And my son Lee lives on the farm, and he was a 
fantastic lacrosse player and a good hockey player and still 
plays hockey — very slowly I might say. He hasn’t speeded up 
much over the years but he’s gained about 100 pounds since he 
was a teenager. But it’s still good to watch. It’s good hockey. 
And his wife, Jessie, who stays at home with their beautiful 
daughter. They make sacrifices for us in this job, Mr. Speaker, 
and I don’t think we always give them the credit that we should. 
 
My dad who . . . I have trouble talking about my family. My 
dad who just turned 100, 100 years old . . . and I better get this 
together, because he’s watching. I know he will be. And he’s a 
tough old bird; I’ll tell you that. The things he’s seen in his 
lifetime, in his 100 years, Mr. Speaker. Horses were the main 
power on farms when he was born and the main means of 
transportation. Cars, there were cars around but they were 
seasonal at best, and most people didn’t have them in 1915. But 
they were coming into prominence and my dad, because of the 
time he was born, was a great horseman all his life and has a 
way with horses. 
 
He’s seen steam locomotives turn to diesel, and he was way 
into middle age when the first man landed on the moon. And 
he’s seen the computer age, and he’s very sharp, Mr. Speaker. 
He’ll be watching this and critiquing all of our speeches, and 
he’ll have a few things to say to me the next time I visit him. 
And for his 100th birthday we gave him an iPad mini so he can 
skype with my grandchildren, his great-grandchildren, and my 
kids. And of course he can’t skype with me, Mr. Speaker, 
because I don’t know how. But he does, and I think that says 
something about that man. He’s been the greatest role model of 
my life, and I just thank him. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think about, at budget time, where Saskatchewan 
has come from in the few short years that I’ve been coming to 
this place. And I remember a Saskatchewan where people were 
leaving and young people didn’t even plan on staying here for 
the most part. They’d plan on going someplace else. The choice 
was, where? Staying just didn’t seem to be an option. You 
know, jokes were made about the place. Will the last one out 
shut off the lights? Things of that nature. We made excuses why 
we liked to live here. Our relatives and friends from other 
places would say, why do you even stay there? It’s a hopeless 
situation. It’ll never amount to anything. Everybody wants to 
leave. Why don’t you? 
 
And so we’d make excuses, but the truth is a number of us 
stayed because we love the place, you know. And I’m glad we 
did because it’s a different place now. And I remember in 2007 
at election time, I remember the way people used to feel about 
this place. We weren’t proud. We weren’t proud of the way it 
was . . . it was. There were no opportunities and people kind of 
shuffled around and hung their heads and made excuses about 
staying here. But after election day in November of 2007, you 
could feel the difference, Mr. Speaker. People walking down 



6774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

the street would walk more erectly and hold their heads up and 
they looked happier and more proud, and things started to 
change right away, Mr. Speaker. And it’s because of budgets 
like this that they did. 
 
And I’m very proud of this budget, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud 
to be associated with the Minister of Finance for so long and 
saddened that he’s announced that this is his last budget and 
he’s going to be moving on. I know the Minister of the 
Economy made a wisecrack about his poor choice in hockey 
teams, and I have to say I haven’t seen the Leafs play for years, 
but then I only watch playoff games, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is remarkable in the circumstances of 
what’s happening in the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. Revenues are 
flat. Of course costs continue to escalate for everything. We 
know that from our own personal lives. And certainly on the 
scale of a provincial budget, it’s even a bigger deal to contain 
costs. And you know, since 2007 this government has delivered 
record property tax cuts, record income tax cuts, over $5 billion 
in tax relief to Saskatchewan people altogether. And the 
members ask where the money’s gone, Mr. Speaker. That’s one 
of the . . . those are some of the places that the money’s gone, to 
tax relief for every Saskatchewan person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spending was held to a 1.2 per cent increase from 
last year: key investments in health and education and social 
services and assistance while managing operating spending, Mr. 
Speaker; changes to tax credits to ensure sustainability and 
manage costs. 
 
Even with the revenue challenges that we are experiencing this 
year, Mr. Speaker, investments, substantial investments are 
being made in infrastructure again, a new four-year 
Saskatchewan Builds capital plan: twinning and passing lane 
projects on Highways 5, 6, 7, 16, 39; interchange projects at 
Warman and Martensville; the next phase of the Regina bypass, 
Mr. Speaker; continued progress on the Swift Current long-term 
care centre; construction to begin on new schools in Regina, 
Sacred Heart and Connaught, plus nine joint-use schools around 
the province; a major renovation at Hague High School and St. 
Brieux; and the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford of 
course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget supports employment training and job creation, Mr. 
Speaker: two new growth tax incentives for job creation and 
capital investment; increasing training seats for apprenticeship, 
medical training, and adult basic education. 
 
This budget keeps Saskatchewan strong by investing in people 
through significant investments in health care including new 
investments in seniors’ care to increase choice and flexibility in 
care options and to support caregivers, Mr. Speaker; funding to 
reduce emergency room wait times and improve patient flow; 
increase supports for K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
students; increase support for people with disabilities and 
low-income seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember, while we’re talking about health care, 
I remember during the time when those members opposite were 
in charge around this place. I remember that we had the longest 
wait-lists in Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the shortest 
wait-lists for surgeries in Canada. And that’s a credit to budgets 

like this, balanced budgets, good budgets that provide benefits 
for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the 
money’s been going. 
 
This is a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, with a surplus of $107 
million. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s all I’ll say about the 
general budget. I know that we’re under time constraints 
because a number of people want to speak, but I’m very proud 
to be the Minister of Agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Agriculture in this province is our second-largest industry in 
normal times. Maybe this year it’ll be the largest because of the 
unfortunate temporary downturn in the oil and gas industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In any event, it’s extremely important to the economy of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan, all of our 
standards of living. Crop production: second-largest crop ever 
this year in the province at 30.7 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker; 
record crop production the year before at 38.4 million tonnes. 
We’re experiencing strong cattle prices after a long sort of 
downturn following the discovery of BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] in 2003. Western livestock price insurance is a 
new program that we were proud to introduce last year, Mr. 
Speaker, and it exceeded our enrolment expectations in the first 
year of the program. 
 
Realized net farm income was 2.46 billion, 30 per cent above 
the five-year average of 2008 to ’12. A record 13.9 billion in 
exports, ag exports in 2014, Mr. Speaker, our fourth 
consecutive year of record exports. We lead the nation in ag 
exports. 
 
Under the NDP in their last year in power, it wasn’t $13.9 
billion, Mr. Speaker. It was 6.4, $6.4 billion only, Mr. Speaker, 
less than half, less than half. I’ve woken up the member from 
Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, and it’s always a pleasure to hear from 
him. He doesn’t stand up very often, but he likes to make a lot 
of noise from his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, canola was our top export commodity in 2014 at 
$2.5 billion just for canola. Value-added is another area of 
opportunity in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll build on our 
strength as a primary producer and expand that, and continue to 
expand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to brag a little more about agriculture 
before I get onto the agriculture portion of the budget. We 
produce here 99 per cent of Canada’s chick peas, 95 per cent of 
Canada’s lentils, 86 per cent of Canada’s durum wheat, 83 per 
cent of Canada’s flax seed, 70 per cent of Canada’s mustard, 60 
per cent of Canada’s dried peas, 49 per cent of Canada’s canola. 
I think I better move on, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to run of time. 
 
I want to talk, I want to brag some more about agriculture, but 
this time the agriculture budget. This is a $362.4 million budget 
in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, a budget that supports a growing 
agriculture industry, and it builds on the second-largest crop 
ever, as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, at 30.7 million tonnes and 
record exports of 13.9 billion. 
 
Business risk management programs under this budget are 240 
million, Mr. Speaker: AgriStability, 47.1, up 4.4 million from 
last year; AgriInvest, 38.5 million, up 4.4 million, Mr. Speaker; 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6775 

crop insurance, 154 million this year which is down 11.1 
million because of a strong record of crop production and low 
payouts from crop insurance. And so that makes the program 
cheaper and, as a result of that, our coverage is up to $183 an 
acre on average across the province, Mr. Speaker, up from $162 
last year, and premiums down, Mr. Speaker, from $7.47 an acre 
on average last year to $7.06 an acre on average across the 
province this year. 
 
Oats, in the changes to the crop insurance program, Mr. 
Speaker, we were able to increase the base grade for oats from a 
3 CW [Canada Western] to 2 CW, which will put a lot more 
money in the pockets of oat producers around the province. And 
we added hemp as an insurable crop, Mr. Speaker. Hemp in the 
past has been a small acre crop, but two years ago we grew 
25,000 acres of hemp in Saskatchewan and this past year over 
40,000, Mr. Speaker, so it warrants crop insurance coverage. 
And we hope that this will allow hemp growers to expand their 
production even more. 
 
Unseeded acreage coverage changed this year, Mr. Speaker. 
Four coverage levels available: 50, 70, 85, and $100 per acre, 
and the unseeded premium will now be charged on all acres 
normally seeded. 
 
Agriculture research budget, Mr. Speaker, of $26.7 million, 
same as last year, includes $2 million for the Global Institute 
for Food Security. Irrigation bridges, 500,000 for that, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the third year of the program. 
 
Growing Forward 2 strategic initiatives, $71.2 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and that includes such programs as agriculture, 
research, pest control and disease surveillance, rural water 
infrastructure, farm business management, trade and market 
development, agriculture awareness, value-added business 
development. A total Growing Forward 2 commitment of $388 
million over five years remains the same as we’ve said in the 
past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m skipping over some pieces of this, Mr. Speaker, because the 
member from Athabasca is restless and I need to make time for 
other speakers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, the NDP budget day news release and 
backgrounder was all doom and gloom as usual. However they 
got the cuts to ag wrong in their backgrounder. They 
highlighted the fact that the AgriStability program delivery 
costs have gone down by $1.4 million. I don’t know if they 
proofread their news releases or not, Mr. Speaker, but this is 
good news. There’s more money available for the program and 
less for administration. This is what we were trying to do when 
the previous Ag minister brought AgriStability back to 
Saskatchewan in the first place, and we’ve succeeded in doing 
it, Mr. Speaker. Since we’ve taken over the administration of 
AgriStability and settled that office in Melville, which the 
members opposite would not even fully fund back in those days 
when they were in power, we have been able to find efficiencies 
in administration and save producers millions. 
 
Overall budget of 362.4 is the seventh-largest Ag budget ever. 
Average budget over the last eight years under this government, 
Mr. Speaker, is 395 million. Average agricultural budget over 
the last eight years of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 278 

million only. Research funding now is 96 per cent higher than 
under the NDP in the last year of their government. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I’m getting a signal from the House Leader that I’m taking a 
little too much time, so I think I’ll try to wrap up here as 
quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about making choices. Let’s take a 
look at the choices that the NDP made when they had budget 
challenges. They raised taxes 17 times, including the PST three 
times, income taxes twice, business taxes four times, and that 
doesn’t even count all the education property tax hikes. They 
stopped investing in infrastructure and closed facilities: 176 
schools, closed 1,200 long-term care beds, 52 rural hospitals, 
and the Plains hospital in Regina, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they 
dealt with tough fiscal times. 
 
This Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, took a different approach. 
He’s delivered a growth budget, a balanced budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m very proud of it, Mr. Speaker. Accordingly, I 
will be supporting the budget but not the half-baked amendment 
from the other side of the floor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 
start, I was hoping there would be more of the opposition in the 
crowd because I’m going to offer up a little bit of help near the 
end of my speech. I know I have to cut out a few things, but 
we’ll carry on. And I know that the member from Athabasca is 
paying attention finally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the 2015-16 budget is keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. This 2015-16 budget is balanced, with a 
surplus of $107 million. Overall revenue is 14.28 billion, up just 
1.2 per cent from last year. Overall spending is 14.17 billion, 
also up just 1.2 per cent from last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I continue on, I would like to thank some 
people. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, a thank you to all ministers and 
their ministries for their hard work and due diligence on this 
balanced budget. As a past treasury board member, I know the 
amount of hours put in to produce this balanced budget, and I 
thank all treasury board members for their dedication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to deliver the eighth straight balanced budget 
comes with great leadership, and this Finance minister is just 
that — great. Mr. Speaker, this Finance minister puts people 
first and our great province next. This will be the last budget by 
this Finance minister as he is retiring. I want to say that it has 
truly been an honour to work with you, and this province will 
truly miss you. Your values and credibility will serve us for 
many years to come. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my constituency 
assistants, Cheryl Hume and Maureen Paron, for their 
dedication to the constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford and their 
prompt and effective handling of all files. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population has hit an all-time 



6776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

high of 1,132,640 — pardon me, there’s going to be two more 
births here; it’ll be 42 — people after growing more than 
17,000 people last year. Mr. Speaker, all of this tells us that 
despite the challenges in the oil sector, our economy is strong 
and Saskatchewan is strong. This budget is about keeping 
Saskatchewan strong, and our government will take five key 
steps to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
One, we will keep taxes low. Our government has delivered the 
largest tax cuts in Saskatchewan’s history, and the budget 
contains no tax increases. Two, we will continue to make record 
investments in infrastructure. Three, we will control operating 
spending. Four, we will help the private sector create jobs with 
new tax incentives for job creation and increased training 
opportunities for our young people to fill those jobs. And five, 
we will balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the active families benefit, the graduate retention 
program, research and development tax credit, seniors’ drug 
plan, and Saskatchewan’s employment supplement are all being 
changed to ensure their ongoing sustainability, unlike the 
previous government who would have cut the programs or 
raised taxes to maintain them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan population grows, so does its 
infrastructure and capital needs. This budget begins a four-year, 
$5.8 billion commitment to the Saskatchewan Builds capital 
plan to construct and maintain needed infrastructure such as 
schools, health care facilities, municipal infrastructure, roads, 
bridges, and highways. Mr. Speaker, within the four-year plan, 
budget 2015-16 provides more than 1.3 billion for core 
infrastructure in the 2015-16 budget, the largest infrastructure 
allocation in Saskatchewan’s history and an increase of almost 
50 per cent from last year. This investment, Mr. Speaker, is in 
addition to $2 billion in capital investment forecast this year by 
commercial Crown corporations, largely SaskPower, SaskTel, 
and SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2015-16 capital plan also includes 256.4 
million in health care capital commitments, including 129 
million to begin site preparation and construction of the 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford and an integrated 
correctional facility, a potential P3 project as well.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2015-16 balanced budget is helping to keep 
Saskatchewan municipalities strong by providing a record 265.3 
million in municipal revenue sharing. That’s up 8.3 million or 
3.2 per cent from the 2014-15 budget, and up 138 million or 
108 per cent from the 2007-08 budget. Mr. Speaker, revenue 
sharing is based upon a formula of one point of the provincial 
sales tax. Urban revenue sharing for all cities, towns, villages, 
and resort villages will total 170.5 million in 2015-16. Revenue 
for rural municipalities, which includes organized hamlets, will 
amount to 75 million, and northern municipalities will receive 
19.8 million in revenue sharing in the upcoming fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall direct provincial support in the budget to 
municipalities totals 346.2 million. This includes 31.7 million in 
provincial support to municipal infrastructure through a number 
of programs, including 23.7 million from the Ministry of 
Highways, and infrastructure for rural roads through the 
municipal roads strategy, 7.9 million from the Ministry of 
Government Relations for support provided under the new 

Building Canada Fund and the Saskatchewan infrastructure 
growth initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also allocates 49.2 million in funding 
for municipalities from ministries, including grants for libraries, 
policing, urban parks, and other programs. Mr. Speaker, 
education property tax mill rates will not increase this year. 
However with huge demands on infrastructure and capital this 
will be watched closely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to touch a little bit on agriculture. 
It’s hard to add any more than what the minister already did, but 
agriculture in my constituency is a big part, along with the 
resource revenues. Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about what 
this budget has for agriculture. The Government of 
Saskatchewan recognizes the role a thriving, sustainable 
agricultural industry plays in the province’s economy with this 
year’s investment into agriculture program and services. The 
Ministry of Agriculture 2015-16 budget is $362.4 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2015 crop insurance program includes 
ongoing enhancements, giving producers more choice and 
flexibility. As well, crop insurance premiums are decreasing for 
producers while coverage levels on average are increasing to 
$183 per acre, up from $162 in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk just a little bit on Advanced 
Education. The 2015 budget for Advanced Education will help 
keep Saskatchewan strong by investing in post-secondary 
educational institutions and supports for students. The budget 
provides 20.2 million in direct support for First Nations and 
Métis post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, the budget also 
provides 46.6 million for infrastructure to help ensure 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions continue to meet 
the challenges of growth and accommodate the needs for 
students. This is a 43 per cent increase over 2014-15, and a 68 
per cent increase over 2007. Since 2007-08 the provincial 
government has provided 477.5 million in capital funding to 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget provides an additional 2.5 million to 
fulfill the government’s commitment for more medical training 
seats in three areas. The budget continues to fund 40 additional 
medical undergrad seats to bring the total to 100, 60 medical 
residency seats to bring the total to 120, and an additional 20 
nurse practitioner seats to bring the total up to 40. This budget 
also provides continued funding for 690 nursing training seats 
in the province. The government fulfilled its commitment to 
increase nursing education training seats by 300 in 2013. 
 
Mr. Speaker, total funding transfers to post-secondary 
institutions are 708 million in the 2015-16 budget. This includes 
operating capital and targeted program funding. Operating 
funding to technical institutes and federated colleges will see an 
increase of 2 per cent. Operating funding to the University of 
Regina, affiliated colleges, and regional colleges will increase 
by 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few things under the economy. Mr. Speaker, 
the Ministry of the Economy in 2015-16 budget also includes 
two new tax incentives for job creation and capital investments. 
The new manufacturing and processing exporter tax incentive 
will provide tax credits to eligible corporations that increase 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6777 

their number of full-time employees, as well as tax credits to 
eligible companies that increase their number of head office 
jobs. Mr. Speaker, a second new incentive will provide an 
income tax rebate to eligible primary steel producers that make 
a minimum investment of $100 million in new or expanded 
productive capacity. As these incentives only apply on new job 
creation investment, they will not impact existing government 
revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Economy’s 2015-16 budget 
has enhancements to labour programs, including a $600,000 
increase to adult basic education for a record investment of 25 
million, an increase of 62 per cent since 2007-08. The 
investment will add 200 adult basic education seats for an 
estimated total program capacity of 8,780 seats, up 2,900 seats 
from 2007-08. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition the province will nominate a record 
5,500 immigrants under Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program in 2015, including 775 nominees through a new 
provincial subcategory linked with the federal express entry 
system. The new Saskatchewan express entry subcategory was 
announced in January 2015 and will help attract skilled labour 
to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan remains 
committed to students across the province with a total 
investment of 3.7 billion in education in the 2015-16 budget. 
Mr. Speaker, the government is continuing to meet the demands 
of communities throughout the province and through a $157.5 
million investment and a 154.1 million increase for initial 
construction costs for the nine joint-use schools in Warman, 
Martensville, Saskatoon, Regina scheduled to open in the fall of 
2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to move on here and I’m going to get to 
seniors’ care. That seems to be the number one issue for the 
members opposite, so I would like to talk a little bit about that. 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is investing in 
seniors’ care, major capital projects, and in programs aimed at 
reducing emergency department wait times. Health care saw a 
record in total spending of 5.5 billion for the 2015-16 budget.  
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors’ care will be improved with an additional 
10 million investment in new targeted funding to support 
seniors living in their own homes as well as improving quality 
of long-term care. Highlights include 3.5 million to support 
seniors who wish to remain at home as long as possible by 
enhancing the Home First/Quick Response program in Regina 
Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Prince Albert Parkland health regions 
and expanding the program in the Prairie North Health Region 
to an additional site. This brings the total funding for Home 
First/Quick Response to $8 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities will receive 3.3 billion 
for operating funding and for targeted initiatives. This is an 
increase of 55.7 million compared to last year and supports care 
provided through hospitals, health centres, and long-term care 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the Ministry of Social Services the 
province will fulfill its four-year commitment to increase 
benefits under the seniors’ income plan and personal care home 

benefit. Mr. Speaker, in 2015-16 a total of 26.5 million will be 
invested in the seniors’ income plan to increase maximum 
monthly benefits by $10 per month — $270 for a single senior 
and 235 for each member of a senior couple. Approximately 
14,000 seniors will benefit from this increase that takes effect in 
2015. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Moving on, Mr. Speaker, the government will meet its 
commitment to increase the monthly income threshold by $50 
to $2,000 for the personal care home benefit in July 2015. 
Investment in the personal care home benefit will total 3.7 
million in 2015-16. The benefit will be accessed by about 800 
seniors and was introduced in 2012 to assist lower income 
seniors with the cost of living in a personal care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is reacting to seniors’ care in 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, week in and week 
out we hear the opposition leader talking how health care is 
broken. Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of seniors in 
long-term care, personal care homes, and assisted living 
facilities that would tell you that that’s not true. There are 
thousands of health care workers that will tell you that that’s not 
true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition continue to dwell on the 
misfortunes of some. It appears they cannot think for 
themselves. They do not have any type of plan or even a single 
suggestion on how they would improve health care. It is truly 
unfortunate what has happened to some, but this government 
and this Health minister has always and will respond to the 
needs of all Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite just don’t get it. 
 
This past weekend my 10-year-old grandson, who plays Atom 
AA hockey and he’s a pretty good hockey player, anyway he 
had a sleepover. And so we were watching TV. And I’ve got to 
tell you, he’s a good hockey player. He’s got hands like his 
grandpa and a temper like his grandma, so he’s going to go a 
long way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were watching TV and on comes the NDP 
cartoon featuring the Leader of the NDP. He talks about where 
did the money go. So my grandson asks me, Grandpa, where 
did the money go? So, Mr. Speaker, I explained to him what the 
NDP government did when they were in power and how they 
closed 176 schools, closed 52 rural hospitals, closed long-term 
care beds, and further did nothing on highways, and so on. Mr. 
Speaker, I also explained to him that under the NDP there were 
no jobs for our kids, and that is why many of his cousins, aunts, 
and uncles moved away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I then explained to him what this Saskatchewan 
Party government has accomplished: record spending on 
highways and infrastructure, new schools, new hospitals, new 
long-term care facilities, jobs, wait times the shortest in Canada 
for surgeries, more doctors, more nurses, just to name a few 
accomplishments. Mr. Speaker, when I finished I asked my 
10-year-old grandson if he understood, and he said, I got it, 
Grandpa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to ask my grandson if he would 



6778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

come and meet with the NDP, and maybe he can make them 
understand where the money has gone and will continue to go 
the residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, my only concern is 
that if he came, he may drink the NDP Kool-Aid. So on second 
thought, maybe we’d do that by video conferencing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong. Our people are positive 
and that, along with the Saskatchewan Party government, will 
keep Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that 
this is a challenging budget, but the good news is Saskatchewan 
has never been in a better position to meet this challenge. Our 
economy is more diversified than ever before. More people live 
here than ever before. Exports are at an all-time high, and 
business continues to show tremendous confidence in 
Saskatchewan’s future through major capital investments. Our 
diverse economy in this balanced budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and definitely not 
supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed an honour to have an opportunity to offer a few remarks 
about the current provincial budget. As with other members, I’d 
like to offer a few well-deserved thank yous. 
 
In the past it’s been my pleasure to thank Kyle Leonard, the 
very capable young man who runs the constituency office so 
capably; my wonderful wife, Jocelyn who offers her continual 
love and support; and the good people of Regina South that I 
have the honour to represent, whose advice and comments have 
helped me immeasurably over the last eight years. 
 
But I would also like to thank the individuals whose hard work 
made this provincial budget possible. First of all to our Finance 
minister, the member from Canora-Pelly, an inspiring, 
hard-working, and passionate person, a very passionate person, 
Mr. Speaker, whom I’ve had the honour of knowing since well 
before his career in politics and whose integrity has been an 
example for all of us in this House: certainly to staff here in the 
legislature who have very capably assisted him in his role; 
members of the Legislative Assembly who have contributed 
untold hours working on the treasury board committee that 
carefully and thoroughly considers each and every budget item 
line by line and number by number; the dedicated public 
servants in the Ministry of Finance who provide all the 
necessary research and examples of precedent and information 
from other jurisdictions; the enormous number of stakeholders 
consulted annually by the Minister of Finance and his team and 
who provide experience and guidance that helps every budget; 
finally, all the residents of Saskatchewan who through their 
comments and observations have contributed in a very 
significant way to the shaping and the forming of this and every 
provincial budget. Mr. Speaker, all these good people deserve 
our thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of this year’s budget is keeping 
Saskatchewan strong and, as other members have pointed out, 
it’s built on several key principles. Here they are: keeping taxes 
low; controlling spending; continued investment in 
infrastructure; incentives for job creation; investing in people; 

achieving these goals within a balanced budget, one of only two 
in all of Canada. We’re very proud of that. 
 
My colleagues have outlined the context for this year’s budget, 
especially the fact that it needed to address a revenue shortfall 
of some $700 million due to currently low world prices for oil. 
They’ve also noted that our response to this very significant 
challenge was to control operating expenses, limiting new 
spending in this area to just 1.2 per cent, and avoiding tax 
increases all together at the same time. 
 
This of course, Mr. Speaker, is in sharp contrast to the record of 
the NDP opposite who during their term of office met similar 
fiscal challenges by raising taxes 17 times, as members on this 
side have said. In addition, instead of tackling critical 
infrastructure needs, including the repair and replacement of 
education and health care facilities and highways, the NDP 
responded by closing 176 schools, 52 hospitals plus the Plains 
hospital right here in Regina, and something like 16 long-term 
care facilities totalling, I think it’s 1,200 beds, Mr. Speaker, all 
across the province, and all but abandoning maintenance of 
Saskatchewan’s highway system, hiking taxes, and slashing 
services, leaving behind crumbling infrastructure including the 
nation’s worst highways, encouraging skilled tradespeople and 
trained professionals to move to Alberta, and at the same time 
saying that was somehow good for Saskatchewan because there 
would be more for the rest of us who are left behind here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, planning for decline, not planning for growth. 
This in fact is the legacy of 16 years of NDP government in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve chosen a different path because this great 
province and its people deserve more, so much more. 
 
Here’s a brief outline of where we’ve travelled together since 
the election of 2007. We’ve paid down, as we know, $3 billion 
of the provincial debt. That’s almost half of the principal, and in 
the process saving nearly $1 billion in interest payments, $1 
billion that had been reinvested to grow the economy and to 
improve the standard of life for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
We provided the people of Saskatchewan with unprecedented 
tax relief, Mr. Speaker, including historic reductions in personal 
income tax and the education portion of property tax. In all, this 
amounts to $5 billion being put back into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan families to help them meet their priorities, their 
interests. 
 
And then there’s infrastructure. Now, Mr. Speaker, as 
somebody who made a living in the construction industry for 30 
years, I’m particularly interested in this file and very proud of 
our government’s approach to it and what we’ve accomplished. 
And as with so many other issues, a little historical perspective 
may be helpful. 
 
I still remember the 1990s, the dark 1990s here in 
Saskatchewan when the NDP government of the day simply 
turned its back on the people of Saskatchewan and walked away 
from all of its infrastructure responsibilities. I remember the 
inevitable result. It’s something like a third — maybe it was 
even more — but at least a third of our construction industry’s 
entire workforce was forced to pack up its tools and move to 
Alberta. And that expertise, all that expertise, Mr. Speaker, all 
those taxpayers, all those families and their children, our 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6779 

province’s very future, gone. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Money for potatoes. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Money for potatoes indeed, as the member 
from Wood River notes. It has taken years for Saskatchewan’s 
economy and its population numbers to recover, but 
Saskatchewan people, ever resilient and optimistic, assisted by 
their new government where possible, have turned this province 
around. And a new focus on investment and infrastructure has 
been a big part of our new success. 
 
Here are some of the key numbers. In its first eight years, our 
government has invested over $8 billion in infrastructure. In its 
last eight years of government, by comparison, the NDP 
invested less than half that amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve allocated one $1.25 billion to health care facilities, 
including 15 new and rebuilt long-term care facilities. Here’s 
the list. LTC [long-term care] facilities have been completed in 
Watrous, in Shellbrook, Redvers, and Rosetown, Prince Albert, 
Radville, Tisdale, and Kipling. They’re under construction right 
now as we speak in Biggar, Kerrobert, Maple Creek, and 
Kelvington, and planning is well under way for others in 
Meadow Lake, Swift Current, La Ronge, and Saskatoon. 
 
Let’s talk about hospitals. The Rawlco mother baby care centre 
at Regina General Hospital, right here in Regina, is complete 
now. Construction of the new children’s hospital in Saskatoon 
will be moving forward, thanks to well over $200 million from 
the provincial government. The new Moose Jaw regional 
hospital is under construction. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Hear, hear indeed, says the member from 
Moose Jaw. Enabled by $80 million in funding from the 
provincial government, planning is now under way for the new 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, the renewal of 
Prince Albert’s Victoria Hospital, and a new hospital for 
Weyburn. And a new integrated facility combining acute and 
long-term care beds has been announced for Leader, 
Saskatchewan in the Southwest. Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty 
good start, pretty good start indeed. 
 
Let’s turn our attention for a moment to schools, shall we? 
Since 2008 our government has approved construction of 40 
brand new or replacement schools, 27 major renovation and 
addition projects, and countless smaller projects such as new 
roofs and new boilers. The total value of this extremely 
important investment in our children’s future is nearly $1 
billion. Of course, the most recent addition to this list of capital 
projects is the new nine joint-use schools in Regina, north in 
Saskatoon and Warman and Martensville. That actually means, 
Mr. Speaker, 18 brand new facilities in the province’s K to 12 
school system, built in pairs on nine separate sites, serving 
students in the Public and Catholic school divisions in these 
four fast-growing communities. 
 
Right here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, we also have École 
Monseigneur de Laval That’s the high school portion which has 
been relocated to the former Robert Usher Collegiate. We have 
Sacred Heart, École Connaught, Seven Stones, Douglas Park, 

and Arcola. All of them are community schools; all of them 
getting brand new facilities right here in Regina. École St. 
Andrew is getting an addition and renovations, structural 
repairs. Long-awaited structural repairs have been completed 
for Campbell Collegiate in the south, and a new facility for 
Scott Collegiate is under way as well. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot 
of work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more that I could say about 
highways, but I think I’m running out of time. So I’ll conclude 
my remarks at this point, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
means that by long-standing tradition, I’m going to reach across 
the aisle in the true spirit of bipartisanship. I’m reaching right 
now to the members opposite. I’m asking them to set aside 
political rhetoric and ideology. I’m asking them to set aside 
partisan politics. I’m asking them to be guided by common 
sense and their conscience and to vote for the budget, which I 
know in their hearts they realize is the right thing to do.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is typically at this time that the member 
from Biggar, seated somewhere to the left here, usually shakes 
his head sadly and slowly says, they’re not going to do it. 
They’re going to vote against the budget. I just know they will. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the sad part. For eight years in a row, 
he’s been right. And for eight years in a row, I’ve been wrong. 
But in the spirit of an old dog trying to learn a new trick, I have 
come to recognize that he’s right. They are going to vote 
against this budget once again. I finally accept that inevitable 
fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what? I’m okay with it. I’m okay with it for two 
reasons. Reason number one is there’s a whole lot more MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] on this side of the aisle 
than the other side of the aisle, thanks to the support of the 
Saskatchewan people. And when it comes to the budget vote, 
we’re going to win, and we’re going to provide people of 
Saskatchewan with a budget that they need and deserve. 
 
The second reason I’m okay with this, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
people of Saskatchewan will be watching and listening. And 
when they see the folks on the other side of the aisle, the NDP 
opposition voting against all the good things in their 
communities that are contained in this budget, they’re going to 
start thinking about that. And I think we’ll see the results of 
their deliberations, Mr. Speaker, in the following provincial 
election, and that too is a vote that all the folks on this side of 
the aisle will be awaiting with great interest. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to stand and enter into a debate on the 
budget. As is tradition, Mr. Speaker, there is a few people that 
I’d like to thank before I get into my formal remarks. 
 
I’d like to thank my wife to begin with. Normally I leave her till 
the end, but she’s one of the most important people that I have 
in my constituency back in Saskatoon. She keeps the home fires 
burning, although she’ll phone me from time to time to remind 



6780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

me that the garbage needs to go out. It’s all right to get back to 
Saskatoon to get that done when it’s appropriate. So I want to 
thank her very much for her love and support that she’s given 
me over my years in public service. 
 
I also like to acknowledge my children. I’ve got four. Our son 
Jeremy who’s 30, who’s going to be graduating from university 
this year, we’re thankful for that because then he can start to 
make some money and we don’t have to support him anymore. 
Our daughter Kayla, who is in university as well, and her 
partner Nathan, they are the parents of our only granddaughter, 
Mia. And as anyone knows who has grandchildren, they are 
certainly the apple of our eye, and we spend as much time with 
her as we possibly can. 
 
My daughter Allison is graduating from university this spring in 
Europe, and she’ll be returning home. Hopefully she’ll be 
starting to make an income. And my son Stephen who’s just got 
his interview for medical school. So we have high hopes for 
Stephen. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency staff, especially my 
constituency assistant, Kelly Merriman. She does a great job of 
keeping the office running when I’m not there, which is a lot of 
the time, so I want to thank her specifically. My constituency 
association, President Doug Shaw, they do a great job of 
keeping us organized as well and keeping our constituency well 
staffed and well financed. And I’m happy about that. 
 
I also want to thank my office staff in the Ministry of Justice, 
Dawn Cherkewich, Jennifer Hartung, Reagan Seidler, and my 
new chief of staff, Stacey Ferguson, which leads me to just a 
quick shout-out to my former chief of staff, Mary 
Donlevy-Konkin. She’s moved on to private practice. I want to 
thank her very much for her friendship and her support for me 
as minister over the last little while. She spent seven and a half 
years in government, Mr. Speaker, and I know that I speak for 
all those who know her, that she was very, very well respected 
in government. And we are all going to miss her very much. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, just to the constituents of Saskatoon 
Northwest who provide me the honour of being able to sit here 
and represent the people of Northwest and the people of 
Saskatchewan as the Minister of Justice and the Attorney 
General. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, before speaking to the budget itself, I do 
want to extend my thanks to my colleagues. I have great respect 
for each and every one of my colleagues in this legislature on 
both sides of the House. And I certainly learn something from 
each one of them every day, so I’m very, very thankful to be 
able to work with such a great group of people. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, earlier, it’s my great honour to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan as the Minister of Justice and 
the Attorney General, and I want to thank specifically our 
Premier for his faith and confidence in me in allowing me to 
serve in those important roles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we recall, on the day of the Throne Speech last 
fall our nation’s institutions fell under attack by an armed 
assailant intent on subverting the democratic ethos of this 
country. Since that time we’ve seen subsequent incidents in 

Paris, Nigeria, the Philippines, Denmark, Tunisia, and 
elsewhere, as well as threats in our own country to remind us 
how important it is that we continue to protect our public spaces 
and our forums of debate. 
 
While there are many occasions in which our caucus and the 
members opposite will disagree, there certainly exist matters of 
such gravity and significance that all elected members naturally 
unite in a common cause. To quote, “And do as adversaries do 
in law. Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.” This was 
the advice of Shakespeare, and in this case it is well taken. 
Undoubtedly among all causes which unite us, ensuring the 
ongoing safety and accessibility of this Assembly, its visitors, 
and its ideals stands among the top. 
 
This legislature is the heart of our democracy and it’s a 
privilege to be in this place every day. It’s a monument to the 
principles of suffrage and civil liberties for which our forebears 
valiantly fought, and a daily demonstration of representative 
government of our province’s young people. From its 
chambers, ideals as transformational as medicare and as 
visionary as human rights laws have emerged and changed the 
trajectory of our country forever. Therefore I’d like to commend 
in particular the staff of the Sergeant-at-Arms and members on 
both sides of the House who serve on the Board of Internal 
Economy for their continued work to review and improve the 
safety apparatus of this Assembly. Your diligence allows for the 
debate we are having today and for this, you all have my 
thanks. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll turn my attention to the matter at 
hand, which is the budget debate. In 1965, then premier and 
provincial treasurer Ross Thatcher said, the provincial budget 
functions in two capacities. One is a clear indication of the kind 
of principles the government intends to pursue and two, as the 
rationale of those promises that a political party makes to its 
electorate. 
 
While many governments are not in the position to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m proud to say that this budget achieves both. Last 
election the Saskatchewan Party set out a vision of our province 
alongside a detailed breakdown of our commitments. In the 
platform, which is still available, we envisioned a 
Saskatchewan with safer communities, where citizens have 
faster access to quality health care, where people with 
disabilities have an improved quality of life, a province with 
improved highways and infrastructure, and a Saskatchewan that 
is the economic leader in Canada. This budget is both a 
fulfillment of those commitments and a pledge to keep 
investing in the future. 
 
A multi-dimensional approach on crime is being pursued, one 
that includes innovative crime prevention, smart crime 
suppression and law enforcement, compassionate support for 
victims, and an effective rehabilitation of offenders. We are 
working hard to make Saskatchewan a place where everyone 
can live in safe, vibrant communities, where all have an 
opportunity to contribute and to benefit from the growth in the 
economy. 
 
Lately members of this Assembly have posed the question, 
where did the money go? Let’s explore that for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker. For one, it’s being directed into a new transition house 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6781 

in Melfort, a facility that will provide shelter and support to 
women and children fleeing violence or abusive circumstances. 
We were saddened last fall when a fire destroyed the nearly 
completed building, but our Premier responded immediately, 
announcing through social media our government was there to 
build it, and we will be there to rebuild it. As the facility opens 
and develops its programs this year, our community justice 
budget includes increased funding of $210,000 to support the 
Melfort transition house, a total commitment of up to $360,000. 
 
But this is one part of our commitment to vulnerable women in 
the province. Community justice funding is increasing to 
recognize our commitment to Kate’s Place, a residence operated 
by the Salvation Army that provides a safe and supportive 
residence for up to 11 women participating in the Regina drug 
treatment court. This continued support will allow some of the 
most vulnerable women in society to find employment, return 
to school, and raise their children in a healthy environment. 
 
It’s also important to note for the Assembly that this budget also 
increases our support for victims of sexual assault. In 2015-16, 
an additional $219,000 will be provided to six organizations in 
the province with a focus on direct support for victims and 
survivors of sexual assault. 
 
So where else did the money go, Mr. Speaker? It went to 
expanding police-based victims services which support and 
provide information to victims of crime. Enhanced funding has 
led to new victims services in Assiniboia, Canora, Coronach, 
Creighton, Esterhazy, Kyle, Melville, Moosomin, Pelican 
Narrows, Wadena, Waskesiu, and Wynyard, and this list will 
continue to grow. The money went into enhancing the victims 
compensation program, the largest enhancement of the program 
since its inception in 1992. 
 
It has gone into expanding video conferencing, both to reduce 
prisoner transport and increase security and also to allow 
vulnerable witnesses such as children to testify from outside the 
courtroom from a location in which they feel more safe. By the 
end of this year, we will have increased the number of locations 
with video conferencing technology from six in 2007-08 to over 
70. That’s where the money’s been going, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
fact that since 2006 and ’07, funding for direct services to 
victims through the Victims’ Fund has more than doubled. 
 
At the same time, our province is becoming a safer place. 
According to the latest figures in 2013, the rate of crime in this 
province fell 7 per cent, while the measure of crime severity 
declined by 9 per cent. This marks the 9th time in 10 years that 
the Saskatchewan crime rate has fallen and the 10th consecutive 
year that the severity of crime in Saskatchewan has decreased. 
These are important numbers, Mr. Speaker. While there will 
always be more work to do, it is an encouraging trend. Our 
crime rate is now 31 per cent lower than a decade ago. 
Communities are safer, and our victims are receiving more 
support. And that’s where some of the money is going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a reflection of the priorities of this 
province. One program that deserves special recognition is the 
Little Tots ASD [autism spectrum disorder] program. Our 
government will be providing $550,000 annually to make the 
Little Tots ASD program permanent in the Saskatoon Health 
Region. Including the Little Tots program, we are investing 

$7.6 million annually into improving targeted autism services 
and supports. That’s 1,400 per cent increase from the original 
funding of $500,000 in 2007, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
particularly important to my family. 
 
However we know the health care outcomes depend not only on 
our financial inputs, but on the effective management of 
resources. In the 1980s, Canadians were spending roughly $50 
billion each year on health care. That number has now risen to 
over 200 billion. This is one reason we continue to seek 
improvements through lean, to ensure our health care 
investments result in improved health care for the people of this 
province. To date, lean has been behind more than $125 million 
in projected financial benefits. Equally important is improving 
patient care. As a simple example, in the Saskatoon Cancer 
Centre, a lean workshop was able to reduce distance for nurses 
by 26 per cent, freeing up nurses’ time to devote to care for 
children and patients. 
 
We are also looking at innovations on the capital side, which 
include the use of P3s to deliver health care facilities to 
Saskatchewan communities more quickly. The Swift Current 
long-term care centre is one example. Using a P3 to build this 
new 225-bed centre will save taxpayers more than $16 million. 
Overall this budget provides more than $1.3 billion for core 
infrastructure in 2015-16 and the largest infrastructure 
allocation in Saskatchewan’s history. And it also includes $265 
million in revenue sharing, the largest ever grant provided to 
Saskatchewan municipalities and an increase of more than 108 
per cent from the 2007-08 budget. As a result, Saskatoon, my 
home city, will receive just over $47 million. 
 
Disability programs are also getting a boost. The budget 
contains $485 million directed for programming for 
Saskatchewan people with disabilities, up 39.5 million from last 
year’s budget. The largest component is $200 million, an 
increase of 26.8 million or 15.4 per cent over last year for the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. 
This is the fourth consecutive year the province is increasing 
SAID benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all in context of another balanced budget, 
which is a remarkable feat. Economic experts from around the 
country are weighing in on the accomplishment. BMO 
Economic Research praised our budget, summarizing that 
“operating spending will be well contained this coming fiscal 
year while capital expenditures are getting a healthy boost.” 
 
TD Economics went further in commending the Finance 
minister: 
 

. . . with an ongoing commitment to expenditure 
management combined with a mix of strong resource 
diversity . . . [the Minister of Finance] leaves 
Saskatchewan in a good position to record a surplus in 
fiscal 2015-16 and beyond. As such, Saskatchewan is on 
track to join a relatively short list of provinces targeting 
black ink in this year’s budget round. 

 
And it is this type of fiscal discipline and foresight that 
contributes to our growth as a province. Balanced budgets 
increase trust in our province’s finances. As a consequence, we 
attract more investment, which means more jobs and growth. 



6782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, the most interesting part of the budget may 
not yet be in the funding estimates but on the revenue side. As 
all Saskatchewan people know, oil prices have fallen 
dramatically in the past year. This has cost the treasury 
hundreds of millions of dollars, making tough choices a 
necessity. Yet the remarkable thing is this: while revenue to the 
government has taken a significant hit, the province’s economy 
continues to perform. The fact is telling and speaks to how far 
Saskatchewan economy has advanced. 
 
As everyone familiar with our history will know, this year is not 
the first time Saskatchewan has borne the vacillating affections 
of commodity prices. To begin the scene in Saskatchewan’s 
early days, our province was founded amidst a flurry of 
economic activity. It was in this time that the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix wrote the following, which paints a scene as it 
appears in 1906: 
 

The spring of three years ago witnessed a spectacle on 
those prairies to the southwest which will never be 
forgotten. 
 
That particular spring, the traffic of the incoming settlers 
was so steady and continuous that it was not an uncommon 
sight to see an almost unbroken line of wagons and 
vehicles of all kinds and degrees of richness stringing out 
in a long snake-like caravan many miles in length. At night 
round every slough the campfire blazed, while in the 
stopping houses . . . brave men and women, weary but full 
of hope, rested their way to the land that promised comfort 
and prosperity. And today the traveler reaching that point 
in the trail, reins up involuntarily and looks with 
amazement at the dozens of cozy farm steadings which dot 
the wide plain. The change suggests [in the midst of] . . . 
Arabian Nights for it is as if some wizard had waved a 
magic wand or breathed an incantation that turned the 
wilderness into a populous country. 

 
[16:45] 
 
Growth at this time in our province’s history was explosive. 
That period established the face of Saskatoon as we know it. St. 
Paul’s Cathedral, the Avenue Building on 3rd Avenue, Third 
Avenue United Church, and the opening of the Caswell School 
have all had their roots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all to say that over the course of the history 
of this province, we have had economic difficulties with falling 
commodity prices. But the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
that today we have an economy that’s well diversified and able 
to resist the changes in the economics when commodity prices 
tend to fall in one area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the history of this province, 
we are well served by this Finance minister and this budget in 
this particular year. And with the diversity in our economy, 
we’re able to withstand the fall in the commodity prices simply 
because of the diversity of that economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll end my comments. I want to 
say that I will be supporting the budget and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter the debate on today’s budget. 
 
And before that, Mr. Speaker, I know it’s an old story, but I 
want to share it once again with the Assembly. About a week 
ago I had a dream, and in that dream I was about to be shot by a 
firing squad. And next to me was a conservative sitting right 
next to me or tied up to a stake in this courthouse. And the 
captain of the firing squad walked over to the conservative and 
said, before you get shot, what is your last wish? And the 
conservative fellow said, I want to hear all the speeches from 
the Sask Party government of how this year’s budget is 
balanced, is what this guy said. So the captain walked over to 
me and said, before you get shot, what is your last wish? To 
which I replied, shoot me first. And what’s really important, 
Mr. Speaker, is that they ought to say to people of 
Saskatchewan all the gobbledygook that they have in relation to 
this budget. 
 
And before I go to my address, Mr. Speaker, there’s two things 
I want to say. First of all, my granddaughter Mila is watching. I 
want to say hello to Mila who’s in Saskatoon. Her mom said 
she’s watching TV. She wants to see you on TV. And I said to 
her okay, Mila, you get ready. Your grandpa will be on in five 
minutes. And Mila is sitting at home watching TV. And what I 
want to say to Mila is, my girl, you’ve got to go to school. You 
have to get educated. You have to learn to work really hard, 
because as you get older, and you get educated, and you get that 
great job, you’ve got a lot of bills to pay, based on this budget. 
Now Mila’s only three years old, Mr. Speaker. She’s only three 
years old. But when she hits 18 or 19 or hopefully even later on 
in life, after she goes to university, she’ll have to start paying 
some of the debt racked up by this conservative government, 
Mr. Speaker. We all know. So Mila, don’t quit school. Keep 
working hard because we have a lot of bills to pay as you grow 
up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we watched with a lot of interest the first 
few days before the budget was to be presented, and we sat in 
our caucus and we spoke about the budget. And all of a sudden 
we seen the Premier tout the possibility of having the 
revenue-sharing deal with the municipalities being up for 
discussion. Well, Mr. Speaker, everybody in the caucus, in the 
NDP caucus, knew it was not so. We knew it was not so. It was 
a deflection by the Premier. It was a deflection by the Premier 
to take away everybody’s attention from the real problem with 
the budget, and that was the incredible debt. 
 
We also knew in the NDP caucus that the other issue that we 
wanted to see what our Premier was made of, was what is a 
typical conservative response when they have a difficult crisis 
in managing the books? What would they do? Would they raise 
taxes? No, they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. And they talked 
about it four or five times during budget day, saying, we’re not 
going to raise taxes. But we knew. We knew in the NDP 
caucus, what they will do is they will put the province back into 
debt. And, Mr. Speaker, on two fronts we were right. 
 
Now the third front that we ought to . . . we want to be able to 
paint a picture for the people of Saskatchewan. Why would he 



March 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6783 

do this? Why would the Premier and the Minister of Finance’s 
exit out of politics, why would they burden our future 
generations with debt? Why would they do that, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they have to get to the next election, the next electoral 
time frame, Mr. Speaker. So it’s better to punt all those 
problems down the road, because what is paramount to our 
Premier is not the good management of our finances nor our 
visionary plans for the province, but to retain power and to be 
re-elected within the next year or so, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
exactly what his intentions and his plans are with this budget is 
push all the debt down the road, deflect people’s attention with 
the trial balloons that he’s put out before, before, Mr. Speaker, 
before the budget came through. 
 
We knew that revenue sharing would not be touched, Mr. 
Speaker. We knew that right from the start, and we saw these 
things as games that the Premier was playing, Mr. Speaker. And 
now we look at some of the arguments as well, Mr. Speaker. 
Their first crisis as a government, their first crisis, they built this 
in March about this crisis that they’re going to have this huge 
financial problem, Mr. Speaker, and what did they do? They 
had record revenues. They had record revenue. They didn’t 
touch the thing that they put up as trial balloons. And the people 
of Saskatchewan are very astute observers of politics, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the Premier, shame on him today for putting out 
those trial balloons while deflecting the real challenge with 
Saskatchewan in 2014-15, and that is the growing debt and the 
challenges we’re going to have with this economy from years 
on end, Mr. Speaker. We needed a premier that was going to 
look to the future, do something bold, do something innovative, 
exciting. Make sure people of Saskatchewan are engaged. We 
saw none of that, Mr. Speaker, absolutely none of that. 
 
When we asked about the legacy fund, what did we get, Mr. 
Speaker? We said no. The Government of Saskatchewan said 
no to the legacy fund. That is gone. What we have, Mr. 
Speaker, is we have a rainy day fund depleted from $1.4 billion 
down to $200 million, Mr. Speaker. We saw that happen. And 
we also saw record revenue, Mr. Speaker, record revenue. The 
NDP could only dream of 80 or $90 oil, Mr. Speaker. We had 
45 . . . The highest I think was $45 a barrel for oil when we 
were in power. We had, Mr. Speaker, about an $8 billion annual 
operating budget. These guys have over $14 billion worth of 
money that they could operate with, Mr. Speaker, and we could 
only dream, we could only dream about those kinds of revenues 
as a government. 
 
And what really also gets me, Mr. Speaker, record revenues. 
They said no to a legacy fund. They said no, we’re going to 
clean out the rainy day fund. We’re going to have . . . Even 
though we’ve got record revenue, we’re also going to have 
record spending. Record spending in the wrong places. 
Misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re seeing 
they’re borrowing more money. To the people of 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party government has cleaned 
out your savings. They have put you more into debt and, Mr. 
Speaker, this is all the time when we had record revenues. How 
does that work? How does this bizarre budget work, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And not to be outdone, not to be outdone, the next move of the 

Saskatchewan Party government is we will put in P3s. We will 
put in P3 agreements where private companies, private 
companies can build the schools that we need and the highways 
that we need. And these private companies will not only get the 
work, Mr. Speaker, but they won’t be from Saskatchewan. 
They’ll be from somewhere else, Mr. Speaker. The work is only 
temporary. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to control the 
access to our schools. They’re going to be able to charge us 
interest on some of the facilities that they build and the 
highways they build, adding more debt. And what’s worse, Mr. 
Speaker, is they also have maintenance contracts that we have 
to pay. So it’s a sweetheart deal for big companies out of 
Saskatchewan, leaving Saskatchewan families and businesses 
out of the loop. Now is that fair for the future of the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And then they also brag about what they have done in the 
budget. They have sold the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, the Crowns 
of Information Services Corporation. And they brag about that 
in their budget. They’re using the revenues from that sale to 
balance the budget. Well on the NDP side we say, what’s going 
to happen now with that one Crown that generated 14 or $15 
million? That takes away from the operating opportunity for 
future years. Every single year they made money for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Look at the liquor store debate, Mr. Speaker, where the Premier 
gets up one day and says, not a single dime will go towards 
liquor stores. Well, Mr. Speaker, that investment into 
government-owned liquor stores and liquor and gaming in 
general, I think it generates half a billion dollars for schools, for 
roads, for hospitals, for programs. Now what happens if that 
money is gone in the future? How are you going to replace 
revenues from Information Services Corporation and from 
liquor and gaming revenues if they’re all sold off? 
 
Do you think one of the big stores that are going to be given the 
opportunity to build these liquor outlets are going to come back 
and say, okay Saskatchewan, here’s your share. Here’s your 
share. No, they’re taking that money down east, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re taking the money down east, never to be seen nor spent 
in Saskatchewan ever again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then you look at . . . They’re still not done with this debt. 
You look at, the legacy fund is gone. The rainy day fund is 
depleted. They had record revenue. They had record spending. 
They’ve got more debt — 700 million. They’ve got the P3s that 
they’re going to add on to the future cost of operating 
government. 
 
Now the municipalities are going into record debt. The 
universities are going into record debt, Mr. Speaker. All of this 
debt that’s being laid in right, from left to right, to anything that 
they can get their hands on for now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then you look at the most recent example about the potash 
industry now is being told we’re taking some of the revenues 
from the front end, but you can claim some of the exemptions 
15 years from now. They’ve done it again, Mr. Speaker, taken 
revenues that should be coming to the province earlier than 
anticipated, and they’re also doing all these changes without 
consultation to a very important industry called potash. 
 



6784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2015 

So all in all, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the practices of 
this government and this budget. There is no vision. There is no 
commitment to the future. And every time the Saskatchewan 
Party government gets in trouble they start focusing on the 
NDP. Let’s go beat up on the NDP — that’s their only strategy, 
Mr. Speaker. They lack vision. They lack commitment and they 
lack the leadership necessary to build Saskatchewan while the 
economy’s hot. While revenues are coming in and while we’re 
on this roll, let’s give ’er snoose, Bruce. That’s the bottom line 
from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, because we need to start 
moving right now. 
 
And I also add, to a lot of people that might be listening: 
taxpayers, taxpayers are going to pay taxes or debt. It doesn’t 
matter. There’s only one taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. And by the 
way that the Saskatchewan Party government’s continually 
putting on debt on future generations, on that grandson, on my 
granddaughter, Mr. Speaker, they are going to be the future 
taxpayers. These taxpayers are paying the debt, are paying the 
debt that’s being punted down the highway, that’s being punted 
down the highway by this Finance minister, that Premier, and 
that Sask Party government. And I say to them, shame. Because 
you had opportunities today to make a significant difference. 
You had an opportunity to provide leadership and you chose not 
to. 
 
And that’s why when the minister announced that it was his last 
budget, I said thank goodness that it is his last budget. Because 
the bottom line is it lacks vision. It lacks commitment. It lacks 
proper management, and on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about the NDP we want the top-notch 
schools in the country based on the revenues we have today. 
We want the best-run hospitals and health care system based on 
the revenues we have today, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And what we don’t want to do, what we don’t to do is we don’t 
want to saddle future generations with debt, Mr. Speaker, the 
same, the same practice done in the 1980s under the Devine 
Conservatives, many of which across the way are part of that. 
They can’t deny that. And it’s absolutely amazing and 
astonishing to me, Mr. Speaker, as I sit here, how grown men 
and women try and rewrite history. They try and forget about 
the ’80s. They don’t want to talk about the ’80s. I’ll tell you 
why they don’t want to talk about the ’80s, because they racked 
up record debt where Saskatchewan had no choice — either 
shut our doors and declare bankruptcy or make some very, very 
tough choices. Very tough choices. And, Mr. Speaker, those 
tough choices were made alongside the people of Saskatchewan 
because of the huge debt. 
 
Now today you look at our debt according . . . our Finance critic 
is watching this very carefully. We went from — what? — $11 
billion debt when we were in government. We were bringing 
that debt down from the Conservatives of the ’80s, down from I 
think it was 15 or 16 billion down to 11, and it gave the 
Conservatives an opportunity, Mr. Speaker. Now they’re right 
back up to almost $20 billion in debt, and I say, shame on them. 
 
Because our future generations are going to pay that debt, 
because of one simple reason is you lacked the vision, the 
commitment, and the leadership to make a brand new bold 
Saskatchewan from this day forward, and this budget is 
evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. It’s evidence of that. Why? 

Primarily because the Premier is positioning his re-election and 
the Saskatchewan Party caucus re-election based on borrowing 
from future generations. And I say, shame on that particular 
practice, Mr. Speaker, because the people and the grandchildren 
and the great grandchildren that are maybe listening today are 
going to pay that debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if you look at where they have misspent, Mr. Speaker, the 
list is fairly long. It is very extensive as to what priorities that 
this government has put money into, that have been misplaced 
and do not help the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past 5 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6753 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6753 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6753 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6753 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6767 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6769 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6753 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6753 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6754 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6754 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Strong Kids Campaign  
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6754 
 Remembering Lilly Daniels 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6754 
 President of MD Ambulance Retires 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6755 
 Ending Discrimination With Think Good, Do Good 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6755 
 Door of Hope Wins Award 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6755 
 Budget Supports First Nations Institutes 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6756 
 Inspired by the Team Clark Spirit 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6756 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Maintaining Health Infrastructure 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6756 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6756 
 Conclusion of Lean Contract 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6759 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6759 
 Support for Low-Income Families 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6759 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6759 
 Management of Provincial Finances 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6760 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6760 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6761 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6761 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6765 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6767 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6771 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6773 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6775 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6778 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6779 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6782 
  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6768 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6768 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


