
























































Hansard: March 02, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 2, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6333 
 March 2, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

New Table Officer 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce Ms. Kathy Burianyk 
as our newest Table Officer. For the last two sessions she has 
been at the Clerk’s Table, participating in a career development 
program. Kathy has had the opportunity to learn skills that will 
serve her well in her new Table Officer role. Please join me in 
formally recognizing Kathy as our newest Clerk at the Table. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
number of, a large group, Mr. Speaker, that’s seated in the west 
gallery. These are individuals who have come to the legislature 
today over their concerns about rural health care. Many are 
from the community of Craik, although there is Coronach and 
Central Butte and many other RMs [rural municipality] that are 
represented, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome these individuals 
to the Assembly and let them know that their presence is noted 
and very much appreciated by all people in the province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the member opposite in welcoming the guests who 
have come from Craik and area who are focused on and 
concerned about rural health care, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s a 
priority shared by all members in the Assembly today, but we 
want to welcome them for taking time out of their day and 
come to the Legislative Assembly. It’s an important part of the 
democratic process. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them here to their Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member opposite and the Premier in welcoming the guests from 
Craik and surrounding area to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the 
rest of the House, a person sitting in the east gallery, Tom 
Howe, who is with SEIU [Service Employees International 
Union]. And we know SEIU members provide outstanding 
service in our health care and other facilities around the 
province. They do an incredible amount of good work 
providing services to make sure our senior citizens, our young 

people, all sorts of needs are met. And so I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Tom to his legislature. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite on welcoming this individual to the 
Chamber today. These are part of our democratic process; we 
like hearing from people regardless of where they stand on the 
political spectrum or their involvement in the trade union 
movement because those are all things that are an important 
part of the fundamentals of our democracy and should be 
welcomed and promoted. So thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the west gallery, I’d like to introduce my 
fiancé, Duron Nelson. Contrary to popular belief, I did not meet 
him on eHarmony or he is not a mail-order husband. We’ve 
known each other for 14 years. And it’s been on again and off 
again, and it’s on again with a ring. So I would like to invite all 
my colleagues to welcome to his future . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 
is a special person that has been in my life, and that was my 
former CA [constituency assistant], Denise Arnold is sitting 
there. Denise, if you want to just give a little . . . Denise is 
probably one of the best organizers that I’ve ever come across, 
just did an absolute job right from the ’07 election, getting our 
office put together and handling all of the issues that came into 
the office. 
 
And I certainly appreciate her coming in today. She said, we all 
need a little support sometime. And I think that goes for both 
sides of the House. I appreciate you being here, Denise. I ask all 
my colleagues to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the rest of the members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce Krystal Lewis. Krystal, if you’d give us a wave. 
Krystal is my intern for this term. And we’ve both got a great 
interest in history, so she is now delving into, as deep as we 
can, into the life and times of Jennifer, the wife of Premier 
Walter Scott. Thank you, Mr. Premier. I’d ask all members to 
welcome her to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of introducing Shalyn 
Rousseau who is my intern for this year. She has got lots of 
enthusiasm and professionalism. It’s a real pleasure to work 
with her. She has a double degree in political studies and 



6334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

religious studies. She’s had the opportunity to work here in the 
Legislative Building. And we’re also going to be going to my 
constituency, and I know later she’s going to be going to St. 
John’s and Ottawa to do comparative study work there. So 
welcome to your Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you, I would also like to introduce my intern for this 
session to the Legislative Assembly, and that is Mr. Damien 
Bolingbroke who’s up in the gallery, the Speaker’s gallery. 
Damien has a keen interest in everything that goes on here in 
the Assembly, and he’s full of questions, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 
always a good challenge for me to stay on my toes, and 
Damien’s doing that for sure to date. We had a good visit in the 
constituency a couple of weeks ago, and I look forward to 
working with him on some important projects that we’re 
working on in this session. So Mr. Damien Bolingbroke. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 
we know that in September last fall, this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing unit 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control of and then rent the units at full market price. 
Essentially this government allowed the private developer to 
back out of a fixed-price contract without any penalties, setting 
a dangerous precedent for this type of default. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to 
the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 
Avenue, inundating it with heavy-haul truck traffic, failing to 
plan for a safe route for that traffic. Of course this is a concern 
to all users and certainly to residents on this residential 
neighbourhood. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Legislative Assembly call on the provincial government to 
immediately take action as it relates to the unacceptable 

danger, disturbance, and infrastructure damage caused by 
the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue west of 
the city centre, to ensure the safety and well-being of 
communities, families, residents, and users; and that those 
actions and plans should include: rerouting the heavy-haul 
truck traffic, receive provincial funding, and be developed 
through consultation with the city of Regina, communities, 
and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents from across 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to 
present a petition to protect health care services in the 
community of Craik. As I said, a number of people have 
travelled to the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, and they have 
been circulating a petition in their community. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Cause the provincial government to immediately stop its 
plan to scale back health care services in Craik, refrain 
from turning the stabilization and observation unit into 
offices, and ensure that the Canadian-trained physician that 
wants to continue practising in Craik is allowed to do so 
without government interference. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 
the community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 
present a petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. 
And the individuals who signed this want to bring to the 
Assembly’s attention the following: that Saskatchewan 
currently offers a variety of facility options to house youth 
offenders according to the assessed level of risk to their 
communities; that Saskatoon has Yarrow Youth Farm, a facility 
for low-risk teens who benefit from an open custody home with 
a caring, supportive environment with programs to help 
residents live more productive lives. Saskatoon also has Kilburn 
Hall, a secure custody unit for youth considered a greater risk to 
their communities. 
 
This government is planning to close Yarrow Youth Farm and 
build an open-custody wing attached to Kilburn Hall to 
accommodate Yarrow’s residents. The provincial Advocate for 
Children and Youth has declared he cannot endorse this 
rationalization as low-risk teens could be influenced and 
pressured by close proximity with high-risk youth, and that 
Kilburn Hall has a much more institutional environment which 
could intimidate and alienate teens who have committed minor 
offences. 
 
So the prayer reads as follows. They are respectfully requesting 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6335 

To cause the government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm 
open, to ensure a caring home environment for youth who 
have committed minor offences, and provide support to 
help these young people redirect their lives by setting 
more positive goals. 

 
And this is signed by individuals from the city of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Hosts Tournament of Hearts 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2015 Scotties 
Tournament of Hearts was hosted at Mosaic Place in Moose 
Jaw from February 14th to 22nd. This major national event 
brought the country’s best women’s curling teams to 
Saskatchewan to compete for the chance to represent Canada at 
the 2015 women’s curling championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Moose Jaw was pleased to host this 
year’s tournament in their state-of-the-art facility, Mosaic Place. 
Curlers, TSN [The Sports Network] commentators, Canadian 
Curling Association officials, and fans all commented that 
Moose Jaw was an excellent host for this event. When asked 
about the venue, Team Canada skip Rachel Homan said, “It’s 
perfect; it looks like a brand new facility and it’s got everything 
we need.” 
 
The stands were filled for most draws with many fans cheering 
loudly for Team Sask, which was skipped by Stefanie Lawton. I 
am excited to announce that the total attendance for the week 
was more than 70,000 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while helping out at the tournament, I saw 
first-hand the hard work and dedication of the volunteers, 
without whom the event could not have happened. With this 
tournament being such a success, Moose Jaw has further 
demonstrated that it is a great place to host major national 
events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the athletes on their spectacular performance, 
and I’d like to say a big thank you to Moose Jaw, the 
organizers, and the hundreds of volunteers for hosting this 
tremendously successful event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Black History Month 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night I had the 
pleasure to attend the Black History Month Gala hosted by the 
Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian Association. The event was 
exceptional — amazing food, dancing, and music. People came 
together from all across our city to celebrate the rich culture, 
contributions, and achievements of Saskatchewan’s Black 
community. 
 
The inspirational Carol Lafayette-Boyd served as keynote 

speaker. The impressive award recipients were Melodie 
McDonald, Desmond McAllister, and Nimone Campbell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Black community is diverse and 
well established in our province. Even before Saskatchewan 
was founded, there were already Black settlers who came here 
and who have helped build and shape our province. And Black 
members of our community contribute and have contributed to 
all facets of our province — from health care to academia, civil 
service, civil society, sports, arts, culture, business, labour, and 
more. 
 
Today it’s exciting to see the Black community continue to 
grow from nearly every corner of the globe, newcomers that 
will help shape and build our bright future. I hope that all 
members will join with me in recognizing the important 
contributions of our province’s Black community and will also 
join me in congratulations and thanks to the Saskatchewan 
Caribbean-Canadian Association on another successful Black 
History Month Gala. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, 
February 20th, I had the honour of attending a very special 
event in Regina. I and the member from Walsh Acres were 
asked to come to be part of the Special Olympics Saskatchewan 
Provincial Winter Games held in Regina over the weekend. 
 
These games are held every two years to allow athletes to 
compete against each other from across Saskatchewan in 
several different sports including curling, snowshoeing, figure 
skating, and floor hockey. These competitions are also 
qualifiers for the athletes to represent Saskatchewan at the 2016 
Special Olympic Winter Games which will be held in Corner 
Brook, Newfoundland. 
 
As many of you know, Mr. Speaker, my daughter Courtney is a 
Special Olympian and this event is very near and dear to my 
heart. 
 
There were 164 athletes and several coaches at the provincial 
winter games representing many cities and towns across 
Saskatchewan. Several athletes will be representing 
Saskatchewan in next year’s Canadian Special Olympics Winter 
Games, including Regina’s own Victoria Sarty, who won gold 
in the figure skating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to celebrate every Special Olympian for 
following their dreams, meeting their goals, and having fun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
athletes who participated in the Provincial Olympics Winter 
Games. We are all very proud of them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 



6336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
rise and congratulate all the people who were involved in the 
Winter Special Olympics that were just recently held from 
February 20th to 22nd. And we know that here in Regina, the 
host, they were the host city to this year’s 2015 Special 
Olympics Saskatchewan Provincial Winter Games. 
 
These games provided the opportunity for 164 athletes from 
across Saskatchewan to compete with their peers in a variety of 
sports, and from there they’re now able to qualify for the 2016 
Special Olympics Canada Winter Games in Corner Brook, 
Newfoundland. 
 
They competed in sports such as floor hockey, curling, figure 
skating, speed skating, alpine skiing, and snowshoeing. And of 
course congratulations go to all the medal winners, but I’d like 
to give a special shout-out to the gold medal recipients. 
 
So in curling we have Melfort team no. 2; in floor hockey, in 
the various divisions, we had the Regina Vipers, the Humboldt 
Broncos, and Lakewood Wild Ones; alpine skiing, Adam 
Sanden; speed skating, Terry Livingstone; figure skating, 
Victoria Sarty; and snowshoeing, on the women’s side, was 
Jordan Blomme, and on the men’s, was Joey Phillips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Special Olympics provides year-round sports 
training and athletic competition for children and adults with 
intellectual disabilities. These activities give them continuing 
opportunities to develop physical fitness, demonstrate courage 
— and my mike’s off — experience joy, and participate in the 
sharing of gifts, skills, and friendship. Special Olympics is 
tackling inactivity, intolerance, isolation, and injustice that 
people with intellectual disabilities throughout the world face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m asking everyone to join with me today to 
congratulate all these folks as well and congratulate the 
organizers on another successful Winter Olympics. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

North Battleford Citizens Recognized 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 30th, I had 
the privilege of bringing greetings to the annual North 
Battleford Citizen and Junior Citizen of the Year ceremony. 
This year’s recipients were two very community-minded and 
deserving individuals. 
 
Our Junior Citizen of the Year was Dylan Joachim, a grade 12 
student at North Battleford Comprehensive High School. 
Although Dylan just recently moved to North Battleford, he’s 
already made significant contributions to our community. Dylan 
is on his school’s SRC [student representative council]. He 
played middle linebacker for the Vikings, teaches 
snowboarding, is in the yearbook club and involved in the Me 
to We movement. He is also a great track and field athlete, 
having competed in the Knights of Columbus national track and 
field competition in Prince Edward Island. 
 
Our Citizen of the Year, Tammy Donahue Buziak, has been 
active in our community for many years. Many people have 
enjoyed listening to her playing the violin as well as attending 
the lessons she teaches. In her duties as a coroner, she also 

gives caring support to grieving families. 
 
Most recently, Tammy chaired the North Battleford centennial 
celebration committee. This was a monumental task, with 
events running from New Year’s Eve to New Year’s Eve and 
many functions in between. Committee members tell me 
Tammy always brings her cheery personality and infectious 
smile to every function and committee meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
with me in thanking and congratulating Dylan and Tammy. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Prairie Women on Snowmobiles 
Ride to Fight Breast Cancer 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize Prairie Women on Snowmobiles 2015 ride to fight 
breast cancer. This non-profit organization has raised over $2.3 
million over the past 15 years. This year was no exception to 
their success. The group of 10 riders raised over $113,000 for 
the Canadian Cancer Society, as well as an additional 29,000 
for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, to purchase equipment. 
 
This strong group of women passed through 32 communities 
across the province. The riders covered approximately 1800 
kilometres worth of trails, ditches, and fields. Kicking off in 
Nipawin, the ladies travelled through Choiceland, Smeaton, 
Meath Park, Prince Albert, Hudson Bay, and Wynyard, to name 
a few communities. 
 
The women were able to finish their journey in Meadow Lake. 
Along the ride, they also met up with the Saskatchewanderer, 
Ashlyn George. They also attended many banquets, lunches, 
coffees, and raffles along their trip. Volunteers like this 
continue to raise awareness and the funds needed to help beat 
breast cancer once and for all. 
 
I would like to thank all members for this Assembly and ask 
them to congratulate the Prairie Women on Snowmobiles for 
another successful and safe ride, and wish the Prairie Women 
on Snowmobiles many more to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Mathematics 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, they may have a different 
leader, but it’s the same old NDP [New Democratic Party] 
math, and it still doesn’t add up. The NDP is now saying that 
the government has been overspending, but at the same time, 
they can’t identify any spending they would cut. And they have 
called for over $4 billion in new spending since the member 
opposite became leader, and that’s on top of the $5 billion 
spending spree the NDP campaigned on in the last election. It 
doesn’t add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve more than clichés 
and buzzwords from the NDP leader. He can’t have it both 
ways. He can’t say the government has spent too much and it 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6337 

should spend $4 billion more. It just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the exact same kind of faulty math Dwain 
Lingenfelter gave to us in the last election, and the only thing he 
cut was the number of the NDP MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. Nothing’s changed, Mr. Speaker. They 
may have a different leader, but it’s the same old NDP. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday over 100 people rallied 
in Craik in order to save the rural health care services in their 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re incredibly frustrated by 
what this government is doing. They have invited the Premier to 
visit their community, to tour the health centre, and to see 
first-hand how incredibly valuable it is to their community and 
the entire region. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said he’s too busy. On his 
many trips up and down Highway 11, he can’t peel in for 30 
minutes to pay a visit and to see it, Mr. Speaker. So today over 
70 residents have come to the legislature to voice their concerns 
because they are sick and tired of this government’s excuses. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Will he today 
meet with these folks? Will he commit to visit their community 
and to tour their health centre? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I did 
meet with the citizens, with representatives of Craik, and with 
the doctor when they were here just months ago in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. And there was follow-up, from the 
perspective of the government and the health region, in terms of 
reaching out to the doctor in question with a contract, Mr. 
Speaker, or at least the invitation to begin negotiating the draft 
contract, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if that has been responded 
to by the doctor. My understanding is that it has not yet. 
 
I will say this. Mr. Speaker, our government all along has 
committed to continuing health care services for the people of 
Craik and that includes as follows: a physician four days a 
week, nurse practitioner five days a week, 24-7 RN [registered 
nurse] long-term care, dietitian services, public health nurse, 
home care, lab and X-ray, and physiotherapy, Mr. Speaker. And 
not withstanding the difficulty of the budget that presents itself 
before the people of the province and the government of the 
province today, we intend to maintain, to continue those 
resources for the people of Craik. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is the contract offer remains, 
the opportunity to negotiate that, with the doctor. However we 
need to move along so that we can ensure there is doctor 
coverage in the community to better serve the people of Craik 
and area, Mr. Speaker. That’s our priority and it’ll continue to 
be our priority going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier had the courage 
today to come out to the rally, to speak with the people from 
Craik and area, they would have heard them talk about the 
meeting they had with the Premier, Mr. Speaker, where they 
said that the Premier said the right words in the meeting, but 
then following there was no action. There was no resolution, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s their frustration. You don’t have 70 
people travel from Craik and area to the legislature because 
they’re happy with this government’s performance on this issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The folks in Craik and area want what they have had in their 
community for 100 years. Here’s a letter to the Premier and the 
two Health ministers that they say . . . They talk about the Sask 
Party government’s plan that the Premier’s boasting about: 
 

It does not have the support of local leaders, health care 
professionals, or the community. It is being imposed 
without any consultation with those who will be most 
directly impacted. If pursued, it will inevitably result in the 
closure of the Craik health care centre and the removal of 
all medical services from Craik. 

 
My question to the Premier: how can he stand there today, 
dismiss the very real concerns that they’re bringing forward, 
and will he have the courage to visit the health care centre in 
Craik? Will he do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very, very clear. 
There will continue to be health care coverage, important health 
care services, to the level that they are existing currently in the 
community of Craik, Mr. Speaker, that I think has been the case 
since 2012. Those include physicians four days a week, nurse 
practitioner five days a week, 24-7 RN long-term care coverage, 
dietitian services, public health nurse, home care, lab and X-ray, 
and physiotherapy. 
 
In terms of the meeting that we had months ago, a major 
concern was about retention of the doctor. Mr. Speaker, an offer 
has been made to at least begin negotiating the draft contract for 
that particular doctor. We would welcome, I think the health 
region would welcome the chance to conclude those 
negotiations, to even begin them because, Mr. Speaker, my 
understanding is that that invitation has not been yet responded 
to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want the best possible health care for the 
people of Craik and area, for people all up and down No. 11. 
Mr. Speaker, that remains the position of the government and 
we’ll back it up with resources. Unlike what we saw from the 
NDP for years in government when it came to rural health care, 
we’ll actually back it up with money in the budget to keep 
facilities operating, to provide funding for 2,600 more nursing 
positions across the province, 400 more doctors practising than 
under the previous government, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to 
act with resources, with tax dollars invested in communities like 
Craik and communities across this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. It is this 



6338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

government that in 2012 cut services, where ambulances 
stopped going to the community, Mr. Speaker, under this 
government. Why the Premier will not agree to meet with these 
people today and tour the health care centre is beyond me, Mr. 
Speaker. These are MLAs who represent much of rural 
Saskatchewan. Why are they afraid to go to Craik and to meet 
with the community and have some honest and true 
consultation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Unlike the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone to Craik. I’ve met 
with them. I’ve heard and seen first-hand how vitally important 
this health care centre is to them and the entire region. And 
that’s why it’s baffling that this government would be putting 
up roadblocks, be putting up barriers, that would prevent a 
Canadian-trained physician from remaining in the community 
when he wants to practise there, Mr. Speaker. They have not 
engaged in true consultation. They’ve been forcing and 
jamming their approach upon the community, and that is the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even the former constituency assistant for the member from 
Arm River-Watrous, Clark Puckett said this: “This is a very 
difficult situation for the citizens of Craik, and I would advocate 
that we get some full-time doctors there.” Well that’s what Dr. 
Karam thinks. That’s what the community thinks, Mr. Speaker. 
Why is this government continuing its plan to pull services out 
of the community of Craik? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole host of 
statements over there that need to be addressed, but let me say 
first and foremost: this government’s focus is on patient safety, 
patient care for the province of Saskatchewan, again as the 
Premier talked about, focusing on rural and remote areas 
because, as pointed out by the Premier, it was neglected terribly 
by the NDP for a whole host of years. 
 
Our priority is to stabilize the services specifically at Craik. Not 
to roll back, not to scale back, as the member has stated, but to 
sustain the current level of services that are there. The Premier 
has outlined those very, very clearly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the member opposite mentioned somebody should 
come out and meet with the people and visit the facility at 
Craik, Mr. Speaker, I did that. In fact on January 27th we 
stopped in for a good hour. We got a great tour by the charge 
nurse. I met with the doctor. He was on call. They gave us a 
very in-depth tour of the facility, what was formerly the ER 
[emergency room], the current stabilization room, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’m welcoming more questions from the members opposite 
so I can get into more detail on this file. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they want to speak with the 
Premier because clearly their meeting with the member from 
Yorkton is not bringing any results, Mr. Speaker, because 
they’re not listening. And that’s the thing: you can stop but if 
you don’t actually listen and hear what the consequences will 

be of their actions, Mr. Speaker, then it’s all for naught. And I 
don’t know why the Premier will not agree to meet with them 
today and to visit the health care centre in Craik. 
 
This isn’t isolated actually to the community of Craik, Mr. 
Speaker. There are representatives who are in the Assembly 
who were at the rally today from Coronach, from Central Butte, 
and many other RMs. Residents from Central Butte have also 
. . . They are here because their hospital, Mr. Speaker, under 
this government’s watch — the second Health minister there 
was just talking about this — they’ve had their services cut 
dramatically in Central Butte. For the past, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve not had acute care or emergency services for about five 
years now. The Central Butte hospital has a doctor come in 
once a week for about four hours. 
 
So despite record revenues in this province, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has turned the Central Butte hospital into a clinic 
that is open for four hours once a week. Residents, Mr. Speaker, 
say they’ve heard of doctors who want to come to the 
community but have faced more roadblocks from this Sask 
Party government. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why has his 
government turned its back on Central Butte? Why is the 
Central Butte hospital now just a clinic that operates for four 
hours once a week? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, in fact I’ve committed 
to a meeting with representatives from Central Butte in the area 
on March 11th, and there is some other meetings planned with 
the health coalition that’s developing in that area very soon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When it comes to the service at Craik, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
easy to answer some of these questions. The member brought it 
up in his petition, Mr. Speaker. He talked about scaling back 
services. That's the farthest thing from the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re looking at stabilizing the services that are currently there. 
He talked about the stabilization unit converting to offices. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve talked to the health region about it. I’ve talked to 
the members, the citizens there. I’ve toured the facility. We’ve 
got a commitment, on behalf of myself and the region, that’s 
not happening. The facility there has a stabilization unit that’s 
very good and very, very adaptable to deal with emergencies 
that would present themselves and to be assessed by 
professionals at the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talked about a long-term doctor. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
correct the Premier on one point. He talked about the contract’s 
been responded to. Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been responded to. In 
fact it hasn’t been responded to. Multiple contacts with the 
doctor in Craik has gone unresponded on by his part. He’s been 
resistant and not willing to negotiate a contract with the region 
or the area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t about one contract with 
one doctor. This is about this government’s approach to rural 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6339 

health care. And to have that minister stand up and then have 
the member from Arm River-Watrous just nodding in 
agreement, that the member from Thunder Creek who sits at the 
cabinet table, Mr. Speaker, who has a say in these decisions, 
Mr. Speaker, for him just to agree is absolutely ridiculous. 
Because we look at the track record of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, we see them reducing services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the second Health minister there talks about a meeting that 
he’s going to have with the folks from Central Butte. Do you 
know what he committed to, Mr. Speaker? Fifteen minutes 
before SARM’s [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] bear pit — that’s how much time he has 
available to meet with the good folks from Central Butte. That’s 
how seriously this government takes health care in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, at SARM’s last convention, a 
number of resolutions were passed. One, “Rural Saskatchewan 
health needs are being bypassed.” The other one said, “Regional 
health authorities are closing down services in rural 
Saskatchewan and are moving those services to the cities and in 
some instances are refusing to hire doctors that have offered to 
come to rural Saskatchewan.” 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier, not to the second 
Health minister or the first Health minister. It is to the Premier: 
with record revenues, Mr. Speaker, record revenues, how can he 
justify the cuts to rural health care services that have happened 
under his watch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this line of questioning 
is somewhat surprising, coming from that member. He’s a 
member of the party that actually changed the designation, 
closed the designation to that hospital and converted it to a 
health clinic in Craik, Mr. Speaker, along with 51 other 
hospitals in the province. 
 
He’s a member of the party that closed 19 long-term care 
facilities totalling 1,200 beds. He’s a member of the party, Mr. 
Speaker, that cut training positions at the College of Medicine, 
cut nurse training positions, chased medical professionals out of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve been investing in long-term care facilities. We’ve been 
investing in new hospitals. We’ve committed to investing and 
stabilizing the facility at Craik for the better service of the 
people in the area, Mr. Speaker. We’ve committed to trying to 
sign a contract with the doctor in place. Mr. Speaker, the 
members of Craik want Dr. Karam there. I would like nothing 
better than to have the doctor sign a contract, Mr. Speaker, but 
to this date he has refused to sit down and negotiate a contract 
with the region. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the bafflegab coming from that 
minister, Mr. Speaker, and the way that he is insulting the 
community and the physician and the other physicians in the 
area, Mr. Speaker, who are not in favour of this approach, is 

offensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there are 70 people who have come to the legislature 
today, not because they’re happy with what this government is 
doing but because they are frustrated. And yes, they’re angry, 
Mr. Speaker, but they’re angry because they love their 
community and they want the best for it over the long run, Mr. 
Speaker. They have come here today. They want to meet with 
the Premier. They want to talk. They want to convey their 
concerns with the Premier and engage in an honest discussion 
and to find a solution because the committee, Mr. Speaker, has 
good ideas. They know what they need to do to make health 
care work in their community. 
 
My question is a yes or no one for the Premier. Will he meet 
with the people who have travelled to the Legislative Assembly 
today? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the last part 
of the member’s question, I would be pleased to meet with 
designated numbers of the people here today as well. But, Mr. 
Speaker, let me reiterate. Our priority is stabilizing care at Craik 
facility, which means a commitment to the primary health care 
and health care in this province, Mr. Speaker. That means 
stabilizing current services. It means signing a doctor to 
perform permanent services in the facility at Craik, and if that’s 
the current doctor, I’m happy to do that. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
will be signing a permanent doctor to perform services in that 
community in the near future to make sure we stabilize the 
services and continue health care in Craik, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, there’s no plan to close the facility, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no plan to renovate the facility. We’ve committed to 
hiring a permanent doctor four days a week in the facility. The 
Premier has talked about the other services available through 
the nurse practitioner and a number of other services there, Mr. 
Speaker. And emergencies that present themself to the facility 
can be addressed by the professionals at hand or designated 
with EMS [emergency medical services] or STARS [Shock 
Trauma Air Rescue Society] if the need arises. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Maintenance of Educational Facilities 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — My question is for the Education 
minister. How many schools in Saskatchewan are structurally 
unsound? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we maintain the facilities 
in our province. We have a record investment that we’ve made 
in our province’s schools. We have, since we formed 
government, spent over $700 million on the schools. The 
2014-15 budget includes $96.2 million. 
 
If we become aware of problems, if we become aware of issues, 
we try and deal with those as quickly as possible. We try and 
work in partnership with the divisions around the province to 



6340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

make sure that we do everything that we possibly can. The most 
precious assets that we have in our province are the students 
that go to our schools, and we want to make sure that we do 
everything we can to make sure that the schools are safe, 
secure, and are doing everything that they can. Mr. Speaker, 
opposed to the members opposite who closed 176 schools, 
we’re continuing on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question was a pretty 
straightforward question. I don’t know if the minister didn’t 
hear it. But we know that the schools in Aberdeen, Delisle, 
Hague, Hanley, and Rosthern are literally propped up with 
posts, with two-by-fours and two-by-sixes because they’re 
structurally unsound and there’s real fear of roofs and structures 
falling in. 
 
The Prairie Spirit School Division said those problems would 
not have been identified with a routine inspection. Engineers 
went through schools built from the ’50s through the ’80s and 
had to drill into ceilings to see where support beams have 
degraded, but that’s just in one school division with a special 
engineer’s inspection. So to the Education minister: have 
schools in other areas of the province been properly inspected 
in light of this and, if so, will he release those findings? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the facilities people within 
a division will continue to work with the ministry and will 
continue to try and make sure that we do everything we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raised specifically Prairie 
Spirit School Division, and I want to reiterate again, Mr. 
Speaker, that the safety of students and staff is absolutely 
paramount. We saw the media coverage a while ago; we’ve 
been in contact with that school division to ensure that 
precautions are in place and the safety needs of the students and 
staff are being met at the affected schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007, we have invested over $700 million 
into school infrastructure. Prairie Spirit has had projects such as 
the new Warman middle year school, an addition and 
renovation of the Martensville High School, and multiple 
relocatable classrooms throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, 
preventive maintenance funding has increased by 28 per cent 
over last year to $21 million. In the past two years, Prairie Spirit 
School Division has received more than $2 million in 
preventative maintenance funding alone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister brags about 
supposed spending but, you know, in light of the fact that 
schools are being propped up with two-by-fours and 
two-by-sixes and have been found actually unsafe, it’s 
absolutely senseless for that Education minister to get up and 
speak like that. We’ve heard that this issue is at least as big as 
$1.5 billion in this province when it comes to education 
infrastructure, the needs of our students. 
 
We put in a freedom of information request asking for any 

analysis, any reports about those infrastructure needs, about 
schools that are structurally unsound, not safe, and schools that 
are desperately in need of renovations. But this government 
refused to release any reports, any analysis, claiming that it’s all 
some big state secret that is only there for the eyes of the 
Premier and cabinet. 
 
To the minister: how on earth is that acceptable? How is it 
acceptable that only the Premier and cabinet ministers should 
know the true state of our schools and whether or not they’re 
safe for students across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when we formed 
government, we inherited a $1.2 billion capital deficit in our 
schools. Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent $700 million on capital in 
our schools, and we still have a long ways to go because of the 
deficiency and the defects that we got from the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to Prairie Spirit school again, 
Prairie school division. Mr. Speaker, preventative maintenance 
funding has increased by 28 per cent over last year to $21 
million. In the past two years, Prairie Spirit School Division has 
received more than $2 million in preventative maintenance 
funding alone. Mr. Speaker, I can also point out that Prairie 
Spirit has $5.8 million in unrestricted reserves. We want them 
to spend the money wisely. We think spending the money on 
the capital in their school division is a good thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an emergent funding program this year. 
There’s $3 million available in that. Prairie Spirit has received 
funding from that for structural projects at Langham, Delisle 
and Hanley. We will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, unlike 
the members opposite that scared people out of the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the bragging and boasting 
of the Education minister is totally counter to what one hears 
from school divisions from across Saskatchewan who have 
been very clear that the funding and the so-called preventative 
maintenance funding of this government has been entirely 
inadequate. 
 
The simple fact is that students and parents and teachers and 
educational supports that work directly in these schools deserve 
to know the true conditions of those buildings, at least whether 
or not they’re safe or not, but this government won’t even say 
whether all schools have been properly inspected. We hear that 
here today. And it refuses to release any reports about 
infrastructure problems in schools because it says that 
information is a big state secret only for the eyes of the Premier 
and the cabinet. That’s nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the minister: what does the government know about the state 
of our kids’ schools that it so desperately wants to keep secret? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to work with 
our school divisions across the province. There’s good trustees 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6341 

and good people that are working hard. We inherited a $1.2 
billion deficit from the members opposite. We will do 
everything we can to remedy that as quickly as we can. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the record of those people was they closed 176 
schools. We built 40 schools. Mr. Speaker, they neglected the 
schools they didn’t close. We’ve invested almost four times 
what the NDP did in schools across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP drove 35,000 students out of our 
province. They underfunded school divisions to the point where 
there were tax revolts across the province. The ratepayers had to 
pick up the tab after the fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies for the hard work that 
we’ve done. We have more work to do, but we’ll take no 
lessons from the people opposite. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased 
operating funding by 26.5 per cent; we have increased capital 
funding by 268 per cent. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Trip Taken by Creative Saskatchewan Executive Officer 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this year’s Oscar for 
wildly misplaced priorities has to go to this Sask Party 
government along with the Oscar for extreme hypocrisy in 
dealing a death blow to an entire film industry and then heading 
off to Hollywood to whoop it up at this year’s Academy 
Awards. 
 
This is the government that shamefully decimated our 
province’s film industry, taking a major step backward in 
economic diversification and a vibrant arts and culture scene, 
and yet this is the same government that sent its Crown 
corporation’s CEO [chief executive officer] to Los Angeles to 
attend an Oscar’s party, even though there’s supposedly a freeze 
on any travel that’s not essential. 
 
To the minister: does he have an answer yet? Does he really 
think that trip was essential? Does he really think Saskatchewan 
people should pay for it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find myself 
in a position where I’m going to have to correct the member 
opposite’s rhetoric in relation to all things it seems. But the 
CEO of Creative Saskatchewan met with . . . went to Los 
Angeles to investigate the market opportunities within the Los 
Angeles region in the fine art and fine craft areas for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So travel decisions are decided by the board of Creative 
Saskatchewan. This specific trip was approved by the board. 
Given the restraint measures, the board reviews all travel on a 
case-by-case basis for agencies like Creative Saskatchewan that 
have a greater reliance on travel in carrying out their mandate. 
This will present some challenges, but the same criteria should 
generally be applied. They’ve already reduced their travel by 50 

per cent as . . . [inaudible]. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — According to the government, one of the 
reasons why the CEO of Creative Sask flew to Los Angeles was 
to plan a big Saskatchewan-sponsored Canada Day party in 
Hollywood. 
 
Schools in our province are being held up by temporary posts. 
Our hospitals and the senior care facilities are seriously 
understaffed. People from rural Saskatchewan have to come to 
the legislature to demand basic health care services in their 
communities. Yet this government is choosing to spend money 
on a party in Hollywood. To the minister: how can he justify 
such misplaced priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I can correct the record 
again. The CEO of Creative Saskatchewan didn’t go to an 
Oscar party, didn’t go to the Oscars, period. So went to meet 
with the fine art and the fine craft communities in order to 
market Saskatchewan fine art. That is absolutely the record. 
And I appreciate the fact that they like to spin and make up little 
stories here, Mr. Speaker, but in this particular situation and in 
all situations, Creative Saskatchewan is going to market the 
creative industries for Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 145 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all getting back 
into the swing of things, I think it’s clear. But practically, this 
particular piece of legislation is government’s response to 
suggestions that have come to the government from the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to speak at length about this 
particular legislation as it relates to how the various parts of the 
bill respond to that particular report. It’s clear that much of the 
response will come in the regulations and we don’t have those 
regulations yet at this time. But practically it looks as if it’s the 
type of bill which will allow for waiver of fees in certain 
situations where people can no longer or can’t afford the fees in 
either their application to court or their application to various 
tribunals. But, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments to 
make on this and I suggest that this matter be moved to a 



6342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is the motion 
by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act be moved to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill has been moved to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 146 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular bill 
obviously relates to the ones that we’ve just moved to the 
committee. It basically is a bilingual bill that deals with 
amendments to The Court of Appeal Act, The Queen’s Bench 
Act, and The Small Claims Act, as all three of those bills are 
bilingual bills. And so practically what it does is make sure that 
any of the fee waiver provisions of Bill 145 also will apply to 
Bill 146 and will comply with the provisions that we have 
around bilingual legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been moving along at some would say a 
glacial pace — others would say it is a fairly reasonable pace — 
to have as many bills prepared and available for people in both 
official languages. And it’s a long-term project in response to 
some judicial pronouncements around the constitution or the 
provisions of the constitution as it relates to legislation that 
needs to be in bilingual form. We know that there have been 
some more cases recently that have addressed this issue in other 
provinces around the numbers of bills and the speed at which 
this has happened. I don’t think it’s an issue for us in 
Saskatchewan yet, but I know we need to be very careful that 
we’re doing this work and we’re doing it in a very considerate 
way. 
 
The importance of this, Mr. Speaker, is that under our 
legislation for Canada, and especially the legislation as it relates 
to the creation of the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta, 
incorporated some very clear accommodations or agreements at 
a national level around the use of both official languages. And 

clearly it was a discussion between Ontario, Quebec, New 
Brunswick, around what would happen in Western Canada. 
 
And what we know is that many of us in Western Canada know 
some French but we’re not totally bilingual. Well maybe our 
children are. But what we also recognize is that we have very 
strong French-speaking communities throughout Saskatchewan, 
throughout Alberta, and clearly in Manitoba. And it’s important 
that our laws are in a form that can be used by them. It’s also 
clear that it becomes a very difficult task for the lawyers who 
operate in French languages to make sure that all of these cases 
are argued appropriately. 
 
I know that we now have many more judges and many more 
clerks who are able to handle totally French court cases. This 
will allow for more . . . This particular legislation will allow for 
fee waivers in some kinds of cases and it’s very clear that these 
fee waivers will also be in the French language. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any further comments about this 
and I don’t think any of my colleagues do either, so we suggest 
that this matter be moved to committee. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 146, The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2014 be moved to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Bill No. 141 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to 
rise again to speak to this Bill No. 141. We’ve had an 
opportunity to comment on it a few times here in the fall 
session. We do have some questions that have been brought to 
our attention in the intervening break, and I just want to 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6343 

highlight some of those here today. 
 
First of all, some of the clarification that people have received 
is that the intent of this bill is to retain the Provincial Archives 
as a third party agency, and as far as we know that’s very 
unique for Canadian provincial archives. Archives need to be 
able to make an independent assessment of what records have 
archival value. 
 
So there’s been some concerns raised about one of the clauses, 
particularly 6(3), and we certainly want to ask a few more 
questions about that once we get this bill into committee. And 
that is, particularly 6(3) gives the minister some discretion in 
the archives now, and that’s concerning I think on a number of 
levels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It says that: 
 

The minister may give directions that must be followed by 
the Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, the Provincial 
Archivist or both in exercising their powers and fulfilling 
their duties and purposes pursuant to this Act and the 
regulations. 

 
But this is concerning because we’re wondering how far this 
direction applies. Does it apply to all the powers and 
responsibilities? Does it apply to areas where the Provincial 
Archivist’s judgment is required? 
 
Another example is clause 18(2)(a), and I’ll just take a look at 
that right now, Mr. Speaker. In the new bill, 18(2)(a) says: 
 

. . . the Provincial Archivist may do all or any of the 
following . . . acquire records or obtain the care, custody or 
control of records that the Provincial Archivist has 
determined to be of archival value. 

 
So in that case, can the minister now order the Provincial 
Archivist to destroy records contrary to the Provincial 
Archivist’s own advice? 
 
And another question that’s been raised is, why doesn’t this 
refer only to direction to the Provincial Archives board? It does 
seem to introduce the potential of a dual reporting line for the 
Provincial Archivist. And this may be a question that would 
require some legal interpretation. So we’re certainly going to 
want to be able to raise some questions in committee about that. 
 
Of course bills are bills, but what we know this government is 
particularly good at in some ways, Mr. Speaker, is spending 
money. However we really question the misplaced priorities 
that they’re doing that in. And I think Archives is an example of 
perhaps not being properly funded and mandated, or not being 
properly funded to meet its mandate. We know that the role of 
the Archives is incredibly important, and it’s a framework for 
all government institutions and Crown corporations. That’s 
what the minister said in his comments back in November. 
 
[14:30] 
 
That’s fine, but will the resources be there to enable the 
Provincial Archives to carry out their mandate? Right now it’s 
only open three days a week and we know that there could be 

. . . The concern is that I’ve had constituents, actually university 
professors, contact me, concerned about the length of time that 
it takes to acquire some of the information that they’ve been 
asking for. These are research projects that are time sensitive 
and in some cases they’ve been told that they have to wait up to 
six months to get some archive material. 
 
I think some of the changes in the Act will make it easier, 
though, because we know now that there’s provisions for 
release of documents that may have had some particular health 
information from the past, and in this case the person receiving 
the documents has to basically promise that they won’t release 
any personal information. So I know that will free up some of 
the archivists’ time because currently they have to go through 
every document to ensure there is no personal information that 
could be released. 
 
And again, you know, when we’re talking about misplaced 
priorities, we see, we see it again. We know that the Archives 
are not adequately funded and yet we see this government 
opening up a Premier’s library. Again, you know, is this really 
what’s important when we know that Archives needs more 
support and more funding to carry on their actual legislated 
mandate? So again we see the kind of misplaced priorities and a 
government that hasn’t got its head on right when it comes to 
what’s really important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So those are some of the concerns. I think we are going to have 
more questions in committee, but I believe at this point, as far 
as the debate goes here in the House, my colleagues have had 
an opportunity to comment and so I’m going to conclude the 
debate on this Bill 141. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 141, 
The Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be moved to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 142 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 



6344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now this 
bill that I’m speaking to now is basically a secondary bill in 
relation to Bill 141. So we know that occasionally there have to 
be consequential amendments made separately in a separate bill 
to bills that are being amended. In this case, The Archives and 
Public Records Management Act which I just spoke to, that 
we’re looking forward to asking the minister questions in 
committee, in this case there’s a couple of other Acts that are 
affected by this change that’s being proposed by the 
government. 
 
First of all, The Education Act, there’s a requirement to 
substitute section 369(3). And then section 37 of The Evidence 
Act has to be struck out and amended as well just to reflect the 
new name. So this is something where we see it’s a very short 
bill. There’s only two bills that need to be changed. And part of 
the reason for that is the fact that The Education Act and The 
Evidence Act are actually prepared in both official languages in 
this province. And so the law that changes them also has to be 
done in deux langues officielles du Canada [Translation: 
Canada’s two official languages]. And I think that’s something 
that’s very important to note. 
 
We know that the francophone community is really pushing 
hard to continue to see bills translated into both official 
languages. And there’s a case actually before the Supreme 
Court from Alberta right now where a gentlemen has pushed his 
cause all the way to the Supreme Court to require the Alberta 
government to translate their laws into both official languages. 
 
Now we don’t know whether this government is prepared to do 
the same. Certainly back in the day when it was originally 
challenged, there was basically an out for the provinces because 
all they had to do was remove a certain clause in their bills to 
say that they’re bilingual, or sorry, unilingual. And that has 
worked for the last two and a half decades, but that’s currently 
before the courts again. If that happens we know this will be a 
huge expense, and I don’t know if it’s showing up as a liability 
in the government’s books right now or not, but if this court 
case is successful this government will need to ensure that the 
law as interpreted by the Supreme Court is properly 
implemented in the provinces. 
 
We’ve seen the Premier muse about constitutional 
proclamations by the Supreme Court in another recent instance 
relating to the right to strike, and the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour has successfully brought a case before the Supreme 
Court which, for the first time in Canada’s history, we’ve seen 
our highest level of court declare that the right to strike is a 
constitutional right. And I think for the workers from the 
province of Saskatchewan who need to access that right from 
time to time, it’s a very important part of our workers’ tool box, 
shall we say, in order to ensure that they’re protected, that 
they’re given proper and due care. 
 
And it was saddening for me. I was at the SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] convention, 

and I happened to hear the Premier’s remarks as he mused out 
loud about whether or not he would respect the Supreme 
Court’s decision. And he made some interesting comment about 
how he represented the people of Saskatchewan but, Mr. 
Speaker, last time I checked, most of the workers in 
Saskatchewan are people in Saskatchewan, so I’m not really 
sure who it is the Premier is actually representing when he 
makes comments like that in public. It’s quite, I think, 
distracting and disturbing to hear those kinds of comments 
being made. And certainly as far as workers’ rights go, I think 
this is a monumental decision that I hope our government will 
respect and implement as soon as possible. 
 
When it comes to the French language challenge before the 
Supreme Court, I mean that’s another example of we’ll wait and 
see what this government does once the Supreme Court has 
made its ruling. Obviously the people from the Ministry of 
Justice will need to do their interpretation as well, and we may 
be seeing more bills such as Bill 142 or a longer list of bills I 
guess when we do the bilingual bills that are now required for 
that shorter list of bills that have been translated into French. 
 
So again we know that The Archives Act, we do have a number 
of questions for the minister when we do get into committee. I 
look forward to asking him those questions at that time and just 
to determine exactly what extent the minister intends to 
intervene in the decisions of the Provincial Archivist and the 
decisions of the provincial Archives Board because I think 
that’s something we have to be very clear about so that both the 
archivist knows and the board also know what lengths the 
government will go to interfere in what should really be an 
independent third party body, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again we just have a couple of small changes in Bill 142 to 
The Education Act and The Evidence Act to correct those bills, 
which are bilingual bills. And at this point there’s no further 
debate from this side of the House on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 142, 
The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act be moved to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6345 

Bill No. 143 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Pleasure 
to join debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization 
Amendment Act, 2014. This of course follows up an earlier 
effort on the part of this government that had been in effect 
since October 29th, 2012, and again that particular effort had 
followed on the heels of a fair amount of consultation with the 
sector and, more broadly throughout the province, students, 
faculty, administrators throughout the post-secondary education 
sector. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s always a balance to be struck 
when it comes to questions of education, but post-secondary 
education in particular, between access and trying to cast that 
net as broadly as possible, and the assurance of quality. 
 
And it’s certainly . . . One of the things that it’s occasionally 
remarked upon, Mr. Speaker, as regards post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan, that one of the biggest barriers that 
students confront when trying to access post-secondary 
education, one of the biggest barriers is geography. And 
through different means, Mr. Speaker, we’ve sought to break 
down that barrier to provide the educational opportunities to the 
learners, take the learning opportunities to the learners, Mr. 
Speaker. And be it through distance education being offered by 
the universities of Regina or Saskatchewan, be it through the 
regional college system, be it through the great work done by 
the Saskatchewan Polytechnic, again be it through the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies or the First 
Nations University of Canada, be it through the work that is 
done by the Gabriel Dumont Institute or the Gabriel Dumont 
Technical Institute, there are different ways in which different 
generations of those seeking to educate Saskatchewan people 
have sought to get over that barrier of education. And again 
there’s always that balance to be struck. 
 
And one institution that this particularly deals with, Mr. 
Speaker, and I should be, I guess, straight up right off the bat — 
and perhaps I’ve mentioned this on the record before — but my 
late mother was a graduate of Briercrest Bible College, and my 
late brother was a graduate of Briercrest Bible College. And 
both of them very proud of that association, and both of them 
valued very much the education that they secured at that 
institution. So in terms of the way that this legislation has 
extended degree granting, a broader measure of degree-granting 
authority to an institution like Briercrest Bible College or BBI 
[Briercrest Bible Institute], I think from a personal standpoint, 
Mr. Speaker, is something that I was very interested in. And I 
know that from a broader provincial perspective, it would seem 
to be a good move. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is make certain that 
we’re striking that balance between ever seeking to extend the 
opportunity, the access that is there for learners, but also to 
make certain that the quality provisions are looked after, that 

we’re making sure that the degree is up to standards and is well 
recognized throughout not just the province, Mr. Speaker, but 
the country. And indeed this is something that we’re sending 
Saskatchewan grads out into the world, and we need to have 
their credentials recognized, so we need to take the steps to 
secure that. 
 
The work that the sector has undertaken along with the 
ministry, we’ll have more specific questions about that in 
committee, Mr. Speaker. But certainly the establishment and 
then the ongoing work of the Saskatchewan Higher Education 
Quality Assurance Board, again a body that’s very distinctly 
mandated with the job of seeking assurances around quality, 
we’ll be interested to ask some questions about the experience 
to date of that body when we get to committee. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We’ll be interested to see how the question of the 
grandfathering period that was initially brought forward in the 
first legislation but which has been dealt with in this legislation, 
we’ll be interested to ask further questions on the specifics of 
that and to get a further take from the minister and officials on 
the impacts for Briercrest and, as the minister had referenced in 
his second reading speech, the Cape Breton University in 
partnership with the Great Plains College or Athabasca 
University and Lakeland College. So how the grandfathering 
impacts those situations, we’ll be very interested to seek further 
clarification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course we’ve been consulting with the sector. It would 
seem that so far this is largely well received, but we’ll be doing 
our own quality assurance on that appearance of the situation, 
Mr. Speaker, as well. 
 
But with that, I would conclude my remarks just stating that I 
know many of my colleagues have weighed in on this 
legislation in terms of the staging and the process that we go 
through around the legislative process, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
getting ready. Again we look forward to a greater opportunity to 
question and to discuss the merits of this bill in committee. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks and welcome the 
Government House Leader taking care of this legislation. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
of the Minister of Advanced Education that Bill No. 143, The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 



6346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

2014 be moved to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 144 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 144, An Act to amend The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act and to make a consequential amendment 
to The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right off the top I think it’s important to recognize 
that this particular bill actually changes the name of the 
legislation that we’ve had in place now for about 20 years, and 
the new name for the legislation will be The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Act. And, Mr. Speaker, according to the 
minister, and I think it’s probably clear from the legislation, the 
purpose of this is to recognize that there are situations of 
violence between individuals that don’t always fit in to a 
description of domestic violence, and so that means that the 
attempt is being made here to broaden the scope of the 
legislation to provide protection to Saskatchewan citizens in 
other relationships. 
 
And you know, what are some of these other relationships? 
Well clearly there are situations where people do live together, 
but it’s not necessarily a traditional domestic relationship, but 
they are involved in violence. 
 
Also the legislation is intended to extend to the whole world of 
the Internet and the electronic contact between people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this as we all know has quite a number of very 
difficult issues involved, whether it’s the issues like the Rehtaeh 
Parsons case in Nova Scotia where a young woman is harassed 
as a result of an incident in the community, and we know from 
reading our paper that the repercussions of that particular 
incident are continuing on a monthly basis as the community 
tries to deal with some of those particular issues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that this topic has been a discussion of the 
federal government and of provincial governments through the 
ministries of Justice in an attempt to see if there are some other 
ways to deal with some of the very difficult issues that arise. 
 
And it appears that this legislation is our Saskatchewan attempt 
to try to set some kinds of boundaries around some of this 
activity, and we’ll, I think, want to hear more about what’s 
intended, because clearly the legislation or the changes aren’t 
extensive but also it will, I think, include a number of 
regulatory changes which we haven’t seen yet. And so how 
those all interplay are going to be crucial in how this legislation 
protects Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
1994 I think was the year that Mr. Mitchell introduced this 
legislation in Saskatchewan. It was, I think, quite a challenge 
for the policing community, the social work community, others 

to understand how it might work and how it would provide 
protection for victims. What we know over the years is that 
there have been further refinements on the emergency 
protection orders and all of the related kinds of orders that can 
be made under this legislation, and all of them have responded 
to particular situations where maybe the original legislation 
wasn’t quite the right fit to deal with a particular problem. 
 
And so I think it’s important to recognize that this particular 
amendment that’s coming forth now is based on the original 
legislation, the experience of many of the people who have been 
involved with the use of the legislation — whether it’s police, 
prosecutors, defence counsel, and the judges — and also 
responses from individuals who have been caught up in this 
particular system. And practically nobody wants to be involved 
in a situation where they are the victim or, for that matter, the 
perpetrator of assault in an interpersonal situation, in a domestic 
situation. And often it’s fuelled by alcohol or drugs or 
something else, but other times it has nothing to do with that 
either. And ultimately the question becomes, what kinds of 
assistance can be provided? What kind of protection is there? 
What kind of mental health services are there to supplement 
these interventions that this legislation allows? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that most people in Saskatchewan 
who have been involved using this type of legislation, even 
though they may have complaints at specific places or times, 
recognize the necessity to have these, in effect, extraordinary 
powers to intervene into, you know, family situations or 
interpersonal situations. 
 
And so I think that what we need to do in the legislature is 
understand from the minister and from the officials what 
specific instances they are responding to when they make the 
changes in this legislation. It’s hard to speculate exactly where 
certain things have happened but I think we can get a general 
idea from the legislation. But sometimes it’s helpful to have laid 
out for us what kinds of problems have been run into, usually 
by judges who are looking back and trying to sort out what 
happened in a particular situation. 
 
And we all want to make sure that there’s the appropriate 
balance between the protection of rights of individuals and the 
protection of people, their protection in a sense of their safety. 
And clearly the safety of people will sometimes end up 
meaning that the rights of certain individuals will be curtailed, 
whether it’s by use of incarceration or restraining orders or 
what other kinds of things that are necessary. 
 
Now this particular, the particular amendments that are coming 
here also relate to a broader review of legislation as it relates to 
vulnerable adults, and I think just the recognition right in the 
title of the legislation that we’ll also be amending, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act recognizes that 
whole area of work as well is something that does relate to this 
particular legislation. 
 
And what we often have is a situation where some of the mental 
health issues interplay with the family issues or the relationship 
issues and with the Criminal Code. And unfortunately, 
sometimes, as has been identified by many of the mental health 
groups, we don’t end up having the services available in as 
timely a fashion as they should be, such that it falls on the 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6347 

police or on the criminal court system to deal with some 
individuals where they really do need the psychiatric or mental 
health help. And as a result, many of the rules around 
guardianship and taking care of the actual physical person also 
then, you know, move over or are covered by some of these 
types of orders. 
 
And it’s always been a difficult area for lawyers who are 
involved, because clients will come in to see you and they end 
up having their own particular perspective, but they’re also 
maybe not as cognizant of their own role in causing all of the 
problems that are there. 
 
Now this legislation I don’t think intervenes and does a lot for 
that, but what it does try to do is make sure that there are very 
appropriate protective orders in place to protect individuals who 
may be caught in a relationship, domestic or otherwise, with 
someone who needs boundaries set and restraining kinds of 
orders put in place. 
 
This area of legislation is one that I think we should all 
recognize as one that continues to evolve and continues to 
respond to the situations that arise. Now what we’re all 
concerned about in our community is, any time that this kind of 
violence creates a level of fear, that makes it difficult for people 
to live fulfilling lives. And many times these orders, under this 
type of legislation, are actually an attempt to protect the 
children or others within the situation from some of the 
violence that has taken place. And I think that we need to 
recognize that as well. 
 
I know the legislation ends up talking about emergency shelters, 
and sometimes there are words that describe these things, but 
maybe not as many physical spaces for the people who need to 
be protected. And so we need to make sure that we understand 
what the budget implications of this legislation is, what the 
budget implications are, and what kinds of dollars the Ministry 
of Justice will be putting forward as it relates to the courts and 
to the police and to the others. But also on the social services 
side, what other kinds of funding will be available to provide 
some of the services that are referred to in the legislation. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now often the first sort of response to a particular incident is by 
the police approaching a Justice of the Peace in a community 
who . . . And that person ends up having to make some of the 
initial orders, often with not as much evidence as anybody 
would like for them to have. And so I know that the legislation 
appears to set out criteria and the scope of factors to give a bit 
more flexibility, but also a bit more power to the justices of the 
peace so that they can respond very quickly when issues arise. 
We will want to understand how that interaction is going to be 
described and how it’s going to be funded. 
 
We know that sometimes the distances in Saskatchewan are a 
factor in this particular legislation. I know that there are some 
opportunities to get orders over telephone or other electronic 
communication, but it also adds a further challenge around 
getting the protection orders in place and in a situation that will 
provide for the protection for families, children, and others who 
are involved. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the legislation itself is pretty 
straightforward. It builds on the ’94 legislation. It makes sure 
that the definitions include same-sex relations and relationships 
and others in a way that is entirely appropriate. It makes sure 
that the relationship itself doesn’t — and how it’s described — 
doesn’t move it outside the Act. And I think that’s one of the 
reasons for changing the word domestic to interpersonal, to 
make sure that people can be protected. So these are all 
important ways that the legislation will take effect. 
 
Now one of the interesting aspects of the legislation is how 
detailed it is about a lot of the personal property issues — 
identification, you know, cheque books, bank cards, all these 
. . . children’s clothing. Because from experience, people 
working in this area know that it’s often those things which are 
the most difficult to resolve. And it makes it pretty clear in the 
legislation that’s existing that there can be some very specific 
orders made, and these provisions are expanded. And as I said 
earlier, the Justice of the Peace has been given further powers to 
give them a little more flexibility in dealing with some of the 
issues that immediately arise. 
 
Now one of the other, you know, factors that’s involved is that 
sometimes the people that may be affected by the order may 
actually have a personal guardian, and that’s been in the 
legislation up and to this point. And that means that the 
individual may not have full capacity. What this also reflects, I 
think, is some recognition around the dementia, Alzheimer’s, 
issues that are part of our broader society. And sometimes the 
methods of providing care, providing control of people who 
aren’t fully in control of their own capacity can be a huge 
challenge. 
 
I think this legislation has aspects of it that can be used in some, 
I would think, extreme cases to deal with some of the problems 
that arise with the violence that may or may not be associated 
with dementia. And I think it’ll be also interesting for us in 
committee, to understand how that interaction will take place, 
how it will work in relationship to some of the other orders 
that’ll be made under various adult guardianship legislation. 
Because ultimately the goal is to protect those people who need 
the protection, and quite often in those dementia cases that 
includes the person who is the perpetrator, the one who is 
victimizing someone else. And it becomes a major, major 
challenge. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation also has broader 
consequences into some of the other discussions that are 
happening in our community around violence against women, 
and it’s important to recognize that that was the place where 
some of this legislation was originally of most use and it will 
continue to be of use. But ultimately it’s really about education 
of the public, of young people, about what is the role of 
violence in any kind of a relationship. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
becomes an ultimate protection, but we’ve got much work to do 
in some other areas to make sure that the next generations of 
our young people will end up having a solid base. 
 
And as identified, all of the harassment issues that come out of 
electronic media become another area where this may or may 
not be the appropriate remedy, and we’ll want to understand 
what’s intended here and whether or not we’re in a position 
where we’re being proactive or whether we’re just being 



6348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

reactive to some of the things that are happening right now. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have had a chance to speak 
about this particular legislation and provide some of our 
concerns at this level. I know that we will continue to have 
questions as the matter goes to committee. It’s important 
legislation for the province; it’s important legislation for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And at this point I would ask it be 
moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 144, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment 
Act, 2014 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 147 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 147, An Act to amend The Class 
Actions Act. And effectively this legislation changes the rules 
around costs in class actions. And what happens is that there’s a 
new section 40 under the legislation, under the heading “Costs,” 
and it effectively ends up making a couple of changes to the 
legislation to effectively give more discretion to the courts 
around their ability to award costs in class action proceedings. 
And it also adds some, you know, in subsection (2), that the 
court may take into account various factors when determining 
whether to award costs, including the public interest, whether 
the action involved a novel point of law, whether the action was 
a test case, and access to justice. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Justice would agree 
with me that these additions to the legislation are effectively 
what judges have always used when they’re looking at whether 
they should award costs in any type of litigation. But it appears 
here that the changes have been made to I guess clarify and 
make sure that there’s much more discretion for the court to 
award costs or not award costs. In other words it’s . . . They do 

have the ability to make that decision. 
 
As you know, when The Class Actions Act was initially 
introduced into Saskatchewan law, there was quite a bit of 
consternation I guess, if I can put it that way, among various 
groups. I think the legislation was brought in just after I had 
been the attorney general although I think I might have been the 
attorney general a little bit in the year 2001 when the legislation 
was introduced because I kind of bumped back into that role a 
couple of times. 
 
When this legislation was introduced, the concern was primarily 
from defendants, not from plaintiffs. And the class action is a 
situation where a person, on behalf of a class — in other words 
on behalf of a whole group of people who have suffered a 
similar wrong — that person can start a lawsuit and then the 
others can be included in that lawsuit. And interestingly 
enough, the group or the institution that was most afraid of the 
legislation was the Government of Saskatchewan because often 
they will be the target of a class action lawsuit. And included in 
that would be Crown corporations or other government bodies. 
And the concern was that you’re giving ability for the little guy 
to take on the big guy. And effectively the legislation did have 
some concerns raised that way but ultimately we, as 
government, decided that we would go ahead with this 
legislation because we thought it is important that certain kinds 
of cases need to get to the courts to be dealt with appropriately. 
 
And we can look at the kinds of litigation over the years which 
have used class actions to right wrongs, whether it’s breast 
implant cases or cases involving defective automobiles or cases 
involving overcharging of fees within certain commercial 
operations. All of these kinds of things are ones where one 
individual might only suffer a few hundred or a few thousand 
dollars damage but a whole group of people, whether it’s 5,000, 
10,000, or 300, suffer as a group a substantial amount of 
damage. And what the legislation does is allow for these cases 
to be brought forward. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And as you know, we have in Saskatchewan lawyers who are 
expert plaintiff lawyers who have brought forward these cases, 
and we’ve seen that on a number of places, and there are a 
number of law firms that do that. By the same token, we also 
have expert defence counsel who handle the other side of these 
kinds of cases, often on behalf of some fairly substantial 
defendants. 
 
But practically, one of the questions that always arises in the 
litigation is the question of costs. And especially when you have 
indigent litigants or litigants with not very much money, the 
threat of having an order for costs given against them at the end 
of a particular lawsuit can often be quite a substantial deterrent. 
And I think that’s what this legislation is trying to deal with, is 
to make sure that the courts have the ability to, even in a case 
where somebody loses their class action lawsuit . . . It may be 
that the case was in the public interest or involved a novel point 
of law or was a test case or it was a question of access to justice 
or some other factor. All of those things can be used by the 
court to say, well even though you lost this case, we’re not 
going to award any costs against you. In other words, the large 
defendant, the one, the well-heeled, the defendant with a lot of 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6349 

money isn’t going to be able to then further punish you even 
though they may have won the case. And that seems like pretty 
reasonable legislation to me, that we would expand that. 
 
Now maybe there’s some other things that are in this kind of 
short bill that affect this, and we will obviously have a chance 
to ask some more questions when we get into the committee. 
But practically it appears to be a situation where the courts and 
lawyers involved in these cases have said there just needs to be 
a few more remedies. There needs to be a little bit more 
discretion to make sure that, even though a group or a class of 
people loses a case, they maybe shouldn’t get dinged with a 
huge amount of costs involved in the case. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that on the face of it, we’re in favour of this 
type of legislation. We’re in favour of fixing what may be 
places where it needs to be tweaked a bit, and this appears to be 
an area where that is true. I think the best place to get further 
information about what triggered the amendments and why 
we’re doing them now will be in committee and so at this point 
I think it makes sense that the bill go to committee. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 147, The 
Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 150 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to stand today and enter into the debate on Bill 
No. 150, An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
This is an important piece of legislation, and it’s an important 
one that we get right. 

Really this Act speaks to the balance of power of those who are 
in a situation where they’re renting their housing, a basic human 
need, and those who are in the business of renting those 
properties out. So we need to get the balance of power right. 
We need to make sure that the interests of the owner, the 
business, is considered, and that they have their rights 
protected. Clearly it’s important this important function that we 
know around the world is thriving and alive and is well. That’s 
a critical, critical point. But at the same time, the other point of 
the balance of power are those tenants, the ones who are 
actually renting something that is so, so, so important to health 
and well-being. It’s critical that we recognize that. 
 
Now we know tenants come in various ways, whether they are 
in extreme poverty; whether they are actually escaping family 
abuse, domestic abuse; right to the very, very wealthy. And we 
just get amazed at what people can afford to pay for rent. But it 
is the world in which we live in which many people can afford 
certain things that are their choices. 
 
And the same can be said on the other side when you come to 
the landlords. Landlords come in a wide range as well: those 
who are just the mom and pop operation, not really professional 
in it, but have decided that this is a good way to invest some 
money to buy a second home and rent it out once. Maybe they 
did it for a child maybe who’s going to university or a 
post-secondary institution and then decided that they would 
continue on because of the stream of income that was a good 
one. Maybe it was a handyman who decided that he was a bit of 
a fixer-upper and didn’t mind looking after a few houses and 
getting some rent, and that’s an important thing. Or somebody 
just renting out a basement suite. We see now, we hear about 
granny suites. We see all sorts of different arrangements for 
housing, and some of them are very interesting. And some 
really meet unique needs of tenants, and we sure appreciate that. 
 
And of course we go to the multi-national landlords, the REITs 
[real estate investment trust], the residential e-i-t income trusts. 
I’m not sure what the “e” stands for, but these are large 
conglomerates who made it their business to enter into this kind 
of market. And we really respect that, very important. And 
we’ve seen that change in Saskatchewan in the last 8 or 10 
years where we’ve seen some of the large properties being 
bought up in all our cities, in all our communities. And really 
now it would be very interesting actually . . . And I don’t know, 
this would be an interesting thing, and we’ll have a chance to 
ask in committee as this kind of bill generates many, many 
questions. 
 
But one of the questions is do we know what kind of 
concentration we have in terms of landlord concentration in 
Saskatchewan? We know for example that one of the biggest 
landlords, if not the very biggest of course, is Sask Housing. 
But I think that it’s important that we do get this balance right, 
and we do understand that this is a basic human need. This is 
not an extra; housing is critical. Housing is very critical. 
 
Likewise, we recognize the landlord’s investment is significant. 
These are not small investments that you can just walk away 
from. You clearly have to have some ground rules that meet 
both the tenants and the landlords. And so when we take a look 
at a bill like this, we want to make sure we get it right. 
 



6350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

Now I see that the minister — and I will talk a little bit about 
his comments in a few minutes — does talk a bit about what 
drove some of the recommendations. But I would like to 
challenge him and the folks in the Ministry of Justice as to how 
can they do . . . How do they feel about the consultations? 
 
We’ve not heard much on this side from different community 
groups or others. Sometimes we worry about that because we 
worry that maybe people are a little afraid of coming forward. 
You know, you don’t want to put yourself in a precarious 
position because you’ve put an idea forward that might 
challenge somebody. It’s not meant to hurt or tip that balance of 
power as I say, but it might be a better idea, a better way to fix 
the mousetrap so to speak. But in fact, there might be 
repercussions, and they would say, I’d rather not say because I 
just want to keep my head low and not antagonize anybody. 
And that way, I can keep paying my rent, and all I want to do is 
make sure my rent doesn’t go up. 
 
And of course we know what we’ve seen in Saskatchewan in 
terms of rents and what they used to be and what they are now. 
The big question of course is around affordability, and that’s a 
big, big challenge. And of course, we’ve talked many times on 
this floor about The Residential Tenancies Act and the 
weaknesses in it to really protect the affordability of rental 
units. 
 
And so it’s really, it’s a concern because quite often we’ll have 
this government say that in fact it feels the housing situation is 
quite well; in fact it’s thriving. And really we have to challenge 
it, challenge them on that because we really don’t know. 
 
They will point, they will point to the vacancy rate that the 
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation, CMHC, releases 
twice a year and say look, it’s over 3 per cent or it’s floating 
around 3 per cent. Fair enough. That is one indicator, but it’s 
not a very strong indicator. And in fact, in many ways if you 
just take it by itself, it can be really misleading. And we know 
that; we can go on at length about stats that are misleading. 
 
And probably that is one of the worst misleading stats when 
people use that to say this is a healthy housing marketplace, 
though it just tells us the vacancy rate. You know, you’ve got to 
be clear; it tells us what the vacancy rate is. And even when 
they start to average it out . . . You know, I was just at a CMHC 
housing conference when they do their housing outlook. It was 
just a few weeks ago here in Regina. And of course there’s 
many concerns about the rental market, but one of them . . . 
obviously we talk a lot about vacancy rates. 
 
And then you can drill down into different areas of the cities 
and you can say, so why is it, for example, on the west side of 
Saskatoon, the vacancy rate floats around 6 per cent? Why is 
that? Why is that? And people would say, well it must be a very 
good housing market. Well actually it’s not because the 
question is it’s because of affordability. People cannot afford to 
have their own units so they double up and that means a lot of 
units are left open. And that’s a real tragedy that people can’t 
afford their own place. 
 
Now it’s not just a vanity thing that we all want to have our 
own place. We know and we know that there’s much research 
in terms of housing and how important it is to have adequate 

housing that fits your family. And if you have three children 
and a single or a household headed by two people, you know, 
you need more than one bedroom. You need to have more than 
one bedroom, but once we started to get into two- or 
three-bedroom houses or rental units, all of a sudden the price 
starts to go way up, and you have some real, real challenges. 
 
So you have affordability and CMHC has done a little bit of 
work in this area but clearly not enough. And we think this is a 
problem both of the federal government and the provincial 
government, and it shows up in The Residential Tenancies Act 
that we really don’t know what’s going on with the rental 
marketplace as much as we should. We don’t know how 
affordable it really is for families, especially those who are in 
low income or mid income who are hoping to save money so 
they can now enter into buying a house that is affordable to 
them. And this is a big, big challenge. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The third dimension of good housing stats really is around the 
core housing need. Now as I said, when you get into the west 
side of Saskatoon for example, the housing vacancy rate is 
higher than 3 per cent. I believe it’s in the 5’s per cent. But it 
could be because of affordability. It could be because people 
just can’t afford to have a place on their own. 
 
The other reason that unit may be vacant, other than being too 
expensive, it’s just too run down. It may be a place nobody 
would live in, but it’s still on the marketplace because we know 
that people, if they’re forced to, may have to live in a place that 
is below standards, below standards in terms of adequate space 
for their family, adequate heating, which is a big deal in 
Saskatchewan, you know. When we get into winter, you don’t 
want to have windows that are super drafty. 
 
It’s very important that we have good heating, a good structural 
building in place, all of those things, good water, adequate 
water so people can bathe. They can use the toilets. They can 
use the water to cook. We want to make sure it’s not problems 
with the plumbing that’s maybe causing health problems. These 
are all issues. 
 
And so we don’t have that data, and we really need to have 
some good, solid data. And when the government hangs its hat 
on vacancy rates and says, listen, the housing problem now is 
solved. It’s at 3 per cent. Everything is A-okay. No it’s not. And 
we owe it, we owe it to people to make sure they have good, 
safe, affordable housing. It’s not just a saying, but we want to 
make sure the housing is safe. 
 
And of course clearly in Saskatchewan, you know, we’ve seen 
this over the last few weeks, but the story is much longer, much 
longer when we talk about fires in homes. And whether we’re 
talking on First Nation reserves, that’s a big, big issue. But I can 
tell you in my own riding of Saskatoon Centre, when we have 
house fires, it’s a pretty serious issue. The housing stock in my 
area is older and sometimes in tough shape, and we have issues. 
And I do need to say that the inspectors from Saskatoon fire 
service have done an outstanding job of making sure homes that 
aren’t fit to live in are actually placarded and people are no 
longer in those homes. 
 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6351 

But we’ve had many, many situations, and it’s very sad because 
I can tell you of fires on Avenue E in Saskatoon. Actually it 
was 400 block South and 400 block North one winter where 
young families, two houses, people died. And they were rental 
properties and it was this tragic . . . One situation where smoke 
detectors were not in place. And the progress we’ve made in 
smoke detectors now, I know I might get off topic if I start to 
talk about some of the new smoke detectors, but clearly, clearly 
this is an important issue. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a critical issue 
because I know that we, both sides of the House, did meet with 
firefighters, the international association of professional 
firefighters in December, November-December, to talk about 
how we can have safer homes in our communities. 
 
So all of this ties back to making sure the balance of power is at 
the right point, the right point so that we are as a government 
building, creating, sustaining the kind of society that we want in 
our communities right across this province. And this bill, this 
Act, The Residential Tenancies Act is a main, main tool. It’s a 
main, main tool, and so we have to get it right. And so when we 
wash our hands of housing responsibilities and say, ah, 
everything’s A-okay; we’re just tweaking here. No, I’ve got to 
tell you, we’ve got a long, long way to go, and we’ll have more 
questions about this in committee. 
 
But I have a bit more to say about this bill because I think 
there’s some really interesting quirks in it that I don’t quite 
understand about how we got to this place here today with the 
bill before us. And I know we can go at length on this, but I do 
want to make sure that if some people did not hear me talk 
about consultation, that how important consultation is, and 
we’ve got to do it in a safe, safe way. Because we know, for 
example, the landlords have the Landlords Association. Fair 
enough, many groups of professionals have associations. We 
applaud that. We think that’s quite appropriate, no issues with 
that. But we know that there is no equivalent for tenants. And 
it’s a very difficult situation, particularly those who are most 
vulnerable or in a very precarious position where they feel like 
they just want to keep their head down and get the rent paid and 
stay on the good side of a landlord, and that’s very, very 
important. 
 
But we know that there are challenges out there. We know there 
are challenges out there. So we want to emphasize how 
important it is in terms of consultation. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the areas . . . This looks like a 
bill that’s relatively straightforward, and I’ll get into the 
minister’s remarks in a few minutes, but I do want to talk a little 
bit about just to . . . And I think I may end up coming back to 
this a couple of times because I do want to underline how 
important some of the language is. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I gave one of my 
better speeches early in November about how important 
language is in our legislation, how important it is to be 
consistent, and how important it is to mean what you say and 
say what you mean and create the legislation around that. Once 
you start to . . . I mean maybe the housing metaphor is like a . . . 
We see this with problems, and people fix roofs on houses and 
they just patch and patch and obviously you don’t know where 

the real roof is and sometimes it’s better to pull the whole thing 
back and roof it the right way and make sure it’s all done right. 
 
But here are the two pieces that I find really kind of interesting. 
Now the first one calls for section 2 being amended this way: 3, 
section 2 amended, 3(b) by adding the following clause after 
(e), (e.1), and I’m quoting: 
 

‘housing program’ means a program offered pursuant to 
an Act or an Act of the Parliament of Canada that provides 
rental living accommodation to individuals during their 
participation in this program”; and 

 
So they’ve added a new definition in there. And I checked: 
what does this really mean? It means they’re defining what the 
word “housing program” means and some list of definitions in 
The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. So that one’s really 
straightforward. So what they’re really just talking about is 
housing program means a program offered by, pursuant to an 
Act or an Act of the Parliament of Canada, so it’s a federal 
piece of programming that provides rental living 
accommodation to individuals during that participation 
program. Seems relatively straightforward. So we need to know 
more about that. What does that mean? What caused this to 
come forward? 
 
But then further on down the road, section 58 is amended. 
Section 58 is amended and: 
 

12(1) Subsection 58(1) is amended . . . 
 

(b) in clause (1) by striking out “social housing 
program as defined in the regulations” and substituting 
“housing program”. 

 
So what does that mean? What does it mean to be moving out 
of social housing? What does that allow the government then to 
do? You know, and I think this is a very interesting thing and I 
have questions about that because of course we’ve seen some 
changes in the Minister of Social Services, what she has done 
recently, where she has effectively ended affordable housing in 
our large cities, saying everything now will be social housing 
for Sask Housing units. But here you have a situation where 
The Residential Tenancies Act is being amended by taking out 
the words “social housing.” So in legislation we’ve now got rid 
of the words “social housing” and all that it means. 
 
And I think this is an important thing when we think about, you 
know, we’ve seen over the past many years a lot of housing 
summits and a lot of speakers get up and they talk about the 
housing continuum and what does that . . . And we see how 
people move through that. Not everybody starts at one end and 
goes to the other end, but they travel along the continuum in 
many ways. 
 
And whether you start at one end where we know where 
people’s super basic needs are being met, safe houses or 
shelters, that type of thing, fleeing from abuse to social housing, 
and then you get into affordable rental housing and then you get 
into the marketplace, market rents, and then from there people 
may end up staying there. And they may find that rental is the 
thing that they want to do, so they may end up staying there and 
that might be good. That may be what they do for the rest of 



6352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

their lives. Or they may be there to save money and move into 
home ownership, and then you get into what all that means, 
whether that’s condos or whether that’s semi-detached housing, 
that type of thing. Or you then get into seniors’ housing. 
 
But we saw a change in government policy this January which 
really left a lot of questions, and of course we will look forward 
to estimates, about what does that really mean. People were 
confused about what that really means. And of course the 
government at the time talked about, and the minister at the 
time talked about how she really wanted to meet the needs of 
those most in need. And I think we can all support that. We can 
all get behind . . . Those in most need clearly need it most and 
so let’s get behind that. But that doesn’t mean the government 
can only juggle with one ball in the air. You can do other 
things. You can look at that housing continuum. We can look at 
shelters. We can look at social housing. We can look at 
affordable housing. 
 
And that is the role of government, and along that way we can 
see that. But we’ve seen what this government really does 
think. We know, for example, the minister in the fall talked 
about how she didn’t really think there were these desperate, 
homeless people. And clearly that was a thing that she then 
thought a little bit more about and made some further comments 
to that effect. But then we saw Lloydminster. The candidate 
then, soon to become the MLA up there, had the same feelings 
about affordable housing. The government had no role in that. 
And clearly she wanted to clarify her remarks because she let it 
slip what she really, maybe she really felt. 
 
And we have some real problems with that because we think the 
government has a clear responsibility when it comes to housing 
and making sure people have good, safe housing. And as I keep 
saying — I keep coming back to this — that really this is the 
issue when we talk about The Residential Tenancies Act. This is 
the one tool people are counting on to make sure their rights are 
protected because they’re in . . . [inaudible] . . . very vulnerable 
position where they don’t know. 
 
But I was really concerned about what the minister had talked 
about in terms of the social housing and affordable housing 
because we’ve seen over the past couple of years a lot of 
confusion in terms of Sask Housing. Because people actually 
appreciate Sask Housing and they do because it’s safe, it’s 
stable and affordable and predictable and, generally speaking, 
the landlord is a pretty good landlord. 
 
But clearly people have questions because when you change the 
rules and you’re not explaining them very well or you get into a 
bit of what this government likes to get into, a bit of bafflegab 
and not meaning what it says but really trying to confuse 
people, people really worry about that — really worry about 
that. And we see real concerns by some of the tenants who’ve 
come forward, and we had to explain that they may have some 
legitimate questions or no, they’re actually okay. But we need 
to really do better than that. I think the government needs to do 
better than that. 
 
But you know, I want to talk a bit about when we see the 
elimination of affordable housing from Sask Housing. We have 
some serious concerns about what that really means for the 
government’s intention. You know, for example, last August, 

August 26, we got this press release from the federal 
government and the Government of Saskatchewan about a $92 
million investment in affordable housing, and this was an 
extension to the Investment in Affordable Housing Agreement. 
We thought this is great but we thought at the time, so where’s 
the plan? Where is the plan? We’re still, you know, several 
months later wondering, where is the plan? And we see this 
language being changed in The Residential Tenancies Act 
where, you know, in January we got rid of affordable housing. 
Now we’re getting rid of the words “social housing.” What is 
the government up to? 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I think a lot of people have a lot of questions, and we really 
want to know what is up. What is the real vision of this 
government when it comes to providing safe, affordable 
housing for those in the rental markets? We think this is a big, 
big concern. And we know that this government, it can 
manufacture numbers that would really seem to indicate that 
they’re doing a lot of investment, but we know, for example, 
Sask Housing itself, and I’d like to see the minister produce 
numbers, but when we ask for it in questions we get 
stonewalled and we won’t get answers back, but what has Sask 
Housing built themselves in the last several years? What have 
they built themselves? You know, we just haven’t seen that. 
We’ve seen partnerships with other groups, and that’s fair 
enough. That’s good, and that’s a good way to leverage money. 
But what is Sask Housing doing themselves about their own 
housing stock? 
 
Other than, you know, of course we saw the fixed-price 
Deveraux fiasco last fall where the minister allowed a private 
company just to walk away from a fixed-price contract, over 
$400,000, and where, you know, it’s unanimous from all sorts 
of points of view, that’s a bad business practice to get into, to 
allow people to walk away from a fixed-price contract because 
it gives all sorts of bad signals, bad signals to the marketplace. 
And you know, this is a time where the government had to have 
a little spine, had to stand up and say, you’ve got to build those 
units, those 48 units. You’ve got to build them. The contract is 
this. And now we see that the government really doesn’t have a 
spine and really caved in, really caved in. 
 
This is a problem. And so here we have it and I think this is a 
critical piece where we see, what does the legislation really, 
really mean and what will be the impact of programs like this 
for the $92 million? Now the government will say, don’t worry; 
we’ve got it covered. We’ll be able to use that money. But 
we’re wondering what for. Will it be used for affordable 
housing? Or will it be used for something else under the guise 
of affordable housing and not really meet the needs of tenants 
who are looking at the price of rental that’s way, way out of 
line? 
 
And so we have some real deep concerns about that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because we know that the minister and some 
of the others in the backbenches have let it slip. They don’t 
really believe the government should be in this market. They 
really believe they just should step back and let the marketplace 
have its way and they’ll hang their hat on the vacancy rate, 
which is no indication of what’s really happening in rental 
housing at all because, as I said, it doesn’t measure affordability 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6353 

and it doesn’t measure core housing need, two very important 
dimensions to providing safe, good, affordable housing for our 
citizens here in Saskatchewan. So there is some real challenges 
here and, as I said, the consultation piece is pretty critical. 
 
So I want to take a minute and take a look at what the minister 
had to say when he introduced this back in November, and he 
thought it was an important piece of legislation. And some of it 
is fair and we think it’s worth getting behind. Talks about 
“Some proposals benefit tenants specifically, such as . . . 
expanding the time for claiming the return on a security deposit 
from 120 days to two years.” And you know, it’s interesting 
because this came out of some of the concerns, issues that were 
raised by the courts and landlords, some by tenants, in the 
Office of Residential Tenancies. And of course we’ll have 
questions about that. Who did they consult with and what were 
some of the . . . What was left on the floor when they were 
making the piece of legislation? And I think this is important. 
 
Another one is “. . . the benefit of tenants [apparently] is found 
in the amendment to section 60, which allows landlords to evict 
tenants if the landlord wishes to demolish or renovate the 
premises or has other uses . . . Currently the notice period is one 
month. The proposal is to extend it to two [months].” And so 
we’ll see how far that goes. We know . . . And “. . . in situations 
of demolition or renovation, the landlord must always return the 
entire security deposit,” which makes sense. 
 
But we’ll follow that as well because we know there’s been 
certain circumstances where people have tried to circumvent the 
legislation. They get very creative in this and empty an 
apartment building if they’re converting it to condos. In some 
ways the cities have stepped up with their own legislation to 
make sure that they have some control over that, and that’s very 
important. 
 
Now landlords will be able to do some other things. It talks 
about tenants’ use, occupancy, or maintenance of the premises 
or the tenants’ use of services. Some rules may concern 
smoking or pets. Smoking is a really interesting one because 
this is a very important one that we see, and it will be 
interesting to hear from the Minister of Justice what this means 
in terms of, say for example the Sask Housing, how do they 
enforce smoking and what will be there? I think this is an 
important issue, and I think that we’ll have some debate on this 
and this is really important. 
 
The other thing for the landlords, the ability to evict tenants 
who violated municipal bylaws or fail to pay municipal 
changes, and we’ll have to get more information about that. So 
this is really, really an interesting piece of legislation before us, 
and I know that we have lots of work to do today and I want it 
to get on the record that we think that what’s really important 
when we do this type of legislation that we do have the balance 
of power and we do respect the fact that it’s not easy for people 
to come forward and raise legitimate concerns. 
 
And while the Office of Residential Tenancies I think does an 
admirable job, I think that . . . It’s not an officer of the 
legislature so we don’t, people don’t have the same protection 
as say going to the Ombudsman or the Children’s Advocate. 
And I’m not advocating there is a limit to how many officers 
you can have. You can have a whole squadron I guess, but I do 

think that it’s important that we need to look at how people feel 
free enough to speak about their concerns without of course, 
you know, without penalty of harassment through their house, 
their rental property, this is important. Of course we understand 
likewise for the landlord. 
 
But I think it’s important that we really consider the strength of 
the Residential Tenancies office, and are they arm’s length 
enough to say, hey, this is a problem; we need to do more? Or 
do they feel all handcuffed because they do report to the 
Minister of Justice? We’ll have that conversation. I think that’s 
important to have some ways of being able to stand up for 
people. 
 
As well I think it’s important to stand up for the landlord. I 
think sometimes landlords feel they may get the raw end 
because we talk an awful lot about tenants, but clearly there’s a 
lot more tenants than there are landlords so their stories come 
forward. But you know, we do hear. And you know as a few 
years ago, we see the rental market just explode and the shock 
of high rents. People may be getting a little used to it but the 
fact of the matter is they’re still really high rents and they’re 
still really unaffordable. And because of that, they cause all 
sorts of problems. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know we’ve got much work to do 
here today and I wanted to get a few comments on record about 
this piece of legislation. We will be asking many, many 
questions in committee on this because this is an important 
piece of legislation. I’ll be asking about what the impact is on 
federal programs, what does that mean, and how we can ensure 
that the funding for housing programs, for affordable housing, 
really was affordable and not be siphoned off into other areas. 
That’s critically, critically, critically important. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 
this bill. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 151 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise again and speak to Bill No. 151, An Act to 
amend The Pharmacy Act, 1996 and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. I’ll speak for a little while and then 
I’ll send it to committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation makes some 



6354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

amendments to add pharm techs and others into the legislation 
so that there can be obviously better regulation, better 
understanding of their role in the legislation. It ends up doing 
that in a fairly straightforward fashion. It’s obviously legislation 
that has been prepared in consultation with the various 
pharmaceutical professions. And we can tell that by the 
legislation itself because the actual name of the Act will be 
changed to The Pharmacy and Pharmacy Disciplines Act. 
 
Now we all know that the role of the pharmacist has changed 
quite dramatically from the corner drugstore role, which we still 
have. But when we have large international corporations, many 
times food stores that have large pharmacy components to their 
business, all of a sudden the role of a regulator within a 
province ends up being much more challenging. And I think 
that what the legislation is trying to do is to make sure that this 
legislation in Saskatchewan moves forward, along with the 
legislation of all the other provinces and territories in Canada, 
to make sure that the professional role of the pharmacist is 
maintained and also that it is appropriately regulated in a 
manner that will protect the public. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that that particular legislation has a number of those 
aspects. 
 
And when I had a chance to talk about some of this before, it 
was clear that the next part of this will be dealt with as we move 
into committee, because there are many aspects of the 
legislation that are dealt with by regulation and by bylaws 
within the community itself. And so what we need to 
understand is that as the profession itself provides the 
regulation, it needs the assistance of the provincial government 
to make sure that it has the powers to protect the public. 
 
We also end up having the regulation of pharmacists, pharmacy 
technicians, and pharmacies and drugs all related to this 
particular aspect, and we all know that there are even bigger 
corporations that are involved in the production of the 
pharmaceuticals and are involved in their promotion and in their 
education around their use. And so what that means is that the 
pharmacists are very much the centre of this operation of 
delivery of the drugs to the people, but practically they are one 
piece in a bigger puzzle. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And it may be that this legislation does capture this role of 
regulation in an appropriate way. But I think that we’ll need to 
ask some questions in committee about this, because the world 
of delivery of pharmaceuticals is changing fairly quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to talk at length today, but I am 
going to suggest that this matter be referred to committee. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 151, The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried.  
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
designate that Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 
2014 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 153 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It will be 
my intention to send this bill to committee after my brief 
comments. So I think that I have thought about this piece of 
legislation, and it’s so important, you know, as I was just saying 
earlier. And this is Bill No. 153, An Act to amend the Statute 
Law. And it’s one that really I think about, that really shows the 
clarity of the work that we do in terms of meaning what we say 
and say what we mean. 
 
And we’ve gone through this, and clearly this is an issue that 
this government has some difficulty with. Because when we get 
into some of the spin that they have, and it shows up in the 
legislation and then we’re back just very quickly thereafter to 
really correct mistakes — intentional or unintentional — that 
we really have to do better than that. 
 
And you know, it reminds me of a saying that I’ve just heard, 
and I think that it’s one that I think a lot about with this 
government, that ink never . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Saskatoon Centre 
currently has the floor. Although he’s situated quite close to the 
Chair, I’m having some difficulty hearing him. I would ask the 
government members in the back, if they are discussing a 
policy, that perhaps they may want to do that outside. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, that there is a phrase out there that really represents this 
government and it’s one that goes, ink never refuses paper. And 
I think . . . Ink never refuses paper. And I think when you think 
about that, and they’re saying we’ll be into the season where 
we’re going to be reading a lot about what this government 
really thinks, what its priorities are, and what it really intends to 
do. And when we think about a bill, like as simple as An Act to 
amend the Statute Law, that we get it right. We get it right and 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6355 

we be as straightforward, with clarity, as much as possible. And 
I think that’s an important thing. 
 
And as we look through some of the changes that have 
happened here — whether we talk about “lunatic,” “insane,” 
“mental incompetent” becomes “lack of capacity,” “lacking 
capacity” — we want to make sure that that actually does mean 
what it’s supposed to mean and the varying degrees of those 
terms. 
 
I worry about that and I worry about some of the changes that 
we have before us. But having said that, I know that we’ve 
struggled hard and I think it’s important that we get it right. I 
have talked on this before, at length, but it’s my intention now 
with these two Acts . . . but I think with this one we’ve all had a 
chance, a good go at it, and we think we’ll have more questions 
in committee on this. So it is my intention now to move Bill 
153 to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 153, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 154 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate as well, as this is really what 
we’re all about here. It is our assigned task to build and create 
the best legislation possible and, as I said, mean what we say 
and say what we mean. And I think that now 154 really speaks 
more to the bilingual nature of the legislation and making sure 
we’ve got that corrected. 
 

And so with that, this bill though is relatively non-controversial 
except for the fact that, you know, when we were talking about 
this earlier, we were wondering when the government was 
going to set its real agenda, and we’re still waiting to see that 
though. But we are at a point right now where I know that it’s 
important to get these pieces of legislation moved forward, so 
with that, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move 154 to 
committee, and we’ll pursue it in committee from there. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 154, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 155 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I enter into 
discussion of Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. This Act’s 
fairly straightforward changes that have been brought forward 
by government here simply relate to a Supreme Court decision 
of 1988 and its impact on ensuring that our Acts, our legislation 
are also translated into French. Certainly it’s important for us to 
be compliant with that decision and making sure that the 
francophone community of Saskatchewan is provided changes 
as well. So this is very housekeeping in nature and doesn’t have 
any changes to the Act itself or any substantive changes. 
 
What I would mention is that when you see the effort and 
energy that’s gone into translating this Act into French, you 
would look to that time as well as a bit of a lost opportunity to 
not first strengthen some of the legislation related directly to 
health care and seniors’ care in our province. And it’s 
unfortunate that this government didn’t see it fitting or a 
priority to take this opportunity to ensure basic protection’s in 
place for the seniors of this province for example by enacting 
appropriate minimum care standards and legislation to protect 



6356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

the seniors across this province. We see crisis far too often in 
the current system, Mr. Speaker, and we see a government who 
wants to stick its head in the sand instead of doing the important 
listening and the hard work required to serve all Saskatchewan 
seniors and all Saskatchewan families. 
 
We see as well so many other issues in health care. We see the 
erosion of services in rural Saskatchewan. We saw the massive 
rally that came to the legislature today with common sense 
leaders speaking about the cuts and failure to support rural 
health care here today, Mr. Speaker. And we see a government 
that seems disinterested with anything other than their own 
self-interest or political interest, Mr. Speaker, certainly not 
focusing on what really matters to Saskatchewan people in 
health care, whether that be in rural services, as discussed here 
today in question period, or whether that be in the emergency 
rooms that are crammed across this province with waits that are 
far too long. The reality that many families are facing is that 
they can’t access family doctors or primary health care, not just 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but in urban Saskatchewan 
as well. And these are all important measures which require this 
government’s attention, and certainly I’ll take every forum that 
I can to press the government to do what they should in serving 
all Saskatchewan people and making improvements on these 
fronts. 
 
But as it relates to Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives 
and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, there’s no 
substantive changes to or not any changes to this legislation at 
this point other than a translation to French, and certainly that’s 
a housekeeping measure that we would support. But we, along 
with Saskatchewan people, are looking to this government to do 
so much more on all those other fronts I spoke of. But at this 
point in time as it relates to Bill No. 155, I adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to 
Bill No. 156, which is simply the consequential amendments 
that support the bill I just spoke to, Bill No. 155, this again 
doesn’t change anything substantive by way of the legislation. 
The original bill is unchanged. This is simply a translation to 
French, and this is the practical measure, the consequential 
amendments to allow that to occur. So at this point in time, Mr. 
Speaker, I adjourn debate of Bill No. 156. 
 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 157 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again a 
fair number of colleagues have participated in the debate on Bill 
No. — here we are; I’m going to have to get some glasses, Mr. 
Speaker — Bill No. 157. Nothing wrong with that of course. 
Some great people are wearing glasses. But in terms of Bill No. 
157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, obviously there’s a better job 
to be done in this province around lining up donors and giving 
that gift of life. I’ve already had the honour of participating in 
this debate. 
 
There are some fairly significant ethical questions that are 
raised by certain of the approaches in this legislation, and 
certainly those are questions that we feel would be better 
addressed at the committee stage. And as such, Mr. Speaker, I 
would conclude my remarks on Bill No. 157 at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 157, The Human 
Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 159 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6357 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to speak to Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. 
This bill in itself is simply addressing the fact that the original 
legislation and the current environment that we operate in for 
farm financing in Saskatchewan have changed significantly, 
and the original legislation no longer has purpose in the current 
environment. It’s redundant, Mr. Speaker, as I understand and 
as I interpret this bill. 
 
Certainly we’ll make sure we fully understand all aspects of this 
and do some consultation on this front, but this would be a 
practical change if in fact this legislation is redundant, as it 
would appear to be when you’re talking about the changes of 
the former Co-operative Trust Company of Canada which no 
longer exists in that form or in operating the way that it did. I 
believe that’s now Concentra Financial, Mr. Speaker, and plays 
more of a wholesaling type of a role within the borrowing and 
the financing environment. But we’ll make sure we’ve done our 
due diligence and consult with impacted stakeholders to make 
sure that our interpretation that this is now redundant legislation 
is correct. 
 
Certainly when you look to the lending environment, the 
borrowing environment for farms in Saskatchewan, there are 
many important providers, many important institutions. You 
know, certainly I think of the many that were developed right 
here in Saskatchewan, our credit unions playing a very 
important role. 
 
And while this change here brings forward . . . simply I guess 
removes legislation that’s now become redundant, what we will 
be continuing to observe is what sort of response this 
government will be bringing forward to the current farm 
pressures, the current agricultural pressures that exist. And I 
know there are many, whether that be the grain transportation 
challenges and transportation challenges in general, which this 
government has been very weak on addressing, Mr. Speaker, or 
whether it comes down to some of the important supports and 
structures that need to be in place. 
 
We know right now we have a very high water table. We have 
concerns for producers across Saskatchewan. We know that 
many producers aren’t going to be able to get seed in the 
ground where they traditionally have, and certainly that erodes 
their bottom line as well, along with the higher inputs and the 
challenges around transportation. So we’ll be continuing to 
listen to producers across Saskatchewan bring their voice 
forward on these important issues, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
consult as well to ensure our current understanding of the 
legislative changes brought forward by this government are in 
fact addressing something that seemed to be redundant at this 
point in time. 
 
But with that being said, I will adjourn debate of Bill No. 159. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 148 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m 
glad to rejoin debate on Bill No. 148. When I’m finished with 
my piece here, Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude my remarks and 
enable the government to move it on to committee stage. And 
indeed there have been a number of my colleagues that have 
participated in the debate on this piece of legislation, and 
certainly we look forward to gaining greater clarity and 
providing greater scrutiny at the committee stage of the 
consideration of Bill No. 148. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the second reading speech from the 
minister, there was a fair amount of reference made to the 
different stakeholders that had been consulted on the legislation. 
And again the minister talked about: 
 

Proposed amendments to the current Act include: enabling 
nurse practitioners to sign medical certificates of death and 
stillborn, and enabling the potential future addition of 
prescribed practitioners to also perform this function, 
enabling the minister to disclose vital statistics information 
in unique circumstances not provided for in the legislation, 
providing vital statistics customers with the option of 
submitting birth, death, stillbirth, and marriage statements 
electronically, and addressing some housekeeping 
amendments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again those would seem to be fair enough. The 
minister had referenced a great number of groups that had been 
consulted on this, but one question that I know remains 
outstanding, Mr. Speaker. This House took the positive and 
much-welcomed step of amending our Human Rights Code to 
bring in transgendered folks to have their rights protected under 
the Human Rights Code. 
 
So we will be interested to know what consideration has been 
given to the vital statistics of other jurisdictions — I’m 
speaking primarily of provincial jurisdictions — whether or not 
that information was considered in the preparation of this 
legislation, and then specifically how that works with the 
question of enshrining the rights of transgendered people in the 
Human Rights Code, and how that is in turn been taken up on, 
around consultation with folks that are interested in human 
rights questions, with the Human Rights Commissioner himself, 
Mr. Speaker, and again with other parties. But those are 
questions that we’ll certainly be following up on, come 
committee. And with that I would conclude my remarks on The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 148, The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



6358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. I would 
designate that Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2014 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 149 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion and debate as it relates to Bill 
No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014. Mr. 
Speaker, as the comments have been laid out by the minister, 
and taking those comments at face value, this change seems to 
make some sense. This would bring the registration of health 
cards over to eHealth, which seems to make sense. We know 
that there’s been challenges under this government in getting 
eHealth into full operation. We know that there’s been 
significant dollars spent there, Mr. Speaker. I’ll reserve 
comment on, I guess, the failure of this government to get the 
job done on this front. But certainly the concept of eHealth is 
very important. 
 
So we’ll be tracking the progress of eHealth and making sure 
that Saskatchewan citizens receive the value that they should. 
But certainly the change to have your health card registered 
over at eHealth would seem to make sense, granted that they 
have the proper provisions in place to protect the privacy and 
security, as I’m sure they’ve ensured over at eHealth. But it’s 
very important with this kind of information that you have 
robust protection for the people of Saskatchewan. Under this 
government we’ve seen breaches of that sort of private health, 
private information, Mr. Speaker, and that’s something that 
Saskatchewan people shouldn’t have compromised. 
 
So certainly on this front and these changes, we’d want to make 
sure that the government is following through in a process 
that’s reflective of the public’s privacy concerns and making 
sure that they’re doing so, with some guidance from everyone 
from the Privacy Commissioner to IT [information technology] 
professionals through to all those in the world of security, to 
make sure that there’s not any breaches through this process. 
 
But the health card of Saskatchewan people, I believe, there’s 
over 1.1 million health cards in Saskatchewan. I always think 
that that’s a pretty important card. In many ways we stick it into 

our wallets or carry it with our other identification, but that’s a 
powerful card and something that we should be incredibly 
proud of in this province, understanding the changes that were 
led from this very province to ensure the kind of health benefits 
that Saskatchewan people receive with that card. 
 
Certainly that’s setting aside the very important improvements 
and concerns that we’ve brought to the legislature and will 
continue to as it relates to the health care needs of all 
Saskatchewan people, whether that’s the cuts and erosion to 
rural health services as we’ve discussed here today with a large 
rally that came to the legislature to cause this government to 
quit dismissing the concerns of their cuts in rural Saskatchewan, 
or whether it gets down to the long waits in emergency rooms; 
or the inadequate access to primary to health care or family 
doctors; the challenges and crises in seniors’ care across this 
province. These are all areas for which we’ll continue to focus 
on. 
 
But certainly this seems to be a practical measure. As I say, it’s 
going to be important for government to get eHealth up 
operating to its full potential in an efficient way that provides 
value to citizens of this province. And certainly I think it’s 
important for us to recognize the value of that health card. 
 
I think I recently stuck my renewal on my card, Mr. Speaker. I 
thank the minister for getting my renewal sticker out to me and 
to all Saskatchewan people, and it is an important reminder of 
the value we receive in working together to make sure that the 
health of Saskatchewan people is a priority, Mr. Speaker. So 
with that being said, I don’t have any more comments on Bill 
No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act. We’ll be 
following up with direct consultations. And at this point in time, 
I’ll be adjourning debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 152 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is an 
interesting bill. It actually is part and parcel with Bill No. 144, 
but it seems to have got separated in the order somehow, and so 
we do want to speak to this bill. A couple of times, I know the 
companion Bill 144, we just recently moved to committee. But 
I do want to just speak briefly about this bill. 
 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6359 

Again this is one of the ones where we have an impact on other 
legislation caused by the new victims of domestic violence 
amendment Act. And as is the case when you have French, or 
bills that exist in both official languages, the bills that change 
them also have to be written in both official languages. So here 
we have the projet de loi no 152 — Loi portant modification 
corrélative à l’édiction de la loi intitulée The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014.  
 
And basically it’s got only one change that’s being dealt with 
here. And the minister indicated in his comments when he 
introduced the bill — let’s just have a quick look here — back 
in November, on November 5th, he indicated in his comments 
that all we’re doing here is amending the bilingual Queen’s 
Bench Act to update the reference there to this new Act. It used 
to be called victims of domestic violence, and now we’re 
calling it the victims of interpersonal violence. I know my 
colleague just spoke at length about that other bill. And we 
know that interpersonal violence can happen in many, many 
contexts and situations. 
 
And so I believe the intent of the bill, no. 142, which is the . . . 
or 144, the companion bill to this, speaks to that particularly. 
However at this point that’s really the only comment . . . 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The members should not be playing with the 
mikes. Yes, you. Leave it alone. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Why thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think at this 
point I don’t really have anything much else to add to this. I 
would like to move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 152, The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 158 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Everybody’s got the back-to-the-session shakeout going on. 
We’re no exception, certainly, But again, good to join debate on 
Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2014. Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because there’s an 
amendment in this bill that will repeal Bill 82, The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013, a bill that 
was given royal assent but never proclaimed, Mr. Speaker. 

And in many ways, what I could do is say, you know, please 
refer to my speech on that debate. And certainly a number of 
the points that we’ve made on this side in that debate stand. But 
as has happened with a number of pieces of legislation with this 
government, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of like Groundhog Day, the 
movie starring Bill Murray, where, you know, you seem to be 
caught in this perpetual loop. And there’s some in this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, where it seems like, you know, here 
we go again. 
 
And again there’s some fine items in this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, some good things in this legislation. 
But it still begs the question when it comes to income security 
for seniors; again some very important people in any society, 
Mr. Speaker, are the seniors. But as regards the pension income 
and the security of income for seniors, it begs the question of 
what’s happening on that broader front in terms of the work that 
this government should be doing to make the case around the 
Canada Pension Plan, around old age security, and around the 
Guaranteed Income Supplement — the three legs of that federal 
approach to income security for seniors. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to see the benefits in 
those programs strengthened, broadened. We’d like to see the 
work under way. And instead of those objectives moving 
forward, Mr. Speaker, we see a federal government that is 
seemingly not interested in standing up for seniors in that 
regard, instead is moving the age for eligibility for CPP 
[Canada Pension Plan] back from 65 to 67. That’s the kind of 
action we see from our federal government. 
 
And when it comes to this provincial government standing up 
and saying that, you know, federal government, this is 
something that’s made Canada a better place, that’s made a 
difference in communities and families, and when that 
three-pronged approach was brought in in the ’60s, Mr. 
Speaker, lifted many seniors out of poverty, which is as it 
should be, instead of seeing action from this government with 
their federal cousins in the Stephen Harper Conservative 
government, we don’t see that action. We see instead inaction, 
and we see this government pointing to things like the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which is fine enough, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And this gets back into my . . . You know, I could refer you to 
my earlier debate where I made mention of the fact that once 
upon a time as a young worker I didn’t have access to a pension 
plan in my workplace and had the good fortune of starting up as 
a subscriber in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. I am a member 
of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and have been now for, I 
imagine, better than two decades, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Now I’ve made the mistake, and perhaps I’m 
going to get some financial advice from the Finance minister. 
So we’ll see how that works out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again there are some fair measures in this piece of 
legislation but it still begs the question of what the broader front 
of action is on the part of this government and, you know, how 
different of . . . This legislation is again subject to that 
Groundhog Day phenomena where, you know, here it is again. 
It’s déjà vu all over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are a fair number of my colleagues I know are 
interested in this legislation, and certainly this is a matter of 



6360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

great interest across the province. We’ve undertaken some 
consultation on this, on this legislation, Mr. Speaker, how it 
works with other pieces of legislation. What are the real 
changes that are entailed in this bill? So we’ll be following that 
up, Mr. Speaker. But at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 161 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 161, An Act to 
amend The Wildlife Act, 1998. And this is a very important bill, 
Mr. Speaker, a very important bill before us. It’s one, you 
know, it’s interesting as we travel about and we run into people, 
and it doesn’t matter where you are. It’s always somebody you 
run into who knows of Saskatchewan. Probably the thing that 
they know is hunting. And it’s funny how that goes. 
 
It’s something that we are well known for and we have a lot to 
be proud of in terms of our abundance of wildlife and what that 
means for hunting and fishing and our reputation, right across, 
right across North America and even into Mexico. You know, I 
mean it’s amazing what people think of when they think of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean really it’s interesting now because we are so diversified, 
whether it’s the farming aspect, whether it’s the mining, the oil, 
some of our amazing people who’ve gone on to do amazing 
things around the world. But somehow the wildlife in 
Saskatchewan just connects the natural beauty of our province, 
connects with so many people around the world. And so this is 
an important piece of legislation before us. And it’s important 
that we get it right. And I know that I’ll take a minute to talk 
about the minister’s comments to make sure we don’t miss 
something. And it’s one that we’ll have a lot of questions in 
committee. 
 
It’s one of those bills that we have to make sure we have the 
appropriate and due process in terms of consultation. This is 
above and beyond what would be mandatory in a usual sense of 
making sure we talk to the stakeholders, that that makes sense 
whether it’s wildlife advisory committee or whether it’s 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. All of these folks have an 
important stake, and there’s so many of them. But of course as 
well, we need to make sure that we consult with our First 
Nations and Métis constituents because this is a basic right for 

them, that they have the ability to continue to hunt and fish in a 
sustainable way. And so the implications for this are very 
strong, and so we want to make sure we get that right. 
 
Now we understand that the intent of the bill really in many 
ways is to modernize some of our older habits, and some of 
these include requiring scientists studying animals to get a 
licence from the government. Now we’ll be watching this 
carefully to make sure that there is no impediment and no 
barrier in place. I know that sometimes people feel that when 
you . . . The science or the research particularly on species at 
risk can be an impediment to progress. We want to make sure 
that people have the best practices so that we have the best 
science and the best information. That’s really, really important. 
 
We also know this bill updates the . . . And now it reflects the 
fact that licensing has been outsourced to a single electronic 
vendor, which has caused issues, and we’ve often wondered 
whether this is the best practice going forward. The debate is 
still out there on that. I think that we sometimes overlook the 
ability to buy licences from a local vendor and what that meant 
for the local economy. We’ll have questions about that. Has 
there been a study about the impact of going to a single 
electronic vendor? What has been the pros and cons? Now that 
we’ve done that, what has been the impact of that? And we 
really worry about that, so we want to make sure that 
information’s out there. 
 
So it also increases the limitation period for prosecutions to 
three years, and this gives more time for the province to press 
charges against poachers — hugely important. I think this is 
important when we know that we don’t want to see any 
legislation, any court proceedings lost because of inadequate 
time to prepare cases, particularly when there may be a delay in 
getting information. These can be quite complex cases, and we 
want to make sure we have cases that go before the courts in a 
really solid, solid manner. And that’s really hugely, hugely 
important that we don’t inadvertently lose these cases. But I 
think, you know, I mean it sends a mixed message, and so we 
want to make sure that’s really important. 
 
It changes the rules around hunting licence suspensions. Under 
the current Act, a person who breaks the law has their licence 
suspended for a period of time and has to pay the fine once the 
suspension period is over. And it seems the offender now could 
purchase a licence even if the fine is unpaid. So we now make 
sure it’s clear and that it is the law that the offender must wait 
until the suspension is over and pay the fine before they can buy 
another licence. And it also creates a lifetime ban on hunting for 
people with three serious offences, and we’ll be watching how 
that plays out. That’s a hugely important piece of legislation 
and what that means. 
 
We’ll be interested to know, and I have some questions about 
how the information sharing will be between provinces, 
whether there’s an implication of cross-border infractions, 
whether somebody who breaks the law here two times, then 
goes over to Alberta and does their hunting, whether there’s 
been any communications back and forth about that. And what 
were those discussions about that? And it really is an important 
one because wildlife does not respect borders. Obviously 
they’re moving across border, so it only makes sense that we 
have legislation that would follow that. 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6361 

[16:45] 
 
And so while it seems the bill has a lot of good pieces, again 
this is one around consultation. Were there other pieces that 
groups asked for, and what did they bring forward? In terms of 
public consultation, was there any public consultation on this? 
And were there things that were left out that now that we have 
the opportunity to amend the legislation, amend The Wildlife 
Act? You don’t want to be opening these things up every year 
and response, like a knee-jerk response to a lobby group. 
Clearly this is one where you might say, yes, they’re very, very 
worthwhile pieces of, well-informed pieces of legislation, but is 
it the complete package? Are there some unintentional 
consequences here? What was the consultation process like? Is 
it, was it full? Was it complete? Did people get a chance to 
really think about the implications of this legislation? And as I 
said, while the government says that there may not be any 
implications for First Nations and Métis in this bill, I think that 
they would like to put that opinion out themselves as opposed to 
wait for the government to say that. And so we have some, 
we’ll have some questions about that. 
 
I just want to make some, a quick review of what the minister 
said because I think it’s important that his comments give us a 
sense of the direction of the government. And I think it’s an 
important piece of legislation. And so it talks about, he talks 
about “The proposed amendments considered today will clarify 
the licensing authority for scientific permits to ensure wildlife 
research is conducted responsibly.” Now he talks responsibly. I 
know that the university has used the word “ethically.” I 
wonder if there’s a choice in that language. It would be 
interesting to know where the universities are coming down on 
this in terms of what do they do when they’re proving doctoral 
work or master’s work or ongoing work like this? So it will be 
interesting to see how this plays out. 
 
And you know, when I think and I look back at the Great Sand 
Hills research study — that was one by the Canadian plains 
research unit at the University of Regina; outstanding, 
outstanding work there — I’m not sure what the story was 
about licensing there, and it would be interesting to hear the 
narrative on that, whether that was done without licence, and is 
that something they’ve learned from. Or is this something that’s 
maybe done, say, for Ducks Unlimited? Is this something that 
Ducks Unlimited would be doing for their own private research 
that may not be publicly released? So it will be interesting to 
hear more about that. 
 
Interestingly when we did the Great Sand Hills research, we 
tasked the First Nations and they stepped up and did a major, 
significant part of this study in terms of the implications for 
First Nations. And it would be interesting to know how this 
would fit into that in terms of the interconnections between 
wildlife and First Nations. Because I mean the interesting thing 
about this is the implication that wildlife exists only by itself 
and how it might grow, how it might flourish, that type of thing. 
But clearly it’s part of an ecosystem and whether that involves 
the First Nations, Métis, or whether it involves being close to an 
urban setting, all of that takes some consideration. So I think 
it’d be very interesting to hear more about that. The minister 
spoke just briefly about it. We’ll have questions at length about 
that. So I think we’ll look forward to committee on that. 
 

It talks about improving legislative authority to manage vendor 
responsibility, hunting and angling issuance, and the 
implementation of additional hunting suspensions to increase 
the protection of wildlife resources here. And it also, and I’ve 
talked about this, lengthens the amount of time wildlife officers 
have to bring charges forward for wildlife violations. 
 
So again I want to just flag this, that I’m curious, and I know 
we’re curious on this side: what has been the impact of the 
out-of-province automated licensing from a single vendor? And 
what has been the cost implications, whether it’s been positive 
or negative? What has been the impact it’s had on local 
communities across our province in terms of those 
mom-and-pop operations that used to issue fishing licences and 
hunting licences? What is the impact on that? 
 
And what has been the impact in terms of privacy? You know, I 
mean my good colleague here from Regina Rosemont raised the 
issue around the PATRIOT [Providing Appropriate Tools 
Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism] Act. Once we 
start shipping our information out of the province, particularly 
into the States, and particularly when it comes to information 
around guns, the American government may have, may have 
some interest in that. And so we would like to hear if the 
government’s done any study on that and whether they have 
any information about that to share or whether that was an 
ideological thing that this government did in terms of their 
budgetary processes a few years ago. 
 
So I think this will be very, very important, you know. It talks 
about prescribing licensing provisions for scientific or research 
processes that require the taking or disturbing of wildlife. Many 
research surveys, especially those involving species at risk, 
using non-obtrusive detection efforts such as monitoring 
songbirds, passive wildlife observation, use of 
presence-absence surveys, the Act didn’t really speak to that 
and now it will so it will be . . . But he chooses the language of 
responsible and undisruptive manner and I’m just curious 
because in an academic setting the word would have been an 
ethical process and I would throw out this word, sustainable. 
But ethical is a big part of academic research and whether 
you’re dealing with human research or otherwise, there’s 
always the ethical approach and I think this is an important 
way. 
 
And it would also be interesting to know in terms of the social 
impact of these studies, will there be an opportunity for the 
public to have access? As I said, sometimes there is private 
research that might be done and whether it’s done by an NGO 
[non-governmental organization] like a non-government 
organization like Ducks Unlimited that’s doing their own work 
for their areas or the Wildlife Federation or the Nature 
Conservancy, whether these will be done in a way that there is 
some social impact that the rest of us will understand. 
 
And then he talks about the government entering into an 
agreement to deliver Saskatchewan automated hunting, angling, 
and trapping licence and sales and now it’s authorized and so 
they’re working on that. But again I would like to know 
whether there’s been any kind of business review of that. 
 
He goes on and talks about the suspension of hunting privileges 
for most wildlife violations includes one-year suspensions from 



6362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

hunting or trapping and whether that’s now been increased. 
That’s really, really important. 
 
Now he talks about a key message from hunters during the red 
tape reduction committee which took place in the spring of 
2012, was to do more to conserve our wildlife resource. And so 
this is really, really important that they talk about the 
implications of making sure your fine is paid and your 
suspension is carried out. And individuals who are suspended 
from hunting activities in other jurisdictions will not be able to 
purchase a licence in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So again, this will be interesting to know how are they tracking 
that and if it’s an out-of-country, an American vendor who’s 
looking after this tracking, it makes for an interesting position 
that we find ourselves in that we have an out-of-country vendor 
looking after us, keeping track of our violations. And so that’ll 
be of some interest for sure. 
 
And I think this will be interesting because then does that block 
us from having a different vendor than Alberta or Manitoba or 
British Columbia, Ontario? Because if it’s just an automatic, 
you’re blocked if your licence is suspended, how does this 
work? Is there one national vendor for all of Canada? How do 
we enter into this, bids for the right to be the vendor if there has 
to be some interprovincial connection? So this will be 
interesting to hear how this plays out. 
 
Now he talks about the final measure proposed to demonstrate 
commitment to our wildlife, but they’re talking about making 
sure that we do more and that we can collect evidence and 
making sure that we have the evidence all well in place. 
 
Actually interesting, he talks about poaching gangs are 
becoming more and more sophisticated, difficult to catch, often 
requiring undercover operations to collect evidence to support 
prosecution. So this is an evolution that is a challenge. And we 
have to make sure we rise to that challenge, and we have the 
proper tools that our enforcement agencies can use. 
 
And he goes on to talk about that we won’t have to really do 
much more in terms of training for our wildlife conservation 
officers, that it will be in place. We want to make sure that it is 
the best that we can have right across Canada, that it is 
outstanding legislation. And so we’ll have many questions 
about this. And as I said, he talks about how amendments to 
The Wildlife Act can be implemented without affecting First 
Nations, existing First Nations and Métis hunting rights in our 
province. So that’s a pretty major statement, and we want to 
make sure that it’s accurate and that actually First Nations feel 
much the same. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that this is a piece of legislation that 
really talks about how we think of our natural environment, our 
ecosystems, and that we do have the best protection in place 
and we do have the appropriate tools that the Ministry of Justice 
and the Ministry of Environment feels they need to have in 
place, and our conservation officers who do an amazing job, an 
amazing job, feel that they can carry out the tasks that they are 
required to do. 
 
And as the minister alludes, and we’ll hear more about this in 
committee, about the challenges, whether it’s poaching gangs 

that we see now and interprovincial travel between hunters 
who’ve lost their licences and may be suspended — all of this is 
one that we feel really requires our attention. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ll have much more to 
say on this over the course of time. But from my point of view 
. . . There will be others that will want to speak to this Act for 
sure, and so I’d like to move adjournment now of Bill No. 161, 
An Act to amend The Wildlife Act, 1998. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The time being now close to 5 
o’clock, this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 New Table Officer 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6333 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6333 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6333 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6333 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6333 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6334 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6334 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6334 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6334 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6334 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Jaw Hosts Tournament of Hearts 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6335 
 Black History Month 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6335 
 Special Olympics Saskatchewan Winter Games 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6335 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6336 
 North Battleford Citizens Recognized 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6336 
 Prairie Women on Snowmobiles Ride to Fight Breast Cancer 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6336 
 Mathematics 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6336 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Rural Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6337 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6337 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6338 
 Maintenance of Educational Facilities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6339 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6339 
 Trip Taken by Creative Saskatchewan Executive Officer 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6341 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6342 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6342 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6343 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6344 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6344 



 

 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6345 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6345 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6346 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6348 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6348 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6349 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6349 
 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6353 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6354 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6354 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6355 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6355 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6355 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6355 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6356 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6356 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6356 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6357 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6357 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6358 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6358 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence 
 Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6358 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6359 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6360 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


