






















































Hansard: March 11, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 11, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6525 
 March 11, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I request an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all of our colleagues, it is my pleasure to introduce, in 
the west gallery, a group of French students from Monseigneur 
de Laval High School here in Regina.  
 
And with the students and their chaperones, we have some other 
representatives from the francophone community, known in 
Saskatchewan as the Fransaskois, joining us here today. In your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, Françoise Sigur-Cloutier is the president 
of the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, a provincial 
organization that builds and strengthens the francophone 
community here in Saskatchewan. James Daschuk, a historian, 
author, and winner of the Canadian Historical Association’s Sir 
John A. Macdonald prize for his non-fiction work entitled 
Clearing the Plains: Disease, Politics of Starvation, and the 
Loss of Aboriginal Life. And thirdly, we have André Denis, 
chair of the Fransaskois school board, joining us here today. I 
understand he’s reasonably new to the job and he may get an 
additional introduction from the Minister of Education. But 
we’d like to thank all of our guests for joining us here this 
afternoon. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to let all members and citizens know that March 6th 
to 22nd has been proclaimed as Rendez-vous de le 
Francophonie 2015 in Saskatchewan. There will be more on 
this topic forthcoming during members’ statements. But I might 
say that it’s my pleasure as the Provincial Secretary for 
francophone affairs to encourage all citizens to join us in 
celebrating the Francophonie in the great province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Député, et je voudrais 
aussi dire bonjour et bienvenue à nos collègues fransaskois. 
C’est une bonne opportunitée pour célébrer la culture 
fransaskoise en Saskatchewan. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would also like to 
say hello and welcome to our Fransaskois colleagues. It’s a 

good opportunity to celebrate Fransaskois culture in 
Saskatchewan.] 
 
Therefore I’d like to say, on behalf of the official opposition, 
welcome to all the francophone people here today in their 
legislature, and I hope you have a great Rendez-vous. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite and with the member from Cypress 
Hills grasslands in welcoming these people to the Assembly 
today. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize Don 
Michaud, who is the director of the francophone school 
division, and Dolorèse Nolette who is the deputy director. I 
have on a number of occasions recently met with the board 
Chair, André Denis, who happens to be from St-Denis. I’m not 
from St. Morgan myself; I haven’t been able to get to that point 
yet. But I want to anyway welcome them to their legislature. 
 
We are working through a variety of things right now and 
enjoying the time. And these are people that are truly 
committed to francophone education in our province and to 
education in a general sense. So I’d like to ask all members to 
join in welcoming them today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce some good friends today in the west gallery. Today 
we have with us Gail and Jim Sack who later today are going to 
be meeting with the Rural and Remote Health minister after 
question period. 
 
But Gail was the former mayor of the town of Battleford and 
currently is a lab and X-ray tech at Prairie North in the Frontier 
Mall. Jim owns Sad Sacks’ Welding and a very good welding 
shop in town, in North Battleford, that does very well. Jim and I 
played hockey together for lots of years, and by our own 
admissions, we’re pretty good hockey players. But Jim is most 
notedly for his post-game activity. He was tremendous at it. 
Accompanying them is Jim’s brother Bruce and his wife, Irene. 
And I would ask all members to welcome them to this 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I would like to give a special introduction to the 
Queen of Caramel from Moose Jaw. Emmy Barr is here today 
with her mom and dad, Dalton and Penny. 
 
And just a little background, is Emmy just recently competed in 
the Just Watch Me! contest for the Entrepreneurs with 
Disabilities in rural Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and I’ll have 
more on that in a member’s statement. Yet along with growing 
this business, Emmy and her family, because they’re here, 
asked me to mention a special thank you to both the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program and 



6526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

SACL [Saskatchewan Association for Community Living] for 
giving her all the support needed to make this dream a reality. 
 
So with that, I would like to ask all members to welcome Emmy 
to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of education. And we 
know that education is one of the most vital services the 
government provides to its citizens; and that this government 
has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the 
necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of educational 
excellence; and that this government has failed to deliver a real 
plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as 
an additional language, support community schools and their 
communities and students. And we know that we must build the 
best education system for today and Saskatchewan’s future. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Moose Jaw. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 
Avenue when they failed to plan adequately and appropriately 
and inundated Dewdney Avenue with dangerous heavy-haul 
truck traffic. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed today by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North and it is getting worse. Shelter is a basic 
need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting harder 
and harder for people to find adequate housing, especially 
families, seniors, women and children who face abusive 
situations. The problem is getting worse because of the rising 
level of poverty and the skyrocketing home ownership cost. The 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac La 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac La Ronge area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today in support of better seniors’ care. The 
petitioners point out that many seniors are having to wait in 
hospital beds due to the lack of spaces in care facilities. They 
talk about hearing an increasing number of stories about the 
adverse effects of chronic understaffing in seniors’ care 
facilities, including unanswered calls for help, seniors being left 
unattended on toilets for hours, and seniors not receiving baths 
for weeks at a time. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including in 
creating more spaces and more choices for seniors; 
ensuring higher standards of care in public facilities, 
private facilities, and for home care; ensuring appropriate 
staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and providing 
more support to help seniors remain independent in their 
own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from folks from Regina, 
Moose Jaw and Rosetown as well, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. The individuals who 
have signed this petition wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in Canada; that the Saskatchewan 
government has failed to tackle climate change, reduce 
emissions to the province’s own targets, or put in a real plan to 
protect the natural environment; and that since 2009 the 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6527 

Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 
funding by 83 per cent. 
 
So in the prayer that reads as follows, they respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a 
real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Langenburg, 
Cut Knife, and Vanscoy. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2015 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
stand in the House today to announce that March 6th to 22nd 
has been proclaimed as Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2015 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Rendez-vous is a chance for all residents to join with other 
Canadians to celebrate the French language and culture. It is 
held each year in Canada in March to promote the French 
language and francophonie culture. It also coincides with the 
International Day of Francophonie, which is celebrated on 
March 20th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to note that 2015 marks two 
important anniversaries for the Fransaskois community. It 
marks 25 years of having a dedicated provincial government 
office coordinating French language services and a decade of 
the Fransaskois flag as an official provincial emblem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, Rendez-vous recognizes the 
historic contributions to the cultural, to the economic and the 
social fabric of our province for more than a century. Their role 
in the province’s future is more relevant now than ever as an 
increasing number of French-speaking newcomers continue 
making Saskatchewan their home and contribute to our growing 
economy. I encourage all citizens to celebrate with us la 
Francophonie in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Je me lève en 
ma place en récognition de la Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
2015. C’est une célébration nationale de la langue et la culture 
francophone. En Saskatchewan c’est une culture très vieille, très 
importante, et très établie. Mais la culture fransaskoise n’est pas 
quelque chose stagnante et ce n’est pas fixée dans le temps. 
Chaque journée beaucoup de nouveaux canadiens arrivent en 
notre province des pays francophones. Ils et elles enrichent 
notre province avec leurs traditions et leurs identités, et aussi 
renforcent notre communauté francophone. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in my place in 

recognition of la Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2015. It’s a 
national celebration of francophone language and culture. In 
Saskatchewan it’s a very old, important, and established culture. 
But the Fransaskois culture isn’t something stagnant or fixed in 
time. Each day many new Canadians arrive in our province 
from French-speaking countries. They enrich our province with 
their traditions and their identities, and also strengthen our 
francophone community.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a member of Saskatchewan’s growing and 
diverse francophone community, I’m proud to rise in the 
Assembly and recognize Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2015. 
Marked annually all across our country, Rendez-vous celebrates 
French language and culture. This year’s motto is “La Joie de 
vivre: Ca nous rassemble,” which of course means the joy of 
life brings us all together. Certainly there will be many joyous 
events with this year’s Rendez-vous de la Francophonie, and I 
encourage all members to find an event in their community this 
weekend to celebrate this important part of the Saskatchewan 
story. 
 
So I ask that all députés [Translation: members] join me in 
sending a big merci [Translation: thank you] to Françoise 
Sigur-Cloutier and all of those at the Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise who have been working so hard to make this 
year’s Rendez-vous de la Francophonie a success. Merci, 
monsieur le Président. [Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Queen of Caramel 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in the House today to not only speak about an amazing 
constituent of Moose Jaw who has overcome so many 
obstacles, but someone who has also achieved incredible 
success in such a short period of time. Twenty-year-old Emmy 
Barr submitted a video of her business, Queen of Caramel, to 
the community futures entrepreneurs with disabilities program, 
or EDP, in the Just Watch Me contest. 
 
EDP provides business advice, training, mentorship, and access 
to repayable business loans for people with disabilities or 
ongoing health concerns in Manitoba or Saskatchewan. 
Although born with Williams Syndrome, Emmy has always 
been at home in the kitchen, starting up Queen of the Caramel 
in grade 12 through Junior Achievement. 
 
Emmy placed second in the seasoned entrepreneur category 
through EDP, earning her a cash prize and many tools to help 
grow her business. Thankful for all of the media attention her 
business has received because of the competition, Emmy is 
truly living her dream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although Emmy does not have storefront to sell 
her caramels, I would encourage everyone who passes through 
Moose Jaw to look up the Queen of Caramel and pick up some 
of her treats. It is truly young entrepreneurs like Emmy who are 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Graduate Students’ Association Awards 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on March 7th, I along with the Minister of Education 
had the pleasure to attend the third annual University of 
Saskatchewan Graduate Students’ Association Graduate 
Awards Gala. 
 
The awards recipients not only demonstrated the remarkable 
depth and quality of research taking place at the graduate level 
at the University of Saskatchewan, but they also reflect the wide 
diversity of our student university campus and of our province 
as a whole, with Indigenous award winners as well as other 
student winners from around the world. 
 
Engineering student Ahmed Abdel-Salam was the recipient of 
the Research Excellence in Sciences Award. Belinda Daniels 
from Sturgeon Lake First Nation was awarded the Excellence in 
Aboriginal Research Award. Keshini Madara Marasinghe was 
the recipient of the Professional Excellence Award. Zohreh 
Izadifar was recognized for her work with the Interdisciplinary 
Research Excellence Award. Professor Alexander Moewes was 
awarded the Advising Excellence Award. Annie Battiste was 
recognized with Exceptional Academic Counsellor for her years 
of service to graduate students, and Omeasoo Butt, the first 
Aboriginal president of the GSA [Graduate Students’ 
Association], was awarded with Outstanding Past GSA 
Executive Award. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the award 
recipients and wish them well as they continue in their research 
and the pursuit of knowledge here in Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Rural Firefighters Honoured 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
privilege that I wish to recognize Big River and District Fire 
Chief Paul Watier, Deputy Fire Chief Darryl Meyers, Captain 
Doug Panter, and Captain Chad Dunn. All of these individuals 
were recipients of the Fire Services Exemplary Service Medal 
for their 20 years or more of full-time service. All medals were 
given to the recipients by the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan, the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rural communities such as Big River, many of 
the firefighting services are run by volunteers. Yet in both urban 
and rural centres, we rely on firefighters to protect not only our 
properties and homes, but also to be emergency responders to 
vehicle accidents. Although they undergo professional training 
and certification, these community members are depended on to 
step up at all hours of the day and help their community in 
dangerous situations. Rural firefighters also have full-time 
careers alongside the commitment to fire services. It can truly 
be an exhausting position. 
 
I’m very thankful that such committed individuals are 
protecting the citizens of Big River and district. I would ask that 

all of my colleagues join me in thanking and congratulating the 
members of the Big River and District Fire Services for their 
long-time commitment and duty to their job and their 
community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

Borden Team Competes in Canadian Firefighters’ 
Curling Championship 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to rise in the House today to announce that skip Ian 
Wainwright’s team from Borden will be representing 
Saskatchewan at the upcoming Canadian Firefighters’ Curling 
Championship in Valleyfield, Quebec next month. The team, 
made up of Barry Saunders, Randy Hosegood, Eric Pearce and 
Kelly Salmon, defeated Moosomin’s Dale Nixon at the 
championship in Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bonspiel has been going for 56 years, showing 
that Saskatchewan is a force to be reckoned with at any level of 
curling. While the competition was fierce, it was clear at their 
Saturday night banquet that the true reason for the tournament 
was the networking between the different communities and fire 
departments. 
 
Since this tournament is open to urban and rural firefighters, 
there’s a mix between volunteer firefighters and full-time, 
professional firefighters. Opportunities like this not only offer a 
little bit of friendly competition between communities but gives 
players opportunities to rub shoulders with their colleagues 
from across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating skip Ian Wainwright and team as well as wishing 
them the best of luck at nationals next month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame Inductee 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the House today to congratulate Prema Arsiradam who was 
inducted into the Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of 
Fame. This past Sunday I had the pleasure of attending her 
induction ceremony at the Prince Albert Golf and Curling Club, 
along with the member from Saskatchewan Rivers who brought 
greetings on behalf of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prema Arsiradam was selected out of five 
nominated women for her long-time and outstanding 
commitment to her work. This includes working with the 
Learning Disabilities Association and the community of Prince 
Albert. Prema immigrated to Canada from South Africa 18 
years ago and has been involved in the community since 
moving to Prince Albert. She is known as an active volunteer in 
the community through her work with the Multicultural 
Council, the Victoria Hospital Foundation, Kiwanis Music 
Festival, and the Prince Albert Girls’ Choir. 
 
It was very heartwarming to hear from her husband and family 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6529 

about all the work that she has done and the many lives that she 
has impacted through her efforts. In her induction speech, she 
very humbly accepted her award and called for the support and 
acknowledgement of all women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Prema Arsiradam on being inducted into the 
Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Services at Health Facilities and the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Gail and Jim Sack are here today along with 
members of their family. Gail and Jim were victims of carbon 
monoxide poisoning in their home in North Battleford. They 
were transferred by ambulance to Moose Jaw at a cost of 
$3,500 and they received life-saving treatment in the hyperbaric 
chamber in Moose Jaw. 
 
Will the Premier agree to meet with Gail and Jim today and 
hear first-hand about their experience, their life-saving 
experience in the hyperbaric chamber? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
absence of the Premier today, I would be happy to take those 
questions on behalf of the government. 
 
We certainly understand and appreciate the value of the benefits 
of a hyperbaric chamber that it has provided to some rural 
residents, Mr. Speaker. We also understand that most burn 
victims are treated within Saskatchewan at either regional 
hospitals or tertiary centres, and carbon monoxide can also be 
treated locally. 
 
Patients who have been exposed to CO2 can be very effectively 
treated with high-flow oxygen, and this treatment may be 
provided by nasal-inhaled oxygen at much higher levels than 
room air or, in extreme cases, intubation and mechanical 
ventilation if ICU [intensive care unit] care is needed, then 
transferred to a facility with ICU coupled with appropriate 
blood testing. All emergency departments would treat a CO2 
poisoning according to their available service levels, including 
lab and ICU, and facilitate transfers to other centres as needed. 
Generally hyperbaric therapy is used as an adjunctive therapy, 
post-acute-care treatment after the emergent care provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but also to the member’s question, I would be 
happy to meet with the two individuals right after question 
period as, I believe, was offered and arranged by the member 
from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Gail and Jim have come to the 
legislature today to share their story because they have not 
received answers from this government and they have not 

received a listening ear about how important this service is to 
Saskatchewan patients. 
 
The Moose Jaw Hospital has the only hyperbaric chamber 
between Toronto and Edmonton. This public hyperbaric 
chamber has been used to help victims of burns, carbon 
monoxide poisoning, and people with wounds who are taking a 
long time to heal. But there won’t be a public hyperbaric 
chamber in the new Moose Jaw Hospital, and it doesn’t sit right 
with Gail and Jim Sack. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, this government hired its $40 
million American lean consultant who shrunk the Moose Jaw 
Hospital, the size of it. There’ll be 30 per cent fewer patient 
rooms, dropping from 99 to 72, and the public hyperbaric 
chamber is being left out because there isn’t the room. My 
question to the Premier: how can he explain that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of 
the Premier today, I’m happy to take that question on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pointed out the alternative therapies that are 
generally accepted. And it’s not me as the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health: this practice is an example of best practice. It’s 
not driven by the Ministry of Health. It’s driven by medical 
professionals and endorsed by medical professionals 
countrywide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have spoken about the services that are available throughout 
the province in other hospitals, Mr. Speaker, other health 
facilities with high-flow oxygen and the services that generally 
can go to help with those situations, and that hyperbaric therapy 
is recognized as an additional therapy to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not to discredit the benefits that it has contributed but, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d also point out to the member opposite that the 
existing hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw has been used about 
20 examples a year for the last five years, so admittedly 
valuable but very low usage. And, Mr. Speaker, I would also 
correct the member opposite that it was not leaned out of this 
facility. In fact, the priorities of the region and the foundation 
were set aside as MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] expanded 
surgical services and enhanced patient . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. It is this 
government who has shrunk the size of the Moose Jaw 
Hospital. It is this government that is pulling out this important 
public service from the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Okay, sure, the public hyperbaric chamber may need to be 
refurbished at a cost of about $70,000. And even, Mr. Speaker, 
if the hyperbaric chamber needed to be replaced, it would be a 
cost of about $120,000. But that’s no excuse for this 
government to pull this service from the patients, Mr. Speaker, 
who have benefited greatly and whose lives have been saved 
because of the treatment, Mr. Speaker. 



6530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

John Black, John Black, their favourite American lean 
consultant, Mr. Speaker, burns through that kind of money in a 
blink of an eye. Miss two and a half of his workshops, Mr. 
Speaker, would cover the cost of a new hyperbaric chamber. 
Gail and Jim Sack cannot understand why this government 
would refuse to ensure that a public hyperbaric chamber is in 
the Moose Jaw Hospital. It just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
My question to the Premier: why would he want, why would he 
want to send Saskatchewan patients out of the province in order 
to receive this important treatment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll reiterate this. This 
facility, this service was not leaned out of the Moose Jaw 
Hospital. The Moose Jaw Hospital, from the information I’ve 
been able to acquire, was designed five . . . the initial steps were 
designed five years ago, much before the contract in question. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite don’t like 
hearing this because they like doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
But the lean initiatives thus far, although they discredit the 
Canadian Blood Services, the blood service efficiencies of 35 
— now we know it’s 50 million — outside of the contract that’s 
in mention, Mr. Speaker, but still attributed to lean. We know 
an additional $75 million in savings have been attributed to lean 
and lean practices within the province, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And even in those numbers, and I know from personal 
experience with . . . Let’s take for example the primary health 
clinic in Yorkton, a facility that admittedly by the region, by the 
designers there, would have needed about 1,000 square feet of 
storage space for extra stock, stock that may be hard to utilize 
quickly, is down to a four-by-twelve closet that is a lot less 
expensive to develop, and rental on commercial space over the 
years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is widely understood by any 
thinking person in the province that this government’s 
calculations, when it comes to their so-called lean savings, are 
fiction, Mr. Speaker. That has been shown time and time again. 
 
And we’ve seen their approach with other examples, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen it with the children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. This government brought in John Black, shrunk the 
design. Government applauded wildly, Mr. Speaker, then gave 
John Black a mountain of cash. Then months later they realize, 
uh-oh we shrunk it too much. Back to the drawing board, Mr. 
Speaker, spending more money to fix what was leaned out. 
 
In the same way, the government has leaned the design of the 
Moose Jaw Hospital. It’ll be much smaller, will have fewer 
rooms, and will offer fewer vital public services like the 
hyperbaric chamber. My question, Mr. Speaker: is the Premier 
ready to admit this is a mistake? 
 
And here’s the member from Moose Jaw North. You’d think 
the member from Moose Jaw North would stand up for his 
community, for the people . . . [inaudible] . . . for this 

government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will it take for this stubborn, stubborn 
government to admit that they made a mistake? Do we have to 
wait until there’s hallway medicine and people are lined up in 
the smaller Moose Jaw Hospital, and then we see patients being 
shipped out of province to get the treatment they need? What 
will it take for them to admit this mistake? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think I heard the 
member opposite use the term fictional again. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean we can debate in this House, I mean 
respectfully, and I’m all up for that. But, Mr. Speaker, to call, if 
they want to call some of our information fictional, well that’s 
up to them, Mr. Speaker. But we’re talking about people, 
professionals that are engaged in the lean process, that support 
the lean process. We’re talking about chief financial officers, 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the health regions, the Health Quality 
Council that are not political. They’re not in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re confirming these numbers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve stated, some of the examples that I’ve 
seen through the initial, this last rollout of lean savings, doesn’t 
even include examples that I know personally about, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s not even, you know, speaking about some 
of the improvements to health care that don’t have a financial 
amount tagged to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, let me point out that it 
has nothing to do with lean being the size it was, Mr. Speaker. 
It had to be upsized because of the 10 per cent growth in the 
population of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Health Services in Craik and District 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Yesterday the Premier and his two Health 
ministers received a letter from the residents and family council 
of the Craik and District Health Centre. The letter said: 
 

We, the permanent residents of Craik and District Health 
Centre, have been proud Saskatchewan citizens for decades 
and even centuries. We have raised our children, 
grandchildren, great- and great-great-grandchildren to live 
and thrive as Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
To continue to reside in our home we insist on the 
retention of services, both acute and long-term care, at the 
Craik and District Health Centre. 

 
What does the Health minister have to say to the residents of 
the Craik seniors’ care home? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6531 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as early as today we 
took questions at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] about the Craik situation, Mr. Speaker. My 
office has been fully engaged. I’ve been fully engaged in this 
file since very early in October. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we heard in the petition presented by the 
opposition when the members of Craik, the 70-some-odd 
citizens of Craik and area were here to advance their cause, Mr. 
Speaker, they had three primary concerns which they’ve always 
communicated with us. Number one is, don’t renovate our 
facility. Mr. Speaker, I’ve made the commitment. I’ve gotten 
the region to make the commitment. The facility will not be 
renovated. 
 
They’ve asked that the facility not be closed. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
given verbal and written commitment. The region’s done the 
same. It will not be closed. They want a full-time doctor, Mr. 
Speaker. We want nothing but that as well, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
continually tried to engage even personally with the physician 
that has served the area for the last two years. Thus far, even 
with the posting of the position, he hasn’t applied. But we do 
have applicants, I know, that are interested and we’ll be placing 
a doctor there in the coming weeks and months. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, that the whole town of 
Craik has it wrong and that minister has it right apparently. I 
don’t think the residents of the seniors’ care home in Craik are 
going to appreciate or have any confidence in that minister’s 
answer because their letter went on to say: 
 

For two years, Dr. Karam has spent time with us. He’s 
become part of our day-to-day care. His contract has 
expired and the ministry has replaced him with a variety of 
locums. 

 
The letter goes on: “We expect more from the government. This 
is our home and we have paid taxes for over 1,000 years 
collectively.” These residents say they expect and deserve more 
from this government, and they’re right to do so. To the 
minister: when will this government shelve its pathetic excuses 
and start preserving the health care services rural residents 
expect and deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that member 
just sort of somewhat self-qualified herself to be the saviour of 
rural health care in this province. Mr. Speaker, we only have to 
go back in history, we won’t have to go too far, and I know the 
members don’t like going back in history because it doesn’t fare 
well for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I reflected in one of my answers in SARM this morning, 
when I first got this position I was asked by a lot of people, isn’t 
that a difficult position to be in. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
there are definitely challenges in health care, and we’ll 
acknowledge that. Anyone on this side of the House would 
acknowledge that. But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

record of this government, opening 13 long-term care facilities, 
looking at three new hospitals, hiring more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having difficulty hearing the response just 
as I had difficulty hearing the question. I would ask members to 
please pay attention to both. I recognize the Minister for Rural 
and Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, well over 425 additional 
doctors, 20 just announced yesterday, new SIPPA 
[Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment] 
graduates, Mr. Speaker; 2,600 more nurses of all designations 
in the province; all these new long-term care facilities, as 
opposed to the 19 facilities closed by the members opposite and 
1,200 care beds and chasing professionals out of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The residents of the Craik and district health 
care centre are very concerned about the erosion of vital health 
care services in their community. Their letter to the Premier and 
the two Health ministers went on to say, “We cannot afford or 
even some of us survive a trip of an hour or more via 
ambulance for medical services.” These seniors cannot afford to 
take an ambulance to access crucial medical services, and many 
of them worry about even being able to survive the trip. But 
they shouldn’t have to worry about that. This government 
should be preserving health care services in Craik. 
 
To the minister: why on earth is this government so stubborn on 
this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve also committed 
to many people in the area of Craik concerned about the facility 
at Craik, the services, the current services will not change. Mr. 
Speaker, I know there’s been concerns with them over the last 
number of weeks and months and possibly years. But, Mr. 
Speaker, even when it comes to emergency services the region 
agrees, as do I, that emergencies that do present themselves at 
the facility when the doctor is on in the facility would be 
assessed and treated accordingly. If they can’t handle the level 
of trauma at the facility, EMS [emergency medical services] or 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] can be called in. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to talk about a one-hour ambulance trip, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s 15 miles between Craik and Davidson. Craik is not 
an acute care, 24-7 emergency facility. Davidson is, and it’s 15 
miles away, Mr. Speaker: an emergency, 24-7 emergency with 
three acute care beds and emergency room and a cardiac room. 
The one acute care bed in the Craik facility is a flex room that 
can be used for that, Mr. Speaker. And I would add it’s about a 
10-minute trip down the highway between Davidson and Craik. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, with answers like that, it’s no 
wonder that more and more residents of rural Saskatchewan are 
starting to feel like this Sask Party government is taking them 



6532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

for granted. We had over 70 people come to the legislature last 
week to rally to save the doctor in Craik. We have residents of 
the long-term care facility in Craik sending a very heartfelt 
letter to the Premier and to his two Health ministers pleading 
for help. Yet this government stubbornly dismisses those 
concerns. 
 
To the Premier: the residents of the long-term care facility have 
asked to meet with him to express their concerns to his face. 
Will he have the courage to go to Craik and meet with them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Premier, I’ll be happy to answer that question on behalf of the 
government. Mr. Speaker, I toured the facility at Craik. I’ve met 
with the stakeholders in Craik time and time again. We’ve 
entertained, I think, four, three or four personal meetings in my 
office. I’ve been out to the facility, met with front-line health 
care workers there, met with the doctor there, got a tour, a 
personal tour by the doctor, Mr. Speaker. I’m very aware of the 
facility. I’m very aware of the excellent care the long-term 
facility has, Mr. Speaker: a four-day-a-week doctor, nurse 
practitioner every day, RNs [registered nurse] on staff, Mr. 
Speaker. Residents are very happy, a beautiful long-term care 
facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not going to go anywhere. It’s another example of 
long-term care in this province that, although the opposition 
like to generalize at the chronic conditions of long-term care in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very small percentage. The 
facility there is beautiful. It’s beautifully run by great staff, and 
it will stay there for a long time to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Housing of Young Offenders 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Corrections minister. Why is this government plowing ahead 
with its poorly planned, ill-advised decision to shut down the 
Yarrow Youth Farm? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few short years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, we undertook a facilities review within our 
ministry. What we were seeing, Mr. Speaker, are burgeoning 
numbers in our adult correctional facilities and dropping 
numbers, which have been dropping for 20 years, in our young 
offender facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have, in Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon, unused space where we 
can house young offenders, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 
low-risk, open custody young offenders within Kilburn Hall, 
Mr. Speaker. So we have decided, Mr. Speaker, because of an 
operational decision, that we’re going to move the five young 
offenders out of Yarrow Youth Farm and move them into 
unused space at Kilburn Centre, Mr. Speaker. This has not been 
plowed ahead with, Mr. Speaker. We have studied it. We have 

looked at it. This is the decision that we have made. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended a 
community meeting with about 100 people from my 
constituency. They’re frustrated with this government’s 
decision to shut down the Yarrow Youth facility on the edge of 
Saskatoon and to relocate the open custody unit to the Kilburn 
secure youth facility in the Buena Vista neighbourhood, and 
community members are especially frustrated that there was no 
consultation whatsoever. 
 
To the Corrections minister: why did this government undertake 
such a decision without consulting with the community ahead 
of time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to bring 
some reason back into this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, not 
what happened last night in Saskatoon. The Kilburn Youth 
Centre, the Kilburn Youth Centre currently houses closed 
custody young offenders. The Kilburn Youth Centre has been in 
existence since 1926, housing adolescents from various 
troubled backgrounds to adolescents that committed any 
particular crime. Mr. Speaker, the young offenders in this 
facility, the open custody young offenders will be . . . They’re 
out in the community with programming. They’re escorted. 
They’re going to be using the front door, the separate entrances, 
separate exits from the adults within or the other secure young 
offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot continue to afford to keep a youth 
facility open at 49 per cent occupancy. Mr. Speaker, we do not 
need more youth beds and that should be a good thing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This minister doesn’t even know her own file. 
They’ve bungled the decision right from the get-go. They’re 
changing whether the door is going to be an open door on the 
alley, and now they’ve changed it. It’s a locked door. These 
youth will no longer have open custody. 
 
It was clear at the community meeting yesterday that this 
government has completely bungled this file. The Yarrow 
Youth Farm is located on the edge of Saskatoon. It’s a great 
facility for rehabilitating youth who have come into conflict 
with the law but don’t require secure custody. It’s absolutely 
shameful that this government is shutting that facility down and 
moving those young people into a youth secure jail in the Buena 
Vista neighbourhood in Saskatoon. 
 
To the minister: we know the government didn’t do proper 
consultations on this. Will it at least agree to publicly release its 
internal analysis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6533 

Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
having difficulty understanding the members opposite talking in 
this regard with this particular subject. The NDP, 11 years ago, 
Mr. Speaker, closed three youth facilities because of a decline 
in the young offender population, Mr. Speaker. They pulled 
funding from an open custody youth facility called House of 
Concord run by the Salvation Army, employing 22 people. 
They also closed open custody at Kenosee Lake youth camp 
and Nisbet Lake youth camp, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re doing exactly the 
same thing. We don’t require the young offender spaces any 
longer, Mr. Speaker. We’re using unused space that we’re 
already paying for as a province, Mr. Speaker. We will continue 
on with this decision. This decision makes sense. It is good use 
of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this decision makes no sense for 
those young people who should be in open custody. If these 
guys have budgeting problems, they shouldn’t be looking here. 
In so many ways, this government’s plan does not make sense. 
Shutting down an excellent facility, mixing low-risk youth with 
higher risk youth, plopping an open custody facility in the 
middle of Saskatoon with no consultation — none of this makes 
sense. 
 
We requested a copy of the report prepared by Chinn Planning. 
Insiders have told us that this report was positive about Yarrow, 
but this government refuses to release the report, claiming it’s a 
cabinet secret. This government needs to put the plan on hold, 
release the analysis, and undertake meaningful consultations. 
Will the minister agree to do that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member is 
talking about moving open custody young offenders into a 
secure custody facility with young offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what they did once they closed 
Kenosee Lake youth camp, Nisbet Lake youth camp, and the 
House of Concord? They moved those open custody young 
offenders into Paul Dojack Centre here in Regina, which is a 
closed custody young offender facility. I’ll take no lessons or 
comments from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking 
after the taxpayers’ dollars in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ll continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this minister does not know her 
file. But the question was, will you release the report? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — If you’re talking about the facilities review, 
I’m not sure exactly what the member’s referring to, but the 
answer is no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Okay, I’ll try to be a little bit more clear here, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about a report prepared by Chinn 
Planning. Will the minister release the report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, if the member’s referring to the 
activities at Yarrow Youth Farm and the quality of care that the 
young offenders were receiving, no one is disputing that quality 
of care. 
 
The care of young offenders is really based on the programming 
in the facility that they’re housed in, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue with the programming that we have already 
undertaken at Yarrow Youth Farm. It will continue under 
Kilburn Hall, Mr. Speaker. And you know, we will continue to 
look at different ways to ensure that our systems, our 
correctional facilities are sustainable over the long term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 166 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter in very briefly here today on Bill No. 166, The Local 
Government Election Act. I’ve already spoken to this bill in this 
Chamber here. I do look forward to the time in committee to 
follow up with questions to the minister and to gain some 
clarity. I know that certainly we recognize the great value of 
municipal councils across Saskatchewan. Those that step up and 
serve their communities are doing so because they believe in 
their communities, and they approach matters in a very 
common sense way. To each and every one of them, rural or 
urban, I say thank you. 
 
We certainly know that there’s a lot of important issues for 
municipalities. We know that this government has been a poor 
partner when it comes to working with municipalities across 
Saskatchewan. It’s a concern to many, Mr. Speaker, that the 
operating grant is something that this government might be 
ripping up, Mr. Speaker, some promise that may be broken, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we hear today that the government may be 



6534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

jacking taxes on Saskatchewan people all across this province at 
SARM . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the Minister of 
Finance shouts, absolutely. I’m not sure to what part of my 
speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That being said, I’ve entered into some discussion of the 
content of this bill. I do look forward to following up and 
clarifying many aspects in committee, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t 
have any further comments at this point pertaining to Bill No. 
166, The Local Government Election Act. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 166, The 
Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election 
Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 

Bill No. 167 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 
Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to 
Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, of course these have a direct relationship to 
Bill No. 166. I’ve spoken to this bill. As well, I do look forward 
to following up in committee with the minister. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, this government has a poor record in 
working in good faith with our municipal partners. They had at 
one point worked together, supported by us to establish an 
operating grant, a municipal revenue-sharing agreement. It’s a 
big concern that we hear that that may now be compromised, a 
broken promise of this government. Municipal leaders deserve 
better. They deserve that commitment to be followed through 
with. They also need better support when it comes to 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, with that being said, we’ll follow up specifically on 
matters of Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 

Consequential Amendments Act in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 170 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 
Safety Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I had an 
opportunity to speak to this bill earlier in December and, 
looking back on the notes, I see I had quite a bit to say at that 
time. But I do want to reiterate one thing, and that is the 
effective lobby of firefighters that have presented themselves 
here in the Legislative Assembly every year since I’ve been 
elected, and I know it’s a long-standing tradition. These folks 
are dedicated to their communities. They’re dedicated to their 
profession, and they have some very important asks of this 
government that are falling upon deaf ears, Mr. Speaker.  
 
That’s the only point I want to raise today further to this 
extensive amendment to The Fire Safety Act is that fire safety 
includes firefighters, and we need to look after our firefighters 
as well, ensure that they are remunerated properly. I know 
municipalities are struggling with some of the requirements for 
arbitration and smaller municipalities are exempt from the 
arbitration, so these kinds of things are making it very difficult 
for our communities to have proper firefighters in place and for 
them to be meaningful members of the community. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think we have other questions 
we want to ask in committee, and that would be the extent of 
the comments at this time on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 170, The 
Fire Safety Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6535 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act be 
sent to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 
Bill No. 172 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
to speak to Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. This 
particular Act, Mr. Speaker, replaces The Naturopathy Act. 
 
I might just talk a little bit about what exactly a naturopath is or 
what naturopathic medicine is. It’s a type of primary care, Mr. 
Speaker, that emphasizes self-care and prevention. I know many 
people, constituents and friends, who have benefited greatly, 
when they’ve run into tricky health situations, have had much 
luck when they’ve visited some of the naturopathic doctors here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out that the Act that we’re replacing was 
passed in the 1950s, and so this a brand new Act, Mr. Speaker. 
This new Act, the minister points out often when legislation is 
before us, the minister talks about modernizing the legislation. 
 
“It will ensure the regulations governing naturopathic doctors 
will meet patients’ needs and that these naturopathic doctors are 
able to work to their full scope of practice.” It’s absolutely 
imperative with our health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, that 
we ensure that all our primary health care, the whole team of 
primary health care workers have the opportunity to work to 
their full scope of practice. 
 
The minister in his second reading speech talks about how the 
Act: 
 

. . . will provide title protection for naturopathic doctors. It 
will establish the authority for the regulatory body to set 
[out] qualifying examinations and eligibility requirements 
for applicants. It will allow the appointment of public 
representatives to the regulatory body. It will align with 
the requirements of the Agreement on Internal Trade and 

the New West Partnership Trade Agreement. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, and there will be an opportunity to have 
further conversations with naturopathic doctors, but protecting 
the title is very important for most professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know as someone . . . I’ve had this conversation before. I have 
been a registered social worker, Mr. Speaker. I have a Bachelor 
of Social Work degree, but I’m not currently a registered social 
worker so I don’t have the right to call myself a social worker. 
And I know when I hear other people who also don’t have the 
right to call themselves a social worker, that it’s problematic. 
When you have a governing body set out, the goal is to ensure 
that there’s a code of ethics, that you’re meeting certain 
standards, Mr. Speaker, and in order to be able to use that title, 
you need to meet those standards and adhere to the code of 
ethics. So I have no doubt that this is a very positive move for 
many people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Act: 

 
. . . will also change the name of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Naturopathic Practitioners council to the 
College of Naturopathic Doctors of Saskatchewan. [The 
minister points out that] This change is to clarify the 
organization’s role as the regulatory body whose first duty 
is to protect the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes [also] mean that the regulatory 
body will have the power to stop individuals from 
providing services for which they are not authorized. 

 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, you want to make sure that people 
who are providing health care services have the training and the 
skills and are governed by a body that ensures that they are 
meeting those criteria, Mr. Speaker. And again, much like my 
comments from my own social work, in order to be able to call 
yourself a social worker, you need to meet those criteria. That’s 
something of which I have some experience, so I totally 
understand and support this move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out: 
 

Because of these changes, patients may not have to travel 
to other provinces to seek treatment. The old Act prevents 
Saskatchewan naturopathic doctors from practising to their 
level of training and expertise, and these changes mean that 
naturopathic doctors working in Saskatchewan will be 
more likely to stay [here] in Saskatchewan because they 
will have the same scope of practice as those working in 
other Canadian provinces. 

 
[14:30] 
 
Obviously again it is important to be able to support our folks 
on our primary health care teams to work to their full scope of 
practice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll have an opportunity in committee when Bill 172, The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act is moved to committee, but in the 
meantime, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



6536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

debate on Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 174 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 
Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
174, The Registered Teachers Act. Giving a little bit of a 
comment and talking about what the government’s trying to 
create with Bill 174 is create an arm’s-length regulatory board 
that will oversee teachers’ discipline and certification. There’s a 
process that is going forward, and I’m, from the minister’s 
comments, getting an idea that it will be I believe about a 
seven-member board with two members from the public being 
appointed to that board. 
 
There will be an opportunity for I guess government to appoint 
three teachers and two members of the public. I guess 
government will have that opportunity. STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] will also have the opportunity to appoint 
three teachers to this board, and also the administrators and 
directors and superintendents will also have an opportunity to 
appoint one teacher or one individual to this board that will play 
a role going through dealing with discipline, making sure 
certifications are up to date. 
 
I know from our side of the House, we’ll have questions and 
stuff. And you know, sometimes it’s controversial. You’ve 
heard different issues that people are saying. And I guess the 
government figures that, at the end of the day, this is the way to 
go, and it’s going ahead with that. 
 
It might have consulted. I don’t know. I have no information. 
Maybe they did; maybe they didn’t. But I know it’s important 
to make sure that we talk to Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, the boards of education, to make sure. And if 
they’re buying in and they’ve been consulted, that’s a good 
thing. 
 
It’s important to do because too many times this government’s 
track record has not been good when it comes forward to 
consult with teachers, consult with the boards of education, 
consult with anyone when they want to ram something, you 
know, legislation, a piece of legislation and just ram ahead on it 
without consulting and talking about it. This government has 
done that, whether it’s through legislation, through the 
regulations that require . . . A minister has the ability to make 
the regulations. They’ve done that. 
 
At this point, you know, after the end of the day they may go 
through . . . This body may be appointed. If everything goes 
through and the legislation is passed, then that body will have I 
believe in 2015, if given permission and granted it goes ahead 
and this legislation is passed, will give that body and board the 

opportunity to start hearings, I believe, in 2015 is what the 
government is proposing. And that will help. 
 
But also what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, all findings, after 
they’re done their investigation and they investigate a situation, 
they’re saying it will be released to the public so the public has 
an opportunity to see what’s going on and what they’ve heard. 
So hopefully that’ll work. 
 
I know from our side of the House, we will have more questions 
and, at the end of the day, we’ll have an opportunity in 
committee to ask the government questions and make sure that 
they consulted. Is there a buy-in by the teachers, by the boards 
of education, by Saskatchewan families, by parents? Let’s make 
sure that, at the end of the day, we have individuals who are 
buying in and saying this makes sense. And sometimes it is 
good sense. So let’s just make sure we’ve done the good work 
to consult before we bring in legislation that . . . you know, after 
we have to make a bunch of amendments to the legislation. 
 
So at this point I have no further comments on this bill, 174. 
I’m prepared to adjourn on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 175 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to make a few 
comments on Bill 175, makes consequential amendments to the 
Act. And again sometimes it’s a name change. When we’re 
having consequential amendments, sometimes there’s very little 
changing. It’s just to, with other pieces of legislation, to come 
in compliance with the current bill, that 174, should it become 
law, that you make those consequential amendments to other 
bills. And we have to sometimes do that to make sure they all 
come in under Bill 174. 
 
So at this point, I have no further questions on Bill 175, the 
consequential amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



March 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6537 

Bill No. 176 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to join debate today. Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety 
Act, the amendments brought forward are fairly succinct, barely 
a page and a quarter of explanatory notes attaching to the Act, 
this of course amending earlier efforts made by this government 
around distracted drivers, particularly focusing on the question 
of cellphone use while driving. Mr. Speaker, the whole question 
of cellphone use while driving is I think one that’s, you know, 
in the last few years coming more to the fore and certainly the 
way that it impacts the ability of drivers to respond 
appropriately to the conditions as they present while driving. 
 
The evidence is there in spades, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
dangerous thing and that it needs to be dealt with appropriately. 
Certainly it was in that spirit, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
came forward, and in general we were favourable as regarded 
the actions of the government at that time. And it’s interesting 
though. You don’t govern in generalities, Mr. Speaker. The 
particulars are always the point that are of great importance. So 
we see amendments coming forward here today where they’re 
trying to make greater allowance for those who would be given 
an infraction, given a penalty under this law, been subjected to 
the question of impoundment when it’s an employee driving the 
vehicle of an employer. And what we’ve got here so far, Mr. 
Speaker, is in section 3 where it’s . . . Again this is out of the 
explanatory notes: 
 

Implement an immediate 3-day (72 hours) roadside 
suspension for the operator of a commercial vehicle, if 
different than the owner of the commercial vehicle, in 
circumstances where the commercial vehicle is subject to a 
seven-day impoundment under the Act as a result of the 
driver’s contravention of prescribed high-risk offences. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be fairly straightforward. 
 
Moving on to the next provision wherein it will now provide: 
 

. . . regulatory authority to prescribe program requirements 
for the suspension of a driver’s licence and appeal to the 
Highway Traffic Board in those situations where a peace 
officer impounds a commercial vehicle as a result of the 
driver’s high risk behaviour. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a case in Saskatoon where there’s 
an individual, an employee of a company, that was driving that 
company’s vehicle, had had I believe a prior penalty on his 
records concerning dangerous driving or distracted driving 
around cellphone use, and of course it resulted in that vehicle 
being impounded, along with other accompanying measures. 
 
Now in the second reading speech from the minister, the 
minister came forward saying that this will hopefully allay the 
concerns raised by the business owner in that particular 

circumstance. That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
there are other alternatives that are being recommended by that 
business owner to what is being presented here. 
 
And it’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
consultation, certainly the concerns brought forward by that 
business owner, I can’t gather a particular instance of where the 
minister consulted directly with that business owner. Certainly 
there was consultation with the Safety Council, with the traffic 
board, other bodies, which is as it should be, Mr. Speaker, but 
certainly no effort to consult with that individual business 
owner. 
 
Again I appreciate that the main point of this exercise is to 
maintain and improve public safety as regards how our drivers 
are conducting themselves on the highways and roads of this 
province. But in terms of the economic penalty that is, not just 
for the individual committing the offence, but then in turn is 
impacting the company in question, I’ll be interested to hear 
more of the minister’s reckoning with that question and how 
that is being sorted out. 
 
That’s perhaps a discussion that’s better suited at committee 
stage, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll look forward to that usage of the 
Act and how those interests have been reckoned with, whether 
or not they have been reconciled. But again, Mr. Speaker, it 
would appear that they have not been reconciled. 
 
I guess just in general, Mr. Speaker, the whole question of the 
impounding of vehicles, there are other prescribed grounds in 
the legislation that trigger the seizure of vehicles when 
committing acts on the highways that are a dangerous offence. 
I’ll be interested to see what the other applications for the 
seizure of vehicles or the impounding of vehicles have been 
enacted, what provisions are there. And if they’re not being 
utilized, why not are those provisions being utilized? And in 
this particular case, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got information on the 
particular provision in question as regards cellphone use, but 
there are certainly other prescribed activities in the legislation. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there’s a greater 
discussion to be undertaken at the committee stage, but we’re 
not quite yet finished the participation from members on this 
side. And with that, I would move to adjourn Bill 176, An Act to 
amend The Traffic Safety Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 177 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 
Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



6538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2015 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased as 
always to enter into discussion about Bill No. 177, The 
Insurance Act. 
 
Just a little bit of background here, Mr. Speaker. This is a new 
Act, Mr. Speaker, replacing and, as the minister says, 
modernizing an existing Act. The original Act, The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act, was first passed in 1913, so over 
100 years of history and the development of insurance in this 
province over that time, Mr. Speaker. It is a substantial Act, and 
in my time here as a legislator it’s one of the more full and 
technical Acts that have come before us. It’s about 300 pages 
and has 11 parts. 
 
When we think about legislation, Mr. Speaker, and when we 
think about insurance in particular, it’s that thing that gives us 
peace of mind to be able to go about our daily life and we . . . 
Insurance covers the broad spectrum. You can buy insurance for 
almost, well almost anything these days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know in my own life, I think about the places where I’ve had 
insurance and had to utilize it. I remember last year, Mr. 
Speaker, on my way home, actually right before we adjourned 
for Easter, right after estimates, Health estimates, I was on my 
way back to Saskatoon and something flew off a truck and 
smashed the top of my sunroof in my car, Mr. Speaker. And I 
was regretting not having a package policy, but I did and I do in 
fact have insurance through my plates, but I did regret that I did 
not have a package policy because replacing windows is 
incredibly expensive. And I didn’t have the forethought to get 
the semi’s licence plate number. I was quite shocked when the 
thing flew off the semi and hit my sunroof, Mr. Speaker, and 
shattered it. I was quite shocked actually and wasn’t quite sure 
what to do. It scared the dickens out of me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I think of another occasion, another type of insurance. Last year 
I ripped my patellar ligament in my left leg, Mr. Speaker, in a 
spin class, and have had to tap into the insurance that we have 
through work to use physical therapy and actually a brace for 
my leg, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had the unfortunate occasion in the past to be broken into, 
actually. I had a bad run of it a few years . . . well about 20 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, where we were broken into on three 
different occasions, Mr. Speaker, in a very short amount of 
time. And thankfully — I’m knocking on wood here — that 
hasn’t been my experience in recent time. 
 
But I know in my own life, well health insurance when we 
travel . . . I had an opportunity where I didn’t have insurance. 
This was a long time ago in my early 20s, Mr. Speaker, and I 
wasn’t as wise as I was now, Mr. Speaker. I travelled to 
California with my husband and we were . . . Actually it’s a 
long story, but we were attacked while we were hiking, had a 
huge hospital bill, and had to pay that, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
remember going to the hospital without health insurance. I only 
had minor injuries, but my husband had a bite mark out of his 
chest and head lacerations, and I can remember my 
mother-in-law saying, don’t let them do anything to you. But 
my husband needed some medical attention. 
 

So insurance is one of those things that can cover many aspects 
of our life, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s our home, our health, 
making sure that our kids are protected. It’s unfortunate there 
are many people who not only do they not buy insurance 
because they . . . It’s not that they don’t want it, but sometimes 
people cannot afford it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So insurance has a huge place in all our lives. And this, as I 
said, is an incredibly important and technical bill. Eleven 
different parts of this bill. We have the part I which is the 
preliminary matters, and it outlines the definitions for “. . . 
terms to be used in the Act and a specification of the application 
of the Act to certain forms of insurance.” Part II is the licensing 
of insurers. Part III is provincial companies. Part IV is fraternal 
societies. Part V is insurance intermediaries and insurance 
councils. Part VI is unsolicited insurance, reinsurance, and 
special brokers. Part VII is market conduct. Part VIII is 
contracts of insurance. Part IX is enforcement. Part X is 
general. And part XI, Mr. Speaker, is consequential 
amendments, repeals, and transitional. 
 
There was an opportunity for a technical briefing a few short 
. . . well I believe it was maybe even last week, Mr. Speaker, 
and our critic and some staff attended that to help get a better 
understanding to prepare, to be able to ask some more detailed 
questions in committee. And I know our able critic will have 
that opportunity in the near future. 
 
But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate of The 
Insurance Act. And that concludes my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 
tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6525 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6525 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6525 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6525 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6525 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6526 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6526 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6526 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6526 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6526 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2015 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6527 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6527 
 Queen of Caramel 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6527 
 Graduate Students’ Association Awards 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6528 
 Rural Firefighters Honoured 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6528 
 Borden Team Competes in Canadian Firefighters’ Curling Championship 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6528 
 Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame Inductee 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6528 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Services at Health Facilities and the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6529 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6529 
 Provision of Health Services in Craik and District 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6530 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6531 
 Housing of Young Offenders 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6532 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6532 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6533 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6534 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6534 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6534 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6534 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6535 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6535 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6536 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6536 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6537 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6538 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


