
























































Hansard: October 28, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 75A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7513 
 October 28, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 
leave of the members of the House to give two extended 
introductions actually, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to do two 
extended introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
special day in the Legislative Assembly today. We have guests 
that certainly are deserving of a special introduction and an 
acknowledgment by members of the House. The first group has 
perhaps come from furthest away, although the High 
Commissioner we are about to introduce is obviously stationed 
here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is the High Commissioner 
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to Canada, His 
Excellency Kamrul Ahsan. Joining His Excellency is Mr. 
Dewan Mahmud, first secretary (commercial) of the Bangladesh 
High Commission, Mr. Speaker. And they’re accompanied by 
professionals from Protocol. Mr. Speaker, I want to note that 
this is the first visit of His Excellency to the Legislative 
Assembly, although he is not new to the province of 
Saskatchewan. He was a part of a private program here just last 
year, where I was also in attendance, meeting with Canpotex. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the High Commissioner has a very busy program 
while he’s here in the province. He’s going to meet with a 
number of, and has already met with, representatives of the 
government. In fact I understand they were talking about coal 
generation earlier today, and the potentiality for more coal 
generation in Bangladesh, and an interest in carbon capture and 
sequestration we’re developing here. 
 
Saskatchewan has strong and growing ties with the people and 
the Republic of Bangladesh, ties for which we are very grateful. 
Mr. Speaker, our province exports to Bangladesh were more 
than $410 million last year; that’s a 26 per cent increase over 
2013. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is Canada’s leading exporter to 
Bangladesh. Our province alone accounts for 58 per cent of all 
of Canadian exports to that great country, primarily agricultural 
products, but now, Mr. Speaker, a return to trade in potash. 
Because at that meeting of Canpotex I referenced earlier, a new 
agreement has been signed, and a welcome one, where once 
again Saskatchewan potash will be moving into that very 
important market, Mr. Speaker. And that was actually an issue, 

the potash export potential was an issue I had the chance to 
raise with Prime Minister Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina when I 
was there on a trade mission in 2011. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina have five agreements in place with their 
Bangladeshi counterparts covering a number of areas including 
student and academic exchanges but also research and 
collaboration. The U of S [University of Saskatchewan] is also 
working with Bangladesh institutions on a number of 
agricultural research projects. Since 2007 Saskatchewan has 
welcomed more than 1,400 citizens from Bangladesh as 
permanent residents to our province. And during the 2015 
winter semester, more than 100 students from Bangladesh were 
enrolled in Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions. 
 
This is a growing and vibrant relationship we have with 
Bangladesh, one that we value greatly, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
important to say, on behalf of 18,000 pulse growers in the 
province who are able to supply about 90 per cent of the import 
needs of peas and lentils to that country, it’s important to say on 
their behalf, but on behalf of the entire province to the people of 
Bangladesh through His Excellency today, thank you. Thank 
you very much for this relationship. We welcome you warmly 
here to the Legislative Assembly today, and we commend you 
to a good program here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and while I’m on my feet, I would also ask 
members opposite for the indulgence to introduce a very, very 
important group who have joined us in the Assembly today. It’s 
my great honour to introduce a remarkable group of women and 
men that are seated in your gallery. We welcome today 63 
members of the Canadian Forces 431 Air Demonstration 
Squadron, better known as the Snowbirds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it would be formidable if we all asked them to just stand 
briefly so that we could acknowledge them. We can probably 
see you there, but if you wouldn’t mind just standing. And I’ll 
try to be brief, Mr. Speaker. Leading the group today is their 
commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Brad Wintrup. And the 
commanding officer of 15 Wing Moose Jaw is also here, 
Colonel Alexander Day, and we welcome his wife, Sue, as well. 
She has joined us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests represent the following components of 
the Snowbirds: they work in command, air display flight, air 
maintenance flight, and logistical and administration flight. 
 
Earlier today Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor hosted a 
special luncheon for the squadron who are recognizing, who are 
celebrating their 45th anniversary. This anniversary is an 
opportunity for all of us to recognize one of the best precision 
flying teams in the world, and a military unit that has served our 
country and served the Canadian Forces in an exemplary way as 
great ambassadors not only for Canada, obviously for the 
country, but very specifically for the province of Saskatchewan 
and the people of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an important anniversary for our colleague, 
the member for Wood River, who did two tours with the 
Snowbirds, including team leader I think in 1985 and 1986. Mr. 
Speaker, they are an enduring symbol of all that is good about 



7514 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

our country, our Canadian Forces in our province. 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw has been home to the Snowbirds since the very first 
day, since the team’s inception. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we welcome them here to this Assembly 
today, and we thank them and their predecessors for their great 
service to our country and for their representation of the 
province and the people of Saskatchewan. I’d ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming these very special guests to the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to join with the Premier in welcoming the groups and 
individuals who have been identified, as well as one other 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would first like to start with the High Commissioner and 
first secretary and welcome them to Saskatchewan and to the 
Assembly and to wish them all the best, Mr. Speaker, as they 
are here to learn, to engage, and to exchange ideas and 
possibilities, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is accurate in pointing 
out the connections between Saskatchewan and Bangladesh in 
economic terms, in educational terms, and especially, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of people. 
 
I recall just a few weeks ago in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, going 
to a cultural evening with probably 3 to 400 members of the 
Bangladeshi community. And it was a great celebration of 
music, of dance, and recognizing the big contributions that are 
being made here to Saskatchewan and adding so much vibrancy 
to our province. So I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these two individuals again to the Assembly. 
 
Thank you. And I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to welcome the 
Snowbirds. And it’s a large delegation and group that we have 
with us today, and that’s fitting, Mr. Speaker, because we know 
their significance and their attachment to Canada and the 
province is indeed large. And it’s something that every child 
from a young age is exposed to, I think, from 
coast-to-coast-to-coast in our country, but it’s a special 
attachment here in Saskatchewan, the 15 Wing here and the 
special place that the Snowbirds hold in the hearts of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I ask all members to once again thank these individuals for 
their service to the country and for making us all so proud as 
Canadians, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And last, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery, I’d like to introduce 
Carla Beck who is seated there. Carla Beck is the assistant 
executive director at the Regina Transition House where she 
manages the women’s shelter. She’s also, as members will 
know, a trustee with the Regina Public Schools, active 
volunteer and leader in a variety of groups in the community 
and throughout Saskatchewan. She and her partner, Guy, have 
three children. And on top of all that, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
proud to say that she is the candidate for the New Democratic 
Party in the constituency of Lakeview and, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, the next MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
for the constituency as well. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Carla to the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d ask that members join me in welcoming some very 
important guests in our west gallery who have come all the way 
from the province of Guadalcanal, the Solomon Islands in the 
South Pacific, most members pray know the site of a very 
important battle during the Second World War. 
 
We have with us the Deputy Premier of Guadalcanal Province, 
the Hon. Rollen Seleso, who joins us as well, accompanied by 
the Hon. Anthony Veke, a senior member of the Legislative 
Assembly and a former premier of Guadalcanal as well. With 
them, Mr. Ashwant Dwivedi, the chief executive officer of the 
Canadian International Training & Education Corporation, also 
the honorary consul general for the Solomon Islands across 
Canada. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we signed a very important MOU 
[memorandum of understanding], an agreement with the 
Saskatchewan Hotel and Hospitality Association, the 
Government of the Solomon Islands, the Guadalcanal province 
particularly, with respect to labour mobility. And we’re going to 
be having a member statement on that forthwith from the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. But I would ask that all 
members join me in welcoming these gentlemen to 
Saskatchewan for their very first trip and that we hope to see 
them again. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the minister opposite and welcome these 
leaders from the Solomon Islands and Guadalcanal to 
Saskatchewan to our Assembly. We wish them well with their 
meetings. And certainly we look forward to fully understanding 
the agreement, but we thank them for the partnership and hope 
that their exchange and time here is constructive and 
productive. We certainly provide a very warm welcome. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
welcome the Regina Open Door Society to the legislature, 
seated in the west gallery. The guests are participants in the 
integrating newcomers with volunteer opportunities to add 
leadership value through education program, known as the 
INVOLVE program. 
 
The Regina Open Door Society has collaborated with the 
Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan and SaskCulture to offer 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7515 

this program, which is a volunteer training program for 
newcomers. The participants are given the opportunity to 
network with a number of community-based organizations, then 
able to sign up to volunteer. 
 
So seated there — if you could just give us a wave — Bonnie 
Soerensen is the program facilitator. Getachew Woldyesus is 
the manager of settlement, family and community services. The 
participants are Roberto Masterio, Hani Al Moulia, Manal 
Anwal, Deonilito De Guzman, David Rugabuka, Yagoob 
Bawazir, and Christina Masa. Excellent. 
 
I have had the opportunity the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, 
to not only hand out the certificates to the participants but to 
network and have great conversations. They’re a great asset, not 
only to the city but to this province, so we welcome them. We 
thank them for choosing Saskatchewan. And we thank the Open 
Door Society and Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan again 
for contributing to the settlement of newcomers in this 
province. They do fantastic work. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask all members to help me welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to quickly join, no need for leave for an extended 
introduction I hope, but I’d like to join with the minister for 
introducing the folks from the Open Door Society, and again 
sponsored by the Multicultural Council. Certainly Bonnie 
Soerensen — I’d also add to the record, Mr. Speaker, proud 
graduate of Thom Collegiate — and Getachew Woldyesus and 
all the folks that are here today from the Open Door Society. 
It’s a great program, and certainly the great leadership that 
Bonnie and Getachew provide to that is well appreciated. So I’d 
just very briefly like to add my voice to that of the minister in 
asking that all members welcome these individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce some guests seated in the west gallery, and I’m 
pleased to introduce them here today. They are here today as 
part of the announcement about the multi-material recycling 
program that will be launched on January 1st, 2016. 
 
From the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association we 
have President Deb Button, CEO [chief executive officer] 
Laurent Mougeot, policy and legal adviser Steven Dribnenki. 
From the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities we 
have President Ray Orb, senior policy analyst Ben Chursinoff, 
and policy analyst Libbey Morin. From Multi-Material 
Stewardship Western we have some guests coming later on 
today, Mr. Speaker, and I will introduce them later. I’ll just ask 
all members to please join with me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to join with the Environment minister in welcoming these 
individuals to the Legislative Assembly today. We are certainly 
looking forward to the establishment finally of the 
multi-material recycling program and are pleased to see Ms. 
Button from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and her officials, as well as Mr. Orb from SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. I don’t see 
him, but I hear he’s here. 
 
Anyway, welcome to all these individuals for the hard work 
they’re doing. We know how important recycling is to the 
environment here in Saskatchewan, and we applaud them for 
the work they do. So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, my house leader. My wife Trish is in the west 
gallery. And along with being a great mom to Carter and Paige, 
she has her own business in Saskatchewan and is working with 
a very important organization, Women Entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan. She’s conducting seminars in Weyburn and 
Moose Jaw and Regina. And I’d ask all members to help me 
welcome Trish to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it’s a great pleasure for me to introduce some of my family 
today: my second-oldest son, Jody, from Calgary. He’s a 
lawyer. He’s the managing director of Marsh Calgary and is the 
leader of the Canadian Energy Practice. And for a passion, he is 
a marathoner. He’s run the Chicago, New York, Boston, Berlin, 
and came in at two hours and 33 minutes. I have to admit that 
he didn’t get that ability from either one of his parents. With 
him is his wife, Shashi Behl, who is an entrepreneur. Shashi has 
a lot of energy and a lot of class. She was the Canadian Retailer 
of the Year for 2014. 
 
And with them is my grandson, Aden. Aden is in grade 6. He’s 
at Lycée Louis Pasteur francophone school in Calgary. He was 
recently elected as the class representative, and he’s a soccer 
goalie. And when I first spoke at his school a number of years 
ago, he introduced me as the prime minister of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I should apologize to the House for not 
correcting him at that time, but it just sort of made me happy. 
So thank you very much. So I’d like to ask everyone to help me 
welcome them to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in our Saskatchewan schools. 
And we know that this province lags behind others in securing 
the rights of gender- and sexually diverse students, and that 
gender- and sexually diverse students are four times more likely 
than their heterosexual peers to attempt suicide. 
 



7516 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

And we know that GSAs, or gender and sexual alliances, offer 
opportunities to improve attendance and retention rates, 
generate meaningful relationships at school, and reduce 
homophobic and transphobic bullying; and that this government 
must act so that under no circumstance are gender- and sexually 
diverse students denied the right to form gender and sexual 
alliances within their schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
government to immediately take meaningful action to pass 
The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act and 
enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan students 
to form GSAs within their schools in order to foster caring, 
accepting, inclusive environments and deliver equal 
opportunities for all students to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton-Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, seniors have 
done their part to build this province, and northern 
Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 Croft 
report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a code red 
level. Seniors from our northern communities need immediate 
attention from this government, and many residents cannot 
afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in 
the Creighton-Denare Beach area. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton, Denare Beach, 
Sandy Bay. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. The petitioners point out that this government needs to 
address the seniors’ care crisis. They point out that families 
have spoken out about staff shortages resulting in the lack of 
staff to help their loved ones with basic needs while they’re in 
their care facilities. They also point out that it was this 
government that has removed the regulations requiring a 
minimum standard of care, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 
the following action: to cause the provincial government 
to immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care, including creating more spaces 
and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher standards of 
care in public facilities, private facilities, and home care; 
ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care 
facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 
standards of care; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan here, concerned about the high cost of 
post-secondary education. Among the very cogent arguments 
they raise, Mr. Speaker, they point out that the average 
Canadian student in 2014 graduated with debt of over $27,000, 
not including credit card and other private debt. In the prayer 
that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Langenburg, Spy Hill, Regina, Saskatoon, 
Balgonie, Pilot Butte, Tisdale, Edam, Battlefords, and Vawn. I 
so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

45th Anniversary of Canadian Forces Snowbirds 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise to recognize the 45th anniversary of the Canadian 
Forces Snowbirds, 431 Air Demonstration Squadron. I would 
also like to recognize Colonel Day, wing commander of 15 
Wing Moose Jaw; Lieutenant Colonel Wintrup, commanding 
officer for the Snowbirds; as well as the past and present team 
leads and the 80-plus members of the squadron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds are very well known in this 
province, as well as across the country. However their reach 
extends far beyond our borders here in Saskatchewan. Regarded 
as one the world’s best precision flying teams, they bring great 
honour to our province and our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people will have memories of the time they 
were able to look up at the prairie blue sky to see some of the 
best pilots in the world exhibit their skill. This year the 
squadron has put on displays all across North America. We are 
proud to be able to have these skilled individuals showcased in 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7517 

cities from British Columbia to PEI [Prince Edward Island], 
South Carolina to California. Whether it’s an aerobatic 
performance at an air show or a flypast over a public event, 
spectators are given a view of how extraordinary this squadron 
truly is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank each squadron member, past and 
present, for the prestige they bring to our Canadian forces. I’d 
also like to commend them for their dedication to our country 
through military service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today in recognition of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Many 
Saskatchewan families are affected by breast cancer. I am sure 
that every member of this Assembly has a friend, family 
member, or a constituent who has been touched by this terrible 
disease. 
 
One in nine women in Canada will develop breast cancer at 
some point. It is encouraging to see survival rates improving 
with new treatments and technologies, but far too many of our 
mothers, sisters, and friends have lost their lives. 
 
There are many great initiatives all across our province that 
raise awareness about breast cancer and raise money to help 
fund research for a cure. From large events like CIBC 
[Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] Run for the Cure to 
smaller events like the Pink Sale at Bobbi-Joe’s Cafe here in 
Regina, people from all over our province come together to 
make a difference and bring an end to breast cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with important initiatives like Breast Cancer 
Awareness Month, I hope that we can continue to increase 
awareness, fund the critical research, support our loved ones 
when they need our help, and eventually create a future for all 
women and girls that is free from breast cancer. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Greystone. 
 

Educational Partnership with Solomon Islands 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, drawing 
on the minister’s introduction, I’m honoured to rise in the 
Assembly today to highlight a new and important partnership 
between the Saskatchewan Hotel and Hospitality Association, 
the Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council, and the 
Solomon Islands province of Guadalcanal. 
 
This educational partnership will support the entry of recent 
tourism graduates from the Solomon Islands by allowing them 
to work and gain first-hand experience in our renowned 
hospitality sector right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
graduates will begin arriving in the spring of 2016, and they’ll 
begin their three-month work placements in hotels across the 
province, thereby helping to meet labour shortages our province 
is currently experiencing in this dynamic sector. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t take this opportunity to 
mention the enduring heritage of the Solomon Islands. 
Consisting of a chain of several islands southeast of Papua New 
Guinea, the Solomon Islands bore witness to some of the 
fiercest fighting in the Pacific during the Second World War. 
That country and especially the province of Guadalcanal helped 
to serve and sacrifice for the high principle of our shared 
freedom. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, these islands were also home to 
the historic site of Lieutenant John F. Kennedy’s PT-109 
shipwreck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in recognizing this 
beneficial new partnership and most especially the enduring 
strength of the people of Guadalcanal province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

A Chance to Speak Documentary  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on September 10th I attended the 
premiere of a documentary shot in Saskatoon’s inner city called 
A Chance to Speak. This documentary, produced by Mr. Vern 
Boldick, examines homelessness, abuse, and the streets of 
Saskatoon as experienced by the city’s poorest residents. 
 
The documentary follows several individuals who open up 
about living on the street. One of the main characters is a young 
man by the name of Chris Moyah who is involved with 
Saskatoon’s STR8 UP, a grassroots organization who supports 
its members in many ways, including leaving gangs; obtaining 
safe, affordable housing; getting proper personal identification; 
obtaining employment; accessing counselling; and much more. 
The screening was followed by a panel discussion that included 
some of the individuals in the documentary as well as some 
dedicated community members who are working to fight 
poverty. 
 
Mr. Boldick hopes to bring the documentary to schools, 
churches, and reserves across Saskatchewan later this fall, and I 
encourage all members to take the time to see this important 
film. Films like this one remind us that inequality is a real 
problem here in Saskatchewan. And there’s no reason why, in a 
rich province like ours, anyone should have to go without 
access to a safe place to sleep or a warm meal each night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all looking forward to seeing how this 
government will implement its anti-poverty strategy, because 
what those living on the margins need is action, not just more 
talk. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Grand Opening of Parkland College 
Trades and Technology Centre 

 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 
short hours ago, I joined the Minister of Advanced Education 
and my colleagues from Melville-Saltcoats and Canora-Pelly as 
well as many regional dignitaries to celebrate the grand opening 
of the Parkland College Trades and Technology Centre in 



7518 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an overwhelming turnout, and the support 
the Yorkton area received for this innovation centre is amazing. 
Hundreds of people, in addition to many businesses and 
community leaders, attended the event. It was complete with a 
cake cutting and speeches from Mayor Bob Maloney and 
Parkland College president and CEO, Dwayne Reeve, among 
many others. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I am proud to say that our government contributed $10 million 
for this project, yet we were not the only sponsors who made 
this day happen. The land for the centre was donated by the city 
of Yorkton, estimated value, $3.48 million; Potash Corp and 
Mosaic, matching grants of $1.23 million; Mr. Speaker, 
Western Economic Diversification fund, 950,000 for the power 
engineering lab. And the college had an additional support of 
2.5 million in corporate and private citizen donations. 
 
It is projects like this that show what government can really 
accomplish when we work together with community partners. 
The facility will have the capacity to train 360 new full-time 
graduates, in addition to upgrading over 2,000 individuals with 
the skills they need to become fully employable in their chosen 
fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Parkland College and the Yorkton area on its new Trades and 
Technology Centre, as well as thanking the community for all 
their hard work and investment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Joint-Use School Project 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently this government undertook the largest new schools 
construction project in Saskatchewan history. Mr. Speaker, we 
are building 18 new schools on 9 joint-use sites in the 
communities of Regina, Saskatoon, Martensville, and Warman. 
 
Because of the success of these projects, Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Council for Public-Private Partnerships is granting 
our program an award. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that our 
projects have been selected to receive the Silver Accolade in the 
innovative partnerships category from the 2015 National 
Awards for Innovation and Excellence in Public-Private 
Partnerships. 
 
These facilities will maximize opportunities for students, create 
efficiencies, and strengthen partnerships between school 
divisions, while creating about 2,300 new jobs in the process. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the SaskBuilds officials, 
school divisions, and everyone else who was part of this 
innovative project. 
 
Building nine joint-use schools by the fall of 2017 is a major 
undertaking that could not have been achieved through a 
conventional approach. By using a public-private partnership, 
we will be able to provide new, innovative schools to over 

11,000 students from kindergarten to grade 8. These new 
schools will also provide an additional 810 spaces of child care 
and community resource space. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to grow. Our government 
is honoured to be recognized for this national award of 
innovative partnerships in our joint-use school project. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Saskatoon’s Growth Outlook 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This House hears 
a lot of doom and gloom and rhetoric coming from the members 
opposite, yet they seem to be oblivious to the reality of what is 
happening within our province. 
 
Our population is growing. Our economy is expanding and our 
unemployment numbers are the lowest in the country, yet we 
don’t hear from the Leader of the Opposition even 
acknowledging these facts. The numbers show the facts. The 
only challenge seems to be getting the members opposite that 
would take the time to read them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that we live in an amazing 
province, yet I’d like to highlight an article in today’s 
StarPhoenix that talks about Saskatoon’s growth outlook. The 
article talks about statistician Doug Elliott’s new paper that 
outlines the growth projection for Saskatchewan regional 
economies. And he has concluded that Saskatoon, specifically, 
“will prosper for years.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, myself and all our members from Saskatoon 
are aware of how great our city is and this, once again, confirms 
it. Furthermore, this is just not good news for Saskatoon, but for 
Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real doom and gloom isn’t that far away 
unfortunately. It’s right across the other side of the House in the 
policies of an old and tired NDP [New Democratic Party] that 
have shown themselves time and time again to be stuck in the 
past with their failed ideologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is moving Saskatchewan forward 
and once again the numbers show it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — On November 28th, 2012 the Premier received 
a briefing note from SaskPower. At the top it says, confidential 
for Premier’s use only. It talks about how the relationship with 
Cenovus is, “very good.” It says Cenovus didn’t need our CO2 
until 2016, which is interesting given the contract this 
government entered into, which now has us paying penalties. 
And it says this: “The sale of CO2 was critical to the business 
case for this project to proceed.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Premier receives a lot of 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7519 

briefing material, so perhaps he doesn’t remember this 
particular note that he received. But will the Premier at least 
admit that he has known for years that the sale of CO2 is critical 
to the business case for the carbon capture experiment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Of course, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know that roughly a third of the world’s successfully stored 
CO2 on Earth is stored here in Saskatchewan. Credit a project 
that was undertaken early on by the previous government, the 
federal government of the day, oil companies that were 
involved, and the US [United States] Department of Energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we built on that expertise with respect to that 
particular technology around storage to the point where the 
United Nations recognizes CCS [carbon capture and storage] as 
an efficacious way to help deal with the climate change issue 
around the world, Mr. Speaker. This particular plant, this 
carbon capture and sequestration plant, clean coal plant at 
Boundary dam 3, relies on and will continue to rely on the sale 
of CO2, Mr. Speaker, to Cenovus or whoever the highest bidder 
is, remembering that Cenovus was chosen in a public process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the largest research and development 
projects on Earth, frankly, in the last number of years. It’s the 
only successful commercial application of carbon capture and 
sequestration. Mr. Speaker, even in the conventional build of a 
power plant, were it to be natural gas or the members’ own 
Cory cogen plant that they constructed when they were in 
office, under SaskPower, there is in the first year some 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, where the project is brought up to full 
capacity and then drawn back to deal with technological 
challenges that exist. That’s the case with conventional power 
plants, and that’s the case with this very significant research and 
development project that has now been the subject of the visits 
of 260 people from around the world, with 30-plus countries — 
including Bangladesh that was here today — very interested in 
carbon capture and sequestration technology. 
 
The scientific community around the world is heralding this as 
a project that’s transformational in the industry, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to get through all of the technological issues that 
currently present to get to that 80 to 100 per cent capacity very 
soon, Mr. Speaker, as it was when the plant originally opened 
about a year ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Interesting response, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
get into some examination, Mr. Speaker, about the reaction of 
this government if they recognize that the sale of carbon is 
indeed important. There’s another briefing note from 2012 with 
the heading, CO2 sales initiative, and it says this: “The 
economics for BD3 ICCS was developed around the 1 million 
tonnes being sold at a starting price of $25 per tonne, escalating 
by 2 per cent per year.” And it says that delays in completing a 
contract for CO2 sales would seriously compromise the project. 
 
So the Premier, Mr. Speaker, knew that the economics of this 
project were extremely shaky at best and that selling 1 million 
tonnes of CO2 every year was critical, was critical to the 
government’s argument to proceed. 

So you’d think, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier heard that we are 
actually paying Cenovus money instead of earning money, 
you’d think, Mr. Speaker, that he would pay a lot of attention to 
that. When exactly did the Premier learn that his government is 
paying Cenovus instead of earning money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the original model certainly 
and remains predicated on the sale of 1 million tonnes of CO2, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the environmental advantage of the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get into the price because that’s 
very commercially sensitive, and I’d invite members to be 
circumspect about that. That’s a confidential agreement 
between SaskPower and this company. We’re going to want to 
continue to sell CO2 maybe to other companies as they bid. 
 
But I would just say this. A government will then also ask, 
okay, that’s if the plant is running at 100 per cent efficiency 
capacity from day one, which is not likely, which is not likely. 
This would have been a conversation that happens. And so then 
the question comes from the minister and the government: what 
happens if it’s not running at capacity, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well I can tell members what one of the scenarios would be if it 
wasn’t running at peak efficiency. Mr. Speaker, at the current 
rate that we’re seeing the plant operate at, we’re talking about 
the capture of 400 000 tonnes of CO2, and at the rate that we’re 
on, at the pace that we’re on right now, at the pace we’re on 
right now, we’re going to make money. SaskPower makes $5 
million even at the 400 000 tonne level that is existing today. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the good news is this. Here’s . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I can wait if the members want to keep 
talking, but they asked the question, so listen to the response. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that members opposite, I think they’re cheering for this 
project to fail. They’re the only ones, by the way. There are 
countries around the world that are still burning coal, that are 
building coal plants, and this presents real hope for the project. 
 
So even with the challenges it’s faced in year one, like any 
other conventional facility would face, we’re going to end up in 
the year making money on the CO2 sale at 400 000 tonnes. The 
other good news is that we’re correcting those problems at 
SaskPower. The engineers are correcting them, and we’ll be at 
80 to 100 per cent efficiency, Mr. Speaker, as per the original 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any project like this, especially when it’s 
groundbreaking and is transformational, is going to meet 
technological challenges in year one. And we have, and those 
are being overcome. And even at that, Mr. Speaker, we’re still 
making money on the sale of CO2. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we are cheering for transparency 



7520 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

for Saskatchewan ratepayers. We are cheering, Mr. Speaker, for 
a project to work, and we are cheering, Mr. Speaker, for the 
facts so that Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, can exactly 
know what they are on the hook for. 
 
You know, yesterday we saw from the minister as well, trying 
to tell this tale of making money, combining the sale of 
electricity, which the plant was always doing, Mr. Speaker, and 
ignoring the fact that we are on the hook for $1.5 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, for this project. Completely overlooked by the Premier 
and the minister. 
 
SaskPower only earned $3 million on CO2 sales last year, but 
this government paid Cenovus $12 million in penalties. That 
means we were $9 million in the hole, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to CO2 sales last year. And we know from the many 
internal documents that we’ve obtained, as early as September 
the government knew it would have to fork over a massive 
cheque to Cenovus because it wasn’t delivering CO2. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, back to my earlier question about what 
the Premier knew and when he knew it, Mr. Speaker. How long 
has he known that the government is paying Cenovus instead of 
earning money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — My hon. friend says he’s cheering 
transparency. Well, Mr. Speaker, all of this reported . . . The 
subject that has been breathlessly raised first by the member for 
Nutana, now by the Leader of the Opposition, was hidden away 
in the annual report, Mr. Speaker. And well, he kind of laughs 
that off and that’s not good enough. 
 
How about this? It was in a Moose Jaw Times-Herald story, 
January 12th, 2015. He should cheer that transparency. The 
Leader-Post, February 17th, 2015, there’s transparency. 
Estevan Mercury story, February 17th, 2015; at a presentation 
to the Pacific northwest regional forum on July 13th, 2015; in a 
SaskPower press release from September 14th, 2015; a 
Leader-Post story from September 14th, 2015. The Estevan 
Mercury again had another story — we’ll get him a subscription 
if he likes — September 16th, 2015. Oh and, Mr. Speaker, the 
National Geographic magazine reported it, October 2015. This 
has been reported by SaskPower. It will be . . . We’ve made 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that it will continue to be reported. 
 
And let’s remember, let’s remind members of the House, this is 
a transformational project. It’s world-leading technology. The 
world is stopping in Estevan to learn exactly what we’re doing, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’ll end the year making money on CO2, Mr. 
Speaker. And when it’s up to full capacity, we’re talking about 
the full sale of a million tonnes and the sequestering of that 
CO2, Mr. Speaker, so it doesn’t hurt the environment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear any answer as to 
when he knew that he’d be paying Cenovus instead of actually 
earning money on the CO2. Asked twice, no response. Why did 
the Premier say the carbon capture project was fully 
operational? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because it was. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, even to this day, to this 
moment in the House, the Premier’s ignoring the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, the facts that have been unearthed through internal 
documents and through the scattered information coming from 
SaskPower and from the minister. 
 
The Premier said the project was fully operational last October. 
We learned this week that the project is still not working 
properly. After almost 13 months, the project is operating at just 
40 per cent capacity, and there are serious design flaws that 
SaskPower is still scrambling to fix. 
 
Here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Canadian Press article 
just two moths ago. It says this: “Wall says the Boundary 
project captures 90 per cent of the coal-fired electricity plant’s 
carbon dioxide emissions.” He didn’t say it will hopefully 
capture. He didn’t say it will maybe capture. He said it captures 
— present tense and very definitive — which is exactly, Mr. 
Speaker, what his government said in the news releases as well. 
 
Why would the Premier repeatedly use present tense and very 
definitive language about this project, Mr. Speaker, when it 
wasn’t even remotely accurate? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, because when the plant first 
became fully operational, Mr. Speaker, officials were reporting 
that the start-up was very successful, that it was meeting the 
objectives for the plant. The objectives for the plant were 
between 80 and 95 per cent capture of CO2. That was happening 
early on. 
 
What happened subsequently, Mr. Speaker, is that we saw the 
efficiency decline — as is the case, by the way, with even 
conventional plants, Mr. Speaker. Some of it was planned, 
where they have planned shutdowns as we’re in right now, to 
retool to ensure the technology is working right. Mr. Speaker, 
the bottom line is that what has been offered to the world, what 
has been offered to the world in this technology was met very 
early on. It will be met, Mr. Speaker, as we meet the first-year 
challenges faced. 
 
And I invite the hon. member to return to his position on this 
issue that he had when he was running for the leadership of the 
New Democratic Party, when he said this. This was in the 
Leader of the Opposition’s leadership platform. He said: 
 

This means legislating targets for emission reductions and 
a renewable power portfolio making our province a world 
leader in safe, environmentally friendly and economically 
viable carbon capture and sequestration by equipping our 
current power plants with mechanisms to safely capture 
and sequester CO2 emissions and permitting SaskPower to 
profit from its knowledge and innovation by marketing 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7521 

CCS innovation. 
 
That is exactly what’s happening today in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, economically viable, certainly not 
what we’re seeing from this front bench in the deals that 
they’ve entered us into, Mr. Speaker. You know, that quote, Mr. 
Speaker, when the Premier said that it was fully operational and 
was capturing, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t at the beginning. That 
was just two months ago, Mr. Speaker, just two months ago, 
Mr. Speaker. And they can yell now but the reality of what was 
said two months ago when they had internal documents 
showing something very different, Mr. Speaker, is a circle that 
this Premier needs to square. 
 
You know, it’s very bizarre to have the Premier of the province 
saying that the project is fully operational and that it captures — 
present tense — captures 90 per cent of emissions, when that’s 
not even close to accurate. Here’s a news release, Mr. Speaker, 
a headline from earlier this year. It says, “CCS performance 
data exceeding expectations at world-first Boundary Dam 
Power Station Unit #3.” Exceeding expectations, that’s what the 
news release said. It goes on: 
 

Unit #3 is now producing affordable coal power for more 
than 100,000 homes and businesses for at least the next 
three decades, and it’s doing so 10 times more cleanly than 
other coal units and four times cleaner than a comparable 
natural gas unit. 

 
Again all present tense, Mr. Speaker, and now we know, Mr. 
Speaker, entirely inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. When that 
information was sent out in that news release, did the Premier 
know that it was false? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the facility is up and running. 
It’s operational, fully operational. They indeed have had some 
difficulties with the facility. That’s been disclosed on a number 
of occasions, Mr. Speaker: press release after press, interview 
after interview, article after article. They have said that they’ve 
had some difficulties with the facility, Mr. Speaker, but they 
have made money in 2015, about $6 million that they will 
make, 5 to $6 million in 2015, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 
important to note. 
 
I think the larger question though that we should be asking, and 
I think that was answered by the University of Regina from Lisa 
Watson. And she said “of course people are going to be upset” 
when there’s issues around Boundary dam. But the bigger 
question is, is whether there should be the plant built at all. And 
I think that’s the question that we would ask the member 
opposite, the leader opposite. In his leadership he said it should 
be built, but does he understand the fact that what has happened 
with respect to it, that there is going to be operational issues? 
That’s been disclosed on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, 
and clearly now we are seeing that SaskPower expects we will 
see fully operational . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, a very strange 
definition of fully, when you look at what they claim they’re 
fully operational. Also very telling, Mr. Speaker that the 
Premier will not say what he knew and when he knew it in 
terms of when they were paying Cenovus. Also interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, why they were pumping out news releases saying that 
they were exceeding expectations, when the reality was 
anything but that, Mr. Speaker. The same news release, the 
same news release from earlier this year said the plant is on 
target to meet the goal of capturing 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 
2015. On target to capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 2015, 
that’s what the news release says. But we know, Mr. Speaker, 
now, that SaskPower has only captured 400 000 tonnes — not 
even close, not even close to 1 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, when the news release went out earlier this year, 
saying the project was on target to capture 1 million tonnes in 
2015, did the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan know 
that that was not accurate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, all of the information — the 
what, the when, all of that kind of stuff that the Leader of the 
Opposition raises — has all been disclosed, hidden away in the 
annual report, hidden away on the Internet, Mr. Speaker, hidden 
away in the Moose Jaw Times story on January 12th, hidden 
away in the Leader-Post in February, hidden away in The 
Estevan Mercury. All of that information has been disclosed. 
 
And even though the plant isn’t operating at the efficiency that 
we would like to see, and that SaskPower would like to see, 
they still made 5 to $6 million in 2015, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
that’s important. So the choice would be, what would you do? 
Would you rather just shut it down? Would you rather have not 
started it in the first place, Mr. Speaker? Even . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member for Saskatoon 
Centre please rise and apologize for those remarks and 
withdraw them. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize and withdraw those 
remarks. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, all of the information has 
been disclosed to the people of Saskatchewan. We will be 
asking SaskPower to provide further updates with respect to the 
efficiency of the plant on an ongoing basis, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that’s important. I think the important question is, we would 
like to know — and I think the people of Saskatchewan would 
like to know — when it comes to the NDP, are they prepared to 
shut that facility down, throw all those people out of work 
and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the transparency that we are 
seeing from this government is offensive. For them to pretend 
that they have been clear with Saskatchewan people and they 



7522 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

have been open about the shortcomings of this project, about 
the failures with the design, about the huge cheques that they 
have had to stroke, Mr. Speaker, because of their poor contracts 
that they’re in, Mr. Speaker, and the failure to have this project 
be successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the minister, for the Premier to pretend that they have been 
transparent by slipping in one sentence in an annual report is 
offensive to every ratepayer and taxpayer in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable. And it sounds like, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Premier knew exactly what the results 
were coming out of this plant, Mr. Speaker, and at the same 
time was allowing news releases to go out that told a very 
different story. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, welcoming 
Americans and telling a very different story. 
 
Two months ago the Premier was at the Boundary dam with 
Senator Lindsey Graham and others and he said this: 
 

We’ve cleaned it up. At this facility operating right now, 
we have energy being produced from coal three times 
cleaner than natural gas. We are capturing 90 per cent of 
the CO2. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he may have well been standing there with a 
mission accomplished sign behind him. But the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, tell a very different story, and he knows it very well. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker . . . And you know what he said can’t 
be accurate. We know it can’t be accurate because SaskPower 
admits — they admit, Mr. Speaker — that the plant only 
functions at 40 per cent capacity. When the Premier was 
boasting to Lindsey Graham that the facility was fully 
operational, capturing 90 per cent of CO2, did he know that the 
facility had serious design flaws and was only operating at 40 
per cent capacity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has provided 
updates on a number of occasions. We’ve outlined, I think, 
eight or nine of them so far here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the efficiency. It’s gone from very high and 
down to 40 per cent, and it’s even gone to zero at times when 
they’ve been shut down. That has been disclosed on a number 
of occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would hope, and I would expect, that SaskPower people 
will be doing everything they possibly can to get the efficiency 
levels up. It’s nothing new in terms of a plant of this type, Mr. 
Speaker, where you are ramping up the expected outcomes of it 
and you’re also ramping them down in a scheduled way to do 
all of the testing and all of the experiments around it to make 
sure that it’s operating at peak performance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. They will continue 
to provide updates to the people of Saskatchewan. And I believe 
that the people of Saskatchewan are most supportive of any 
time that the Government of Saskatchewan is taking 
environmental issues head-on such as we are doing with respect 
to this facility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in February this government said 
that this project was exceeding expectations and that it was on 
target to capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 2015. By April the 
SaskPower president admitted in committee that lots of the 
equipment was being replaced and many components were 
being redesigned. 
 
To the minister: what happened between February when it was 
supposedly exceeding expectations and April when the 
scramble to fix the project started? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think the government has 
provided the answers with respect to that. I think SaskPower 
officials have as well. Any time that there is a new facility 
start-up of this type or any other generation facility of this type, 
there’s a run-in period where they ramp up and they also ramp 
down in scheduled ways. They do additional maintenance. They 
do additional testing. They do everything they can to make sure 
that the plant is operating as efficiently as possible. All is in an 
effort to get the highest efficiency they possibly can. 
 
Now admittedly, admittedly, Mr. Speaker, that it is clear there 
has been on a number of occasions, SaskPower has provided 
updates with respect to it, but even at 40 per cent efficiency, 
SaskPower made between 5 and $6 million in 2015. It isn’t 
where they would like it. It isn’t where the Government of 
Saskatchewan would like it, but I think that they are working as 
hard as they possibly can to ensure that we will get to the 
targets that were always established, that were always part of 
the project, and apparently was supported by yourself at one 
point in time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it seems like this overhaul of the 
project is a massive endeavour, because in April the SaskPower 
president said lots of the equipment was being replaced and 
many components were being redesigned. This week the 
SaskPower president said the facility is still being overhauled. 
 
So to the minister: what on earth is going on with this project 
that the redesign, replacement, and overhaul has apparently 
been happening for months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The member is right. This is a massive 
project. There’s no question about it. It’s a massive project. We 
would invite the member to come down and have a look at it at 
some point in time and talk to the officials about the efficiency, 
talk to the people about the kinds of things that are happening 
with respect to the facility, talk to them about the changes that 
they are making to improve efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. But I 
think the important question is that we would like to know from 
the members opposite, do you want this facility shut down? 
Because around the world . . . 
 
[Interjections] 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7523 

The Speaker: — Do you want me to take more time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at what groups 
around the world are saying about the technology, it’s pretty 
important I think. The Croatian ambassador to Canada called 
the CCS project, the Mount Everest of technology. Obviously a 
steep climb and, no question about it, a difficult project. If you 
look at what Green Alliance . . . Green Alliance highlights that 
CCS is the only technology available to decarbonize heavy 
industry to the extent that is needed to meet carbon targets. 
 
The International Energy Agency has stated without CCS, 
overall costs to halve emissions by . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Question period is over. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 
183, The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) 
Amendment Act, 2015, before I start out getting into some of the 
discussion, I just want to give credit to the labour movement of 
this province, the good men and women who do the great work 
of this province for many of us, whether it’s government 
department agencies, whether it’s the private sector, different 
industry. We see the trades, many good men and women in our 
province, young and old, work together to really, Mr. Speaker, 
provide a good income for their family. And they want to 
negotiate in good faith. 
 
But unfortunately we have a government who over eight years 
did nothing but fight the labour movement, went against the 
labour movement, taking away their right to strike. And we see 
what happened at the end of the day. And I’ll get into that, you 
know, some of the details about . . . 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I would remind this government and the minister, I 
wouldn’t at this point be giving themselves a pat on the back for 
saying that they’re now going to consult with the labour 
movement, the labour men and women of our province, those 
men and women who have done the work and have earned the 
respect that I think the Supreme Court gave them, that they 
have a right and it’s instilled. And the Supreme Court has made 
its ruling that in Canada you have . . . But it’s clear, that 
minister should not and the government should not give 

themselves a pat on the back. It wasn’t like they volunteered or 
they wanted to reach out. They were told and ordered by the 
Supreme Court to make it right. So let’s be clear on that one. 
 
Now having said that, we have a lot of individuals who have 
done a lot of good work. We had many people, whether they 
were, you know, their family, spouses, friends who organized 
and came together to send a message. So I give to the labour 
movement, the leaders and the unions and those individuals 
who came forward to take on this government, it’s not an easy 
task to take on government because the government has so 
much resources. But here is the dollars, you know, hard-earned 
dollars of our, and again the working men and women of our 
province, this government had to use to take them to court, to 
take them on and to fight them time and time. 
 
Why didn’t we use those dollars for good things like seniors’ 
care, like health care, like highways, wherever, housing? Those 
were areas where this government could have taken those 
dollars and done some good things. Unfortunately they’ve taken 
dollars that were earned by many people of this province and 
are very proud. Taxpayers are very proud. And when they turn 
around and give a government an opportunity they can sit here 
and say what they want, but at the end of the day again I’ll go 
back to saying this: credit to the working men and women of 
this province, credit to the organizations that said no, we’re not 
going to accept this. We’re going to fight this; we’re going to 
challenge this. And they did that. They challenged it right to the 
Supreme Court and going. Had to fight and in the end are 
coming up with an agreement and we see the legislation. 
 
Why didn’t they consult with the labour movement before it 
went to this? If they really cared, why did the Supreme Court 
have to tell them what they were going to do? That’s pretty sad 
on that government’s part. It doesn’t show how we consult. 
Well we see the record they have consulting with First Nations, 
many other organizations — Métis, whoever — out in our 
province. Seniors. We see the way this government doesn’t 
consult. Education, our teachers. We see the disrespect that this 
government has shown to many in this province. 
 
You know you’ve been given an opportunity of a lifetime. You 
had record revenues for years. You could have done so many 
good things with the dollars that the people of our province 
have come together and laid at your disposal. They can yell all 
they want. It doesn’t matter. The people of this province know, 
Mr. Speaker. They know that they did the good and hard work 
that they had to, to provide what this government has taken. 
 
Now they can sit here and say what they want. The good people 
of our province are asking some tough questions, and they 
should. They should ask about that government, about that 
government’s record when it comes to their finances with the 
revenue that the government’s given. You’ve had an 
opportunity of a lifetime that no other government in 
Saskatchewan’s history has had the opportunity. And under this 
government’s management, it’s terrible, the waste. And we see 
smart meters, we see so many areas where this government . . . 
consultants and everything else, the lean. The list goes on of 
where they’ve taken dollars. Taking the challenge to Supreme 
Court, taking our labour movement and making them spend 
hard-earned dollars and going at it the way they did instead of 
consulting. 



7524 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

Again I go back to that, Mr. Speaker. This could have been 
resolved if the government would have been open to sit down 
and work out what’s best. But you know what? At least, and I 
thank the Supreme Court for making their decision to say yes, 
the men and women of this province have a right to strike. They 
have a right to fair bargaining. And that’s good, and we needed 
to hear that. And they did the good work; for eight years they 
fought this government. 
 
So when I say that about wasting the dollars, and it is. This 
government will argue its point and that’s fine. Let them. But 
the Supreme Court made the ruling. And again to the labour 
movement, I say to the men and women — and many of them 
refer to themselves as brothers and sisters in the labour 
movement — I say, great job on you. To the leadership: great 
job. To the government: you should be ashamed of yourself, 
what you did. You could have consulted. You could have 
worked with those individuals. So again I want to say to the 
minister and the government, don’t pat yourselves on the back 
to think you did such a great thing; go out there and oh, oh it’s 
going to be a spin. The Supreme Court made it clear to the 
government. 
 
So when we see what went on, and I talked a little bit about the 
cost, and we see areas where the labour movement, it talks 
about the privatization agenda this government says is not going 
on. We see many areas where the labour movement’s been 
fighting this organization. Again it’s the labour movement. We 
see Prince Albert, the laundry services. We see many areas that 
are being impacted by the government without consulting, 
talking to labour. They just go ahead and privatize agendas on 
their . . . for whatever reason, an area where they really want to 
focus. But they try to hide it but they don’t. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the frustration that we’ve 
seen and, I want to say, the good work coordinating by the 
labour movement in this province to take this government to 
task, I commend them. And I say that governments have to be 
willing to work and co-operate with our labour movement. And 
that’s so important. 
 
You know, all they want to do . . . I mean I’ve talked about the 
teachers. I talk about there’s so many areas that this government 
could consult: Métis leaders, First Nations leaders. There are so 
many communities that could be consulted, but this government 
doesn’t want to consult. It just wants to go down a road. It 
decides it’s on an agenda, and it doesn’t matter who’s in their 
way. Get out of the way because they’re going to push ahead. 
 
But again the only reason this bill is here is because the 
Supreme Court made it clear: correct this. This isn’t something 
where we’re looking at this is because the government wanted 
to open arms to the labour movement, the hard . . . men and 
women of this good province that have done the good work, the 
hard work. The Supreme Court . . . Again I want to repeat that 
because I think it’s so important to make sure people 
understand that. 
 
And it’s going to come on election day. And these men and 
women on the other side, the members, will be going door 
knocking, asking for support. And I hope, I hope, I hope at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, when they’re on those doorsteps, 
they get told, they get told exactly what they did and how they 

did it. You don’t consult. 
 
And they can sit there and, you know, say all they want and 
heckle all they want. It doesn’t matter. I know what’s going on 
in this province from the people that have shared their 
frustration with that government. The cost of living, there’s so 
many challenges many people in Saskatchewan are facing under 
this government. They had a record revenue. Instead many, 
many dollars, they could have used those dollars to do such 
good things. And I talked about that, whether it’s housing, 
affordability, utility rates. 
 
Here’s a government who took many dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, 
to fight our men and women of this good province who’ve 
worked hard. We’re not sure of the amount of money, but you 
know what? Any time, as far as I’m concerned, when you take 
dollars, revenue from the government coffer that could go into 
helping our seniors, our school, classrooms . . . And we see the 
cuts to the classrooms. We’ve seen the cuts to the school 
division. We’ve seen the help the school leaders have been 
asking for. 
 
And everywhere, health, front-line workers, the great work 
they’re doing, what do they get? No front-line support. They’re 
doing the great work, and I want to thank all those individuals 
that are out there doing the great work. But unfortunately they 
have a government who’s had a record revenue year after year, 
money coming in, into the government coffers, but chose to — 
whether it’s consultants, lean; we’ve seen smart meters — 
we’ve seen time and time again where this government has 
taken our dollars and have not used them, has not used them 
wisely, has not consulted, and is not saying, what matters to 
Saskatchewan families? What matters to Saskatchewan people? 
 
This government has wasted so much. Such an opportunity. 
Such an opportunity. And they can heckle all they want, Mr. 
Speaker. It doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker. At the end of the day, 
at the end of the day the people know. And they’re talking. I’ve 
talked to many people that are saying, you know, times are 
changing. And we’ll see what happens at the end of the day. 
They can heckle all they want and pat themselves . . . There’s 
so many of the backbenchers on there. Be aware; people are not 
real happy. 
 
And they can sit there and say all they want. Heckle all you 
want, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will speak, will speak. And we’ll see exactly what 
goes on by that government and where they cannot, cannot take 
care of what matters to Saskatchewan families. They will send 
them a message. So we’ll see at the end of the day exactly what 
goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleagues have many things 
to say. And I know, you know, when you look at opposition, 
our critic, David Forbes for Labour, I know in committee he 
will have lots to say. 
 
This is a bill again . . . And I’m going to say this one more time 
for those that maybe just tuned in to the channel, the legislature 
channel, I want to make it clear. This legislation is not because 
the government wanted to consult with the working men and 
women of this province who have fought the battles. It’s 
because the Supreme Court of Canada made it very clear. They 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7525 

made it very clear. So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of the day it is clear. This government was forced. So don’t 
pat yourselves on the back, don’t the minister and government 
give yourselves a pat because you did something good. You 
fought the working men and women of this province for too 
long, and you’re going to get a message. 
 
But at that note, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 
Bill 183 at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 184 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 184 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again, it’s my honour to be able to rise in this Assembly to 
speak to the current slate of bills that this government has 
brought forward. Not a huge list, of course, Mr. Speaker. And 
normally this time of year, we would be debating a Throne 
Speech, but that seems to have vanished off the agenda for this 
government. So instead, we’re dealing with some rather 
picayune changes to legislation and cleaning up, housecleaning 
it looks like, rather than having a legislative agenda on a 
go-forward basis. 
 
So here I am speaking to a bill that was introduced — let me 
see what day we had this brought in — oh October 20th, so a 
mere nine days ago. Normally we would have a lot of time 
throughout the year to be able to consult with the people these 
bills affect. Unfortunately in this session, the government is 
ramming these bills through, and we’ll be voting on them much 
sooner than we normally do. 
 
Again, I suppose, because there isn’t a Throne Speech, there 
isn’t the debate to the Throne Speech, there’s no vision being 
presented by this government, and there really isn’t a lot of 
ideas and positive, proactive things coming forward. So here we 
are in adjourned debates at a point when we should be probably 
looking a little closer at this government’s plans for the future, 
what the impact of the change in fortunes is on this government 
in terms of the province’s finances. And instead, we are 
debating bills that really should be thrown out to the public for 
a few months and reviewed before we would be required to 
have a vote on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate, the minister did provide some comments on 
October 20th. And I think this is just in response to the 
motorcycle lobby which was quite concerned about the increase 

in fees that was being presented to them as a result of the 
no-fault insurance coverage. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, insurance is a complicated business. 
Back in the day when I was in practice, we always said, you 
know, the best . . . the most argumentative type of lawyers often 
end up in insurance law because that’s the type of law where 
one word can make a large difference in terms of payouts and 
coverage. So interpretation of insurance laws is a very particular 
art, and I don’t think that The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Act is a simple piece of legislation by any way you look at it. 
 
What the minister appears to be doing here is adding a third 
option or layering in another option for motorcycle riders who 
lobbied very hard. And certainly I was lobbied in my office by 
motorcycle riders who were very concerned about the high, 
steep price that was going to come their way in terms of 
insurance coverage based on the existing insurance scheme. 
 
So I think what they did, Mr. Speaker, and, if I’m correct, I 
think back earlier this year the minister made the 
announcements that this kind of coverage would be 
forthcoming, and it was announced in May. And what the 
minister said then is that motorcycle owners are saying, look, 
we may not require all these benefits. We might be willing to 
accept a lower level of benefits in order to afford insurance for 
our motorcycles and to be able to drive them. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So it basically looks like we’re setting up another tier of 
coverage. And the first is of course the full package, the 
complete smorgasbord of no-fault injury benefits. And then of 
course there’s tort coverage, which is if you opt out of no-fault 
insurance, you can choose to go through tort coverage which 
would be more limited benefit levels but you can sue for 
additional losses from the people who caused the collision. So 
you can actually take them to court to make up for the 
additional benefits that you’re claiming. And now this new third 
tier which would be a reduced package of no-fault injury 
benefits. So it would be kind of the same level of benefits under 
tort but without the ability to sue. 
 
So I guess the whole idea is creating options for . . . It’s kind of 
like, I guess, when you get a cellphone and you have all these 
different options and you can get this package or that package 
and this many minutes. So it looks like that’s the way our 
insurance is going as well. 
 
I guess one of the main questions that comes to me when I look 
at this bill, Mr. Speaker, is what if I want that third tier of 
coverage? I think right now it’s only available to motorcycle 
drivers, and I’m just wondering why this wouldn’t be available 
to all people who buy insurance in Saskatchewan. As you 
know, Sask Government Insurance is our Crown corporation 
that provides the insurance. If we’re going to allow motorcycle 
drivers to have this coverage, why can’t I get this coverage as a 
vehicle driver? And certainly I think that’s something I’d like to 
ask the minister in committee, is why this third tier of coverage 
is being limited to motorcycle drivers. 
 
I know the other side of this, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a huge 
risk you’re taking. And I guess it’s your choice as a consumer 



7526 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

what level of coverage you’re going to provide. But even the 
minister himself is warning people to not take this lightly, that 
if you opt out of the lower level of benefits, particularly for 
motorcycle drivers or motorcyclists — because those vehicles 
are smaller and we know how quickly an accident on a 
motorcycle could cause very serious injuries; there’s no airbags 
on a motorcycle, Mr. Speaker — and so that is a serious risk 
consideration for these individuals to take into account when 
they choose to license their motorcycle. 
 
But I go back again to the question of why this third tier is only 
being limited to motorcycle drivers. Perhaps that has been 
revealed in the findings, although I think the review that was 
presented in January by SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], the motorcycle review committee, I don’t know if 
they ever did make a recommendation to have this option 
available to all people who purchase automobile insurance 
through SGI. 
 
So in terms of the bill itself, there’s a couple of main features of 
the changes. The first few changes that are described in the bill 
are basically a few housekeeping items clearing up some old, 
minor typographical issues in the first few sections of the Act. 
 
If you look at the explanatory notes the government’s provided, 
it says that there’s new definitions being created in terms of part 
II beneficiaries, part II.1 beneficiaries in particular, and those 
are the changes that are required as a result of the addition of 
the motorcycle insurance coverage. 
 
So another thing they’re doing there is they’re removing a 
reference to the Rates Appeal Board because that board no 
longer exists. It’s defunct. So there’s a basic cleanup that’s 
happening here in terms of the first few changes in this bill. 
 
The real meat of the new provisions starts at section, I think, 9 
of the bill, and that’s where we have this new part II.1, which is 
called motorcycle bodily injury benefits. 
 
And so there’s . . . division 1 is the application of this part and 
the election of motorcycle drivers to choose those types of 
coverages. So that’s the first few sections of the changes. Then 
it goes into division 2, general and rehabilitation benefits. So in 
this whole new section it describes the limited coverage that the 
motorcycle driver would be choosing if they elect this new form 
of coverage. A lot of details on general rehabilitation benefits. 
For example, the maximum amount payable under this section 
is $25,000 for rehabilitation. I don’t have in front of me the 
maximum amounts for the no-fault coverage level, but that’s 
25,000. If there’s a catastrophic injury, the maximum benefit 
amount is $193,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you think about a brain injury and how far 
$193,000 would go for a catastrophic brain injury, I don’t think 
it would go very far. So certainly the levels that are being 
provided here in this third tier of coverage are quite minimal, 
and I think the minister has made that very clear in his 
comments that this is a minimal benefits package. And if that’s 
what motorcycle drivers choose, they need to be fully aware 
that it is not a large amount of money that would be covered. 
 
Division 3 . . . or sorry, I’ll go back to division 2. So division 2 
of this section talks about general and rehabilitation. Division 3 

talks about the weekly benefits that will be available under this 
lower level of coverage, up to 104 weeks. Division 4 talks about 
death and funeral benefits, which again are less than you would 
find if you were covered by no-fault. And I think, you know, 
part of the reasons it was going up so high for motorcycle 
drivers is the level of coverage at no-fault. It’s quite high 
because the damages that they are receiving, especially to the 
injuries that they get in a motorcycle accident, are so much 
more severe. 
 
Division 6 talks about claims. Division 7 talks about payment 
and benefits for these, general payments and benefits. So that’s 
kind of the first part of this bill. It’s quite extensive. Oh yes, and 
then division 8 talks about the indexation of benefits. Division 
9, recovery of benefits. And division 10, compensation pursuant 
to other plans. 
 
So that’s the first changes, is this division 2.1. There’s some 
other minor changes to other clauses to incorporate the fact that 
there is now this third level of insurance. And then there’s a 
new section, division 3.1, tort actions available to Part II.1 
beneficiaries. So this is the levels, where we set out the actual 
levels of insurance is in this new section, division 3.1 of the Act 
under, I guess it would be section 41. 
 
So we see a few different subsections there: tort actions for 
economic loss, and then there’s a tort action for non-economic 
loss. So they’re setting those levels as well, and then 
subrogation for non-economic loss. A few other minor changes, 
Mr. Speaker, to this bill. And so I think this is something that 
we’re going through very quickly here in the House. It’s only 
nine days ago that this bill was introduced. Certainly I hope the 
public is paying attention and will take the time in the next 
week or so to provide commentary on this. 
 
And it’s concerning, I guess, in a number of levels. One is, why 
wouldn’t this level third option be available to other drivers? 
Why is this limited to motorcycle drivers? Is this a wise move 
on the part of anyone to accept a lower level of insurance when 
we know how quickly costs can escalate when you have serious 
damage to your vehicle but also to your own personal being? 
And you know, motorcycle accidents can be very, very, very 
traumatic physically. Physical injuries can be quite catastrophic, 
so the choice that motorcycle drivers are going to have to make 
is a very serious one. And again the minister is cautioning them 
about taking less coverage. Motorcycles as we know are smaller 
and much more vulnerable than other vehicles. 
 
But this is something that the stakeholders have requested, and 
this government in this case . . . They don’t always take forward 
stakeholder requests, but for this particular instance they have 
decided to do so. And it came back from, I guess, a review that 
took place in 2013 and then the SGI’s review of their own 
automobile injury program. 
 
The press release, when this came out, indicated that other 
potential changes are still being considered. And they indicated 
that the legislation for additional motor injury option is 
anticipated to be introduced in fall 2015 and passed during the 
spring 2016 sitting of the legislature. So I’m not sure the 
government still has that view, if they’re going to let this bill be 
passed in the spring sitting of the legislature. Of course we 
know there’s an election coming, so it’s very unclear as to 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7527 

whether that would even happen. So I’m not sure why the 
communications back in May would have indicated that the 
idea is to introduce the bill this fall. I feel like the government’s 
fully considering passing it this fall. So that’s not what the press 
release said back in May, and I’m not sure what changed 
between now and then. So it would be interested in finding that 
out in committee as well, I guess. 
 
So yes, we have some questions for the minister. I think we can 
see the sort of cautions that are built into this type of lower level 
of coverage that people are demanding, but I guess it’s a 
buyer-beware kind of process where individuals are going to 
have to choose what risks they’re comfortable with, and then 
they will live with the consequences. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think other of my colleagues 
will want to speak to the bill as well, and that’s the extent of my 
comments to this point. So I would like to move that we adjourn 
the debate on Bill No. 184, An Act to amend the Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 185 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 185 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased as 
always to wade into the debate and discussion on Bill No. 185, 
The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 
2015. 
 
I think I have to start by noting, this bill first came before us . . . 
Actually the minister spoke to it just over a week ago, Mr. 
Speaker, and traditionally what happens is bills are introduced. I 
don’t know if the government’s plan is to pass this bill this 
sitting, otherwise it’ll die on the order paper. But normally at 
this time, Mr. Speaker, we have a Throne Speech which lays 
out the government’s agenda, and we have an opportunity to see 
where the government wants to take the people of this province. 
And instead of doing that, the government has introduced a few 
pieces of legislation which may never see the light of day unless 
the government is planning on passing them in the next four 
weeks. And I have to point out that would be rushing them. 
 
Usually what happens is bills are introduced in the fall, Mr. 
Speaker — for anybody who might be listening and interested 
to have a little idea about the process — bills are usually 
introduced in the fall where opposition has an opportunity to 
take a look at them and make some preliminary comments. But 

what happens between the fall and sitting session is we go out 
and we reach out to people who are impacted by that legislation 
to find out, is this good? Is this bad? What might be some 
unintended consequences? How could this bill look different? 
There is an opportunity for a thorough, much more thorough 
examination of bills, and we’re not given that opportunity here, 
Mr. Speaker, unless of course the government has introduced 
them and plans to let them die on the order paper. But we shall 
see about that. 
 
Bill No. 185, the traffic safety amendment Act, 2015, the 
minister in his comments on October 20th laid out . . . There is 
a few pieces to this bill that we have before us, and I have to 
point out that we’ve actually had The Traffic Safety Act before 
us a few times. Again I’ve been an MLA for six years and I 
think we’ve actually had this bill before us possibly three or 
four times in the time that I’ve been an MLA, which is highly 
unusual. You think when you’re making changes to an Act that 
government will have thought long and hard about them and 
have done thorough consultations and make the necessary 
changes. 
 
Of course occasionally it’s understandable if something is 
missed, but this bill again has been before us, The Traffic Safety 
Act has been before us on several occasions. And I’ll go on here 
in a moment to tell you one of the occasions that it was before 
us where I think the government dropped the ball. And I was 
actually hopeful that perhaps they were going to make a couple 
of more changes that would have actually reduced our impaired 
driving rates here in Saskatchewan and also saved lives, as we 
still have one of the most abysmal records when it comes to 
impaired driving deaths here in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So looking at some of the provisions, or what the bill plans to 
do, one of the pieces that really required an opportunity for 
some serious examination is this government’s proposal to 
gather information through facial recognition technology used 
with a driver’s licence in Saskatchewan. So the minister points 
out that we’re the only province not using this technology, and 
he argues that having it in place will bring our province in 
alignment with every other jurisdiction. 
 
So what happens here is facial . . . The minister points out that 
facial recognition technology was part of the request for 
proposals last year in seeking a vendor for driver’s licence 
production. And he goes on to say that facial recognition “. . . 
will prevent people from obtaining multiple driver’s licences or 
identification . . . [and] improve road safety by preventing 
suspended drivers from using a false identity to get a licence.” 
He did point out that this was drafted in consultation with the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. But I think this is 
something that should have allowed some, we should have 
some opportunity here, Mr. Speaker, to reach out to many 
people to talk about this. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Privacy is a very important and emerging . . . continues to 
emerge as a huge issue here with technology, with the Internet, 
with the speed at which information can be shared in this age of 
the Internet, Mr. Speaker. And facial recognition technology is 
something that the minister and the bill lays out that this 
information won’t be shared with third parties or other 



7528 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

organizations. But I think this is one piece where it would have 
warranted some serious and thorough further consultations in 
connecting with others, not just in Saskatchewan but in other 
jurisdictions to see how it works. As the minister has pointed 
out, we’re the only jurisdiction who doesn’t use this. 
 
Another thing that this bill proposes doing, Mr. Speaker, is for 
impaired drivers. There were some changes made to The Traffic 
Safety Act not too long ago where drivers need to take a course 
to be able to get their driver’s licences back if they’ve been 
convicted of an offence or they’ve had their vehicle suspended. 
So this bill particularly proposes to increase the length of time 
to complete that course from 90 to 120 days. The minister in his 
remarks said 100 days, but the bill, I believe, says actually it’s 
120 days. 
 
So in order to get your driver’s licence after a drinking and 
driving offence, a driver must attend an addiction screening or 
drug or alcohol abuse course. And what the former bill said is 
that addictions counsellors need to be able to deem a driver to 
be of low risk of re-offending. But the minister points out that 
that needs to be removed from the bill because addictions 
counsellors, that’s not something that they will, that . . . There’s 
been industry changes and addictions counselling don’t or no 
longer provide SGI with low offence risk rating. So that has to 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another part of the legislation is allowing those who’ve had 
their vehicles impounded because of impaired driving have the 
opportunity to cancel their plates. Many of us, I’m sure here in 
this Assembly, are on monthly payments for our driver’s 
licences, and to insure our car, Mr. Speaker. So this particular 
amendment will see those people who’ve had their vehicles 
impounded have the opportunity to cancel that insurance while 
their cars are parked, while they’re impounded. 
 
Another part of the bill, Mr. Speaker, is that out-of-province 
vehicle owners, this bill adds clarity for issuing of tickets to 
out-of-province vehicle owners for automatic enforcement of 
red light or speed offences, Mr. Speaker. So these are some of 
the things that this bill is proposing. 
 
One of the things that I would have liked to have seen, Mr. 
Speaker, came out of the minority report that the member from 
Cumberland and I put forward a few years ago when we 
participated in the Traffic Safety Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that two other jurisdictions have done, both 
Alberta and BC [British Columbia] have, for those offenders 
caught in the warning range — so in other provinces, it’s .05 to 
.08 blood alcohol content — they, at a roadside test, can have 
their vehicles impounded for three days. And they have seen 
that those bills have passed the legal test. Actually recently, 
there was a Supreme . . . They had to make some changes in 
2012. So in BC, they implemented these changes in 2010 and 
had to make some changes in 2012 which allowed for two 
Breathalyzers. If you failed the first one in the warning range, 
you needed the opportunity to have a second one. So they made 
those changes. 
 
But these pieces of legislation in BC and Alberta have passed 
the court and have been deemed to be constitutional. And those 
particular changes, where those in the warning range lose their 

vehicles for three days, have been shown to reduce death rates 
by 50 per cent in BC, Mr. Speaker. And they had similar results 
in Alberta, partly because those people, you don’t just start 
drinking and driving and end up at .08. You become a very 
practised and seasoned impaired driver. 
 
And in fact actually, that Traffic Safety Committee had heard 
some evidence that those who get caught with a lower blood 
alcohol content and issued a short-term suspension are almost 
eight times more likely than the average driver to be charged 
with a Criminal Code driving-while-impaired offence within 
two years. So this warning range of drivers, those who are in 
that .05 to .08 range, are risky drivers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there was an opportunity, and BC and Alberta took that 
opportunity to change the culture around drinking and driving 
and ensure that people don’t think that even a few drinks are a 
good idea. Because in that warning range you are impaired, Mr. 
Speaker, not criminally impaired, but the fact remains that you 
are impaired and there’s reason why you shouldn’t be on the 
road. And there’s reason why here in this province we have 
passed other legislation that punishes people for doing that, but 
we could have gone one step farther in taking the three-day 
impoundment. 
 
And that three-day impoundment, if you’re in the warning 
range, why does it work? Well often what happens now, people 
lose their licence or have their licence suspended, just their 
licence suspended. So you have vehicle impoundment on one 
side and licence suspension on the other. And right now on the 
first offence, you will have a licence suspension. But the reality 
is there’s evidence that shows as many of 70 per cent of 
impaired drivers violate their suspensions. So you might lose 
your licence on a Friday and still end up driving after that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But it’s much harder to hide your vehicle impoundment, 
whether it’s your partner, your husband or your wife or your 
parents, or you’ve got your mom and dad’s vehicle on a Friday 
night, and you drive in the warning, you’re caught in the 
warning range. And you’re impaired and you lose the vehicle. 
It’s pretty hard to explain that. So it really acts as a good 
deterrent for people not to drink and drive. And that is, like I 
said, what BC and Alberta have done to huge success, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I was really hoping that since we have this bill before us, 
The Traffic Safety Act before us again, that this is something 
this government would have seriously considered doing. The 
evidence that the Traffic Safety Committee . . . was clear. And 
my colleague from Cumberland and I did put forward a 
minority opinion and disagreed with the rest of the committee. 
We felt that they were ignoring evidence before them, Mr. 
Speaker. And I was hopeful that perhaps when this bill was first 
introduced and before we got a chance to see it, that this might 
have been something that they decided to do. So that’s 
incredibly disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do know that I will have colleagues who will continue to 
weigh in on this debate in discussion on Bill 185 here in the 
Chamber, but we’ll also have an opportunity to ask some of 
these questions when we eventually move it into committee 
where there will be some questions, particularly on the facial 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7529 

recognition software, around privacy and maybe digging a little 
bit deeper into what the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
had to say about it. And I know that my colleagues will ask 
many of those questions. We will have those questions in 
committee. So with that, I would like to move to adjourn Bill 
No. 185. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 185, The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 186 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 186 — The 
Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Always good to be recognized in this Assembly, to take my 
place and to join debate, in this case of course on The Municipal 
Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, Bill No. 186. 
 
It’s an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
certainly arises from the latest in a series of incidents involving 
the question of conflict of interest and whether or not authority 
is being properly used in a given municipality, and certainly not 
unique to that individual municipality from which the Barclay 
report arose and which we see informing the legislation here 
today in very large part. 
 
But it’s I guess good to see particular legislation coming 
forward in response to what has been a significant problem that 
folks have been wrestling with throughout the province. Also 
good to see the partnership with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities, with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, and also with New North, Mr. 
Speaker, and the northern administrative district organizations 
in the work to bring forward this legislation. 
 
Again with, I think we could all agree, that with great power 
comes great responsibility, and when you’re making decisions 
that you have a direct, personal, financial, business — you 
know, pick your type of interest — when you’ve got a direct 
interest in decisions that you are very much involved in making, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s certainly something as legislators we 
can all get our heads around. And in terms of bringing a more 
orderly approach, a more black and white approach to what the 
responsibilities are of legislators in the municipal sector, Mr. 
Speaker, as regards the way that the conflicts of interest should 
be guarded against is important and is good to see. 
 
In terms of the legislation in front of us, as I’ve referenced, it 
arises from the final report of Justice Ron Barclay who, as it 
happens of course, serves as our Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. And I had the opportunity to see 
Commissioner Barclay yesterday at the celebration of the 
appointment of our new Provincial Auditor, and certainly this 
would be a good time to say thank you to Commissioner 
Barclay, to Justice Barclay for the work that had been done on 
that file in terms of looking into what had gone on at the RM 
[rural municipality] of Sherwood and how that informed the 
report of Justice Barclay. 
 
And I think the one thing that is notable for me in terms of 
Justice Barclay’s final report is, and this is quoting from a 
Leader-Post story related to the whole matter, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, filed by Austin Davis, Leader-Post, October 19th, 
2015, where he references: 
 

Barclay’s final report found “horrendous” conflict of 
interest issues and led to the removal of reeve Kevin 
Eberle, who owns land on which the development was 
proposed and stood to make as much as $57 million in the 
deal. 

 
So again I’m sure we could all agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
Commissioner Barclay is not one given to overstatements, not 
one given to embellishment. And for him to have deemed to 
describe the whole matter as having the quality of horrendous, 
Mr. Speaker, I think speaks volumes to the incident that brought 
this, first the Barclay commission or the Barclay report and then 
the subsequent legislation forward. So again to get back on the 
record, stating our thanks to Justice Barclay for the work that 
has been done there. 
 
In terms of the bill that we have in front of us, it will necessitate 
of course a number of other amendments, not just to The Cities 
Act for one, The Municipalities Act, The Northern 
Municipalities Act, and consequential amendments to be made 
to The Planning and Development Act and The Ombudsman 
Act, 2012. It’s again a fairly far-reaching piece of legislation. 
And again, the different legislative changes necessitated by this 
bill, Mr. Speaker, remind us of the partnership that exists when 
we’re working best in this province, between rural, urban, 
northern municipalities, and the province, and the fact that that 
is a partnership and that it’s with a great deal of caution that you 
move beyond partnership to dictating or to ordering certain 
measures be taken by either level of the partnership. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So again I recognize that this is, in and of itself it represents that 
partnership and represents the balance that’s to be struck 
between what each one of those constituent partners brings to 
the table, and at the same time the role that we have as the 
provincial Legislative Assembly and the role that the provincial 
government has in terms of legislating the terms of that very 
partnership, and the delicate balance to be struck there. 
 
In terms of the balance to be struck between local municipal 
autonomy and the need to reassure the public that the 
government’s being proactive and responsible and 
strengthening this whole conflict of interest legislation in a way 
that is effective and practical, again I think the balance has been 
described accurately. And the way that you’ve got to navigate 
that line, Mr. Speaker, is not something I think we would 
disagree with from the opposition benches. And in terms of the 



7530 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

way that all levels of municipality are affected by potential or 
real conflict of interest, it’s very important to have the clarity 
there and the balance there in the legislation and in the 
oversight regime. 
 
In his second reading speech, the minister described the three 
main purposes of the bill, and I’d just like to reference those to 
get them on the record and then reflect upon them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But in the minister’s second reading speech of October 
21st, a week ago, Mr. Speaker, the minister stated that: 
 

The amendments in this bill achieve three main purposes. 
First, they implement specific recommendations and 
respond to observations in the Barclay report with 
legislative changes, in effect raising the bar for municipal 
officials. Second, they will improve the ability for 
government, through the minister and cabinet, to address 
situations of municipal conflict of interest that may arise in 
the future. And finally, they will expand the Provincial 
Ombudsman’s mandate to review and investigate 
municipal matters, including conflict of interest and code 
of ethics matters. 

 
So in the first case, Mr. Speaker, in terms of implementing the 
work of Barclay, again that seems to be a good approach. In 
terms of the second main purpose around improving the ability 
of government to enforce the different regimes that are out 
there, again when it’s a partnership, you hate to put it in those 
terms, but the buck’s got to stop somewhere, Mr. Speaker. And 
again the very fact that we’re debating this legislation points out 
very clearly where that buck stops. So to have the different 
measures at a government’s disposal when it does come time to 
appoint commissions of inquiry or to remove officials when the 
indication that something particularly egregious has gone on, 
that needs to be very clearly outlined for folks to understand. 
And again that it’s being clarified in this legislation is as it 
should be. 
 
And again with clarifying the role of the Provincial 
Ombudsman, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I know that the 
Provincial Ombudsman and the Ombudsman’s office does a 
great deal of good work. And I certainly know that from the 
perspective of different interactions the Ombudsman’s office 
has had with the constituents in Regina Elphinstone, trying to 
ensure that they get a fair shake from the government on 
different files, but also that the work that the Ombudsman does 
province-wide and as well, Mr. Speaker, the perspective that 
I’ve been privileged to have in terms of closer scrutiny of the 
role of the Ombudsman and the Ombudsman’s office through 
the interaction with the House Services Committee and the 
Board of Internal Economy, and the way that that office 
interacts and reports out, there again demonstrating the 
oversight and where the buck stops. 
 
And one thing I’d be very interested to see, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m sure that this was part of the deliberation, because usually 
when legislation comes forward there’s some kind of estimate 
of the cost implications of the legislation. And I’d be interested, 
and perhaps we’ll be able to find this out at the committee stage 
hearing of this bill, but what the estimated cost implications are 
for a stepped-up involvement on the part of the Government 
Relations ministry of government, but also what the anticipated 
cost impact is going to be for the Office of the Ombudsman. I’d 

be very interested to see what the minister’s answers are on that 
score. 
 
And then certainly, Mr. Speaker, I know that bodies such as the 
Board of Internal Economy and House Services, as different 
and additional duties have been outlined and assigned to 
different of the independent officers of the Legislative 
Assembly, we know that there’s a cost that attaches to those 
new assignments, and we’ll be interested to see how that is 
borne out in the budget application of the Office of the 
Provincial Ombudsman in the days and weeks ahead. 
 
Again returning to the second reading speech of the minister, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the minister said: 
 

. . . the Barclay report recommended specific legislative 
changes and identified other areas where procedures can be 
strengthened and provisions added to better address and 
prevent conflict of interest situations. These amendments 
include, first, requiring council members to give a more 
detailed declaration of the nature of his or her pecuniary 
interest when it’s disclosed. This will move beyond the 
bare declaration currently provided for in legislation and 
require council members to disclose the general nature of a 
conflict of interest and any details that could reasonably be 
seen to materially affect that member’s impartiality in the 
exercise of his or her office. [Clarifying] . . . that a 
declaration must be made when any conflict of interest 
exists, which is defined to encompass a wider range of 
situations beyond financial interest. 

 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that seems to make good sense. 
And in terms of how that plays out in the legislation, and then 
subsequent iterations through, or the way that it works its way 
through regulations. Again we’ll be looking to see if the effect 
is equal to the intent, as described in the minister’s second 
reading speech. But again on the face of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it would seem to be a fair enough proposal. 
 
Again related to Barclay, referenced in the minister’s second 
reading speech: 
 

Second, requiring the mandatory filing and regular 
updating of public disclosure statements by council 
members. The amendments propose to extend the 
mandatory public disclosure statement . . . currently 
[required] in The Cities Act to the other two municipal 
Acts. The statements will continue to require updates 
annually and whenever there is a material change or 
declaration of a conflict of interest made. 

 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would seem to make good 
sense and a good step forward that was taken with The Cities 
Act now working its way through other related pieces of 
legislation so that it’s made clear for each of the municipal 
sectors in the province. 
 
Again returning to the minister’s second reading speech: 
 

Third, requiring municipalities to adopt a code of ethics 
that includes a model code and specific ethical standards of 
the municipality. The model code of ethics will be 
prescribed in regulations once it’s developed in 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7531 

collaboration with the municipal sector associations over 
the next few months. Once implemented they will be 
adopted by municipal councils as their minimum standard 
which they can enhance. 

 
So again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see the kind of 
work that ensues to accomplish all of this and what sort of 
outlay of time and efforts on the part of the different partners 
that will be involved in this and, moreover, what that floor of 
ethical conduct looks like as we go forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And again it’ll bear watching to see who builds upon that floor 
and how that standard currently evolves. But that you shore up 
that floor of what the ethical expectations are for conduct, for 
people that are making decisions about how the affairs of the 
community are conducted would seem to make good sense. 
 
Returning to the minister’s second reading speech, and he 
references further: 
 

The Barclay report also identified that legislation should be 
more aligned with common law respecting conflict of 
interest and its expectation that elected officials act in the 
entire interest of their communities. Through consultation 
with the municipal sector, amendments are proposed to 
clarify what constitutes conflict of interest, private interest, 
and inappropriate use of office. These are modelled on 
similar provisions already in place for MLAs. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, if it’s sauce for the goose, it’s generally 
sauce for the gander. So we’ll be interested to see. And 
certainly it’s an agreeable statement made there by Barclay that 
you should have that basic standard, but again, being very clear 
in the definition of things like what constitutes a conflict of 
interest, what constitutes a private interest, what constitutes 
inappropriate use of office, that all these things are made very 
clear. 
 
And particularly in the way that, you know, the law is an 
evolutionary process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly as new 
and unanticipated circumstances arise, there’s a need to address 
the legislation so as to respect the principle that Justice Barclay 
again references that as legislators or as decision makers, we’re 
put there not to legislate. We’re put there by the community to 
work on the community’s behalf. There’s a delegated authority. 
But it’s not to line our own pockets as legislators, Mr. Speaker. 
That any sort of perception or reality that might involve conflict 
of interest needs to be addressed, and Barclay does well to raise 
that in his report. And again we’re glad to see that being carried 
forward here in the legislation. 
 
In terms of other amendments, again referencing the minister’s 
second reading speech that: 
 

. . . issues raised indirectly in the report and improve upon 
current practices regarding transparency, declaration, and 
disclosure of interests. These include requiring council 
procedure bylaws to have clear and transparent rules 
regarding matters such as delegations and submissions to 
council; clarifying a council member must withdraw from 
all meetings on which he or she serves as a councillor 
where a matter of interest may be discussed or decided; 

committees of council, subcommittees, appeal boards, 
planning boards, and other municipal entities; ensuring 
rules regarding declaring and disclosing conflict of interest 
for municipal employees are in place. 

 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, these things are all very important. 
There’s already some flexibility around determining these rules 
from The Planning and Development Act of 2007, but it again is 
quite important that these things be made very clear. One of the 
things that is a real ally of transparency and accountability, Mr. 
Speaker, is certainly clarity and knowing what the expectations 
are of individuals that are making the decision and knowing 
what the interests are of individuals that are making the 
decision. And certainly if you can ally those features, you’re 
going to be serving transparency and accountability much better 
than is currently the case. So good to see work towards aiding 
clarity and good work around identifying where interests are at 
work. 
 
In terms of the second set of motivations for the legislation in 
and around clarifying the role that cabinet and the government 
can play in terms of policing, being the final sort of court or one 
of the, obviously, higher courts in terms of adjudicating and 
policing conflict of interest issues as they should arise, again 
it’s very important that these things be clear, that they be well 
understood. So in terms of strengthening and improving the 
authorities in the Act related to inquiry, inspection, and 
disqualification, powers as they exist for the minister, for 
cabinet, for those conducting inquiries or inspections, it is 
certainly in order, Mr. Speaker, and we’re glad to see that as 
part of this legislation. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Further in terms of broadening from rural municipalities, the 
power to remove council members from office, to all of the 
municipal sector, it’s interesting. In the minister’s second 
reading speech, he states, “Mr. Speaker, this is not a step that 
any government wants to . . . [take], but ultimately the 
government must be in a position to deal with situations, such 
as the one which arose in the RM of Sherwood, no matter what 
municipalities such situations arise in.” And that caution and 
that reluctance, Mr. Speaker, is I think well stated because 
again, as I’d said at the outset of my remarks, there’s a 
partnership that exists between the municipal sector and the 
provincial sector, and it functions best when partnership is to 
the fore. 
 
But again, the rights and responsibilities within the partnership 
being well understood, and the powers of each of the partners in 
the equation being well understood is critical to a 
high-functioning relationship that should be there with the 
provincial government and the municipal sector. So again, that 
that power be extended to the whole of the municipal sector in 
terms of removing individual councillors, if but reluctantly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m interested to see it there, and it would 
seem to be a fair measure, well put. 
 
In terms of again flowing from that, there are proposed 
amendments that will standardize the disqualification periods in 
all three municipalities Acts. Quoting from the minister’s 
second reading speech: 
 



7532 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

Any person disqualified as per the requirements under 
legislation, which will now include being removed from 
office by cabinet, will be disqualified from running in a 
local election for 12 years, equivalent to three general 
elections. 

 
The minister again refers to these measures with some 
reluctance, and fair enough, but that it should be standardized 
and well understood throughout the municipal sector is again an 
important step. 
 
Getting around to the impact of this legislation on the 
Provincial Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, in terms of it being the 
third area of impetus to the government moving forward on this 
legislation, again I think the Ombudsman’s a logical actor in 
this whole equation, that is having the mandate reinforced and 
the powers of the Ombudsman expanded upon. 
 
But again, we’ll be very interested to see what the anticipated 
cost impact of this measure is, Mr. Speaker, and how that will 
translate into the request ushering forth from the Provincial 
Ombudsman in terms of getting the resources in place to make 
sure that this, you know, that these new tasks that are being put 
before the Ombudsman by Bill No. 186, that the Ombudsman’s 
able to do the job. 
 
And again, you know, I think the Ombudsman is well regarded. 
The independence, the fairness, the thoroughness of the work 
that is conducted by the Office of the Provincial Ombudsman is 
well regarded. And certainly that that independent officer of the 
legislature is again employed in this legislation makes good 
sense. 
 
I guess lastly, in terms of looking to the minister’s second 
reading speech, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I’ve heard the minister interjecting that it was a 
good speech. And you know, these opportunities are so rare, I’d 
have to get on the record and agree with the minister. I think it 
was a good speech. I think it outlined very clearly what the 
intent of the legislation was, what the impact and force of the 
legislation is. And certainly that’s what we look to and I think 
what the public looks to, second reading speeches from the 
minister in terms of identifying where a given piece of 
legislation is coming from, and what the impact of that 
legislation is. So it’s always a happy day when you can agree 
between the sides that it was a good speech. And you know, so 
I’ll certainly extend that agreement to the minister opposite. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of referring to the remarks 
made by the minister, he rounds out his speech talking about the 
consultation that’s gone on. Certainly the public comment that 
has followed with the introduction of the legislation, from the 
municipal sector, that would seem to bear out the assertions 
made by the minister in that second reading speech. And 
certainly the way that all this has been informed by the work of 
Justice Barclay into the incident of conflict of interest that arose 
in the RM of Sherwood, again it would seem to be a good piece 
of work. 
 
And you know, it’s not said enough, Mr. Speaker, but you 
know, citizens have different levels of government that they 
interact with. We just went through a federal election where we 
had that federal piece to the floor. We’re here in the provincial 

Legislative Assembly, and earlier today we had the head of 
SUMA, the head of SARM here today to again work in that 
spirit of partnership with the provincial government.  
 
And you know, that may be a relatively straightforward 
proposition for us as legislators, Mr. Speaker, that have the 
opportunity to gain a greater understanding, a more complex 
understanding of the system and the different levels of 
government, and the different powers that accrue to each of 
those levels. But for many citizens, their basic expectation is 
that, you know, the different levels of government are there, 
should be able to work together, should be able to work in 
partnership, and that their actions should be fairly transparent 
and accountable in their placement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, you know, citizens have that expectation of all levels of 
government. So we’ll be interested to see the impact that this 
piece of legislation has on the ethical conduct and the 
prevention, and then dealing with conflict of interests as they 
arise throughout the municipal sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, we’ll have some more technical, more precise questions 
for the minister as this particular piece of legislation comes to 
committee, but I know that other of my colleagues are 
interested in this legislation and I’m sure will have further 
remarks to put in this debate on Bill No. 186. But as for myself 
at this time, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 186, 
The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
186. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 187 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to weigh into the debate on Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. As you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this bill has two goals in mind. It clarifies who 
can own farm land in Saskatchewan, and will provide the Farm 
Land Security Board with the necessary authority in order to 
enforce the Act. This comes on the heels of regulations that 
were changed in the spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this just 
tightens up or enacts it in legislation rather than just in 
regulations. 
 
And this is a particularly important bill, Bill No. 187, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. Although it has a 
huge impact on our economy, Mr. Speaker, agriculture is still a 
big part of the Saskatchewan economy, but even more than that, 
I think it doesn’t matter how far removed from the farm we are, 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7533 

I think it’s a huge part, agriculture and farming is a huge part of 
most of our identity here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That connection to the land is a very big part of our culture 
here.  
 
I know even myself, as a city girl who lives two blocks from 
my childhood home and removed from the farm by about 60 
years when my dad moved from the homestead near Rapid 
View to Saskatoon, my family has been in one community for 
those 60 years now. So I’m fairly far removed, but I know that 
even in my own family that connection to, and those roots to the 
earth and growing and producing food are very important. 
 
I know my own dad, even though he hasn’t been on the farm for 
a very long time, actually urban agriculture is a big part of his 
life. I grew up with my parents owning a greenhouse and 
producing food. And in recent years my dad’s taken it to a 
whole new level where there are three lots. When my parents 
bought their home in Holiday Park, it was three lots that they 
were able to purchase many, many years ago, and the entire 
backyard and the entire boulevard is all taken over for food 
production. So even though many of us are far removed from 
the farm, I think it’s still a huge part of our culture and this is 
why this bill is very important, the one that’s before us. 
 
So as I said, the two things it does, it clarifies who can own 
farm land here in this province, and it provides the Farm Land 
Security Board with the necessary authority to enforce the Act. 
So what are the specifics here? 
 
And just turning to the minister’s second reading speech, he 
points out that this bill will include: 
 

. . . designating pension funds, administrators of pension 
fund assets and trusts as ineligible to purchase farm land; 
defining having an interest in farm land to include any type 
of interest or benefit, for example capital appreciation, 
either directly or indirectly that is normally associated with 
the ownership of the land; and when financing a purchase 
of farm land, all financing must be through a financial 
institution registered to do business in Canada or through a 
Canadian resident. 

 
So it removes the ambiguity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, around who 
can own farm land in Saskatchewan, and it provides again the 
Farm Land Security Board with more tools to enforce the Act. 
 
Those tools, Mr. Speaker, and the Farm Land Security Board’s 
enhanced: 
 

. . . authority to enforce the legislation including: at the 
discretion of the Farm Land Security Board, any person 
purchasing farm land must complete a statutory 
declaration; increasing fines for being in contravention of 
the legislation from 10,000 to $50,000 for individuals and 
from 100,000 to $500,000 for corporations; authorizing the 
Farm Land Security Board to impose administrative 
penalties to a maximum of $10,000 . . .  
 

And the minister argues, “. . . most importantly, the purchaser 
of the land must prove to the satisfaction of the Farm Land 
Security Board that they are in compliance with the legislation.” 
 

This also grew out of some consultations this summer. Well this 
bill I understand came out of a loophole that the Canada 
Pension Plan and a corporation actually that was very closely 
connected to this government, Mr. Speaker, have been able to 
strike a deal seeing almost 100,000 acres of land sold to the 
Canada Pension Plan. 
 
Many people have been arguing for several years and trying to 
raise this issue and bring it forward that we needed clarification 
on these rules. This wasn’t something that just cropped up 
overnight. There have been many farmers and ranchers trying to 
get the attention of the government, saying that this loophole 
needed to be closed. So arguably this loophole is now closed, 
but with the regulations then will be tightened even further with 
this legislation. But this one particular deal that went through, 
that many people found quite concerning, still stands, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again I think a concern that we have that this has taken a little 
too long . . . It’s been positive that this process is now moving 
in the right direction, partly because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
government finally engaged in a process to speak to 
Saskatchewan people to find out how they felt, how citizens felt 
about farm land ownership, and heard overwhelmingly that 
these rules needed to be tightened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But we would have liked to have seen this addressed sooner. I 
know that, talking to some of my colleagues who are more 
involved in agriculture than I am, they have . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . They’re laughing on the other side, Mr. 
Speaker. I am proudly a city kid. I’m proudly a city kid, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think here in Saskatchewan we all have some 
connection, as I said, to the land. Just because I don’t live on a 
farm doesn’t mean I’m not entitled to have some thoughts, 
especially when I hear from people and citizens about their 
concerns. 
 
And the Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have spoken up. And this government, this 
government has known for several years now that this has been 
an issue, and they have ignored it, which they tend to do on 
many occasions. This is a government that dismisses the 
concerns of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
although we’re pleased that this is finally happening, it could 
have and should have happened a lot sooner, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And there is some concern that that loophole is closed, so those 
who got through the loophole beforehand don’t get . . . That 
particular land deal which people flagged as concerning still 
goes ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway this speaks to the dismissive nature of this 
government. This was flagged for this government quite some 
time ago, and they had to be dragged kicking and screaming to 
make these changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And because the 
decision was overwhelming, or the information provided by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that this was what people wanted to 
see — changes and tightening of farm land ownership — this is 
why this is before us right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 



7534 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

Anyway I do know that when this bill is moved to committee, I 
have colleagues like our opposition critic who has many 
questions from her many discussions with people, farmers and 
ranchers across the province. And she and possibly other 
colleagues will be asking some very important questions in 
committee. So with that I thank you and would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 187, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 188 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 188 — The Best 
Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much. 
And it’s great to get an opportunity to speak again today, and 
I’ll be pretty pithy with my remarks on An Act to amend certain 
Acts respecting Awarding of Contracts. And it’s called, the 
short title is The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015. And I 
don’t know what it means when you have that, best. It’s like an 
adjective. Does it mean it’s the best Act ever? Or is it the best 
value? So here we have a bit of a dilemma. Because I really . . . 
 
I am quite surprised. It’s a very thin bill, very thin bill that 
really doesn’t say an awful lot. It’s kind of cold comfort, I 
know, to a lot of business people in this province who’ve been 
arguing that we should take a look at our procurement here in 
Saskatchewan and really think a little bit about how do we do 
business in Saskatchewan, make sure we have a sustainable, 
local business culture. 
 
Because quite often . . . and we know that this government is 
one of the biggest contractors in the province, and rightfully so 
with the size of the civil service we have and the things that we 
do, and as well with the Crown corporations and we have for 
example SaskPower and the extent of their projects, and 
SaskEnergy and SaskTel. This is very important. This is very 
important. 
 
So we were all a little surprised when we saw this bill. Now we 
know that the Minister of Justice, who is also the minister of the 
P3 [public-private partnership] projects, takes a lot of pride on 
doing things in a very economical way. And if he can do it on a 
shoestring, he’s going to do it in the most economical or the 
cheapest way possible. And clearly today with this kind of 
legislation, we would have liked to have seen more work. 
 
And I just have to say when I compare it to Bill No. 608, and 
this was done in our caucus by my colleague from Regina 
Rosemont, how much more thorough and thoughtful and 
practical, practical it is. It just makes common sense. And his 

bill’s four pages, but a lot more thorough in terms of how we do 
business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course, my colleague’s bill is called An Act respecting 
Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses in Government 
Procurement and he goes through a lot of the conditions of 
what we should be thinking about. And here we have a situation 
here where it’s pretty thin gruel, and we have a lot of questions 
about it. And of course the minister right off the bat takes a lot 
of credit and says, you know, this really started with the 
Premier, and he’s responsible. We know a year earlier from that 
there was quite an uproar in the Saskatchewan steel industry 
about what was happening here with too many contracts, where 
we saw people from outside the province coming in for major 
local contracts and they weren’t getting a fair shake here. They 
weren’t getting a fair shake here. 
 
You know, we’ve often talked about a level playing field, and 
we know in Canada, we know what’s happening in Ontario and 
Quebec when they have a local, a buy local or a point system in 
their contracts, that clearly Saskatchewan producers and 
business people were at a disadvantage. And so they were 
looking for their advantage at home. At least at home would 
they get some sort of advantage. 
 
And so when we see here this bill, which really talks about . . . 
And the key words are here. It amends section 55 of The 
Highways and Transportation Act, ’97, and puts in: 
 

“Awarding of contracts 
55(1) Subject to subsection (2), the minister shall: 

 
(a) obtain competitive prices for the construction of all 
public improvements through the public tender 
process mentioned in section 53; and 
 
(b) award the contract to the bidder whose bid, in the 
opinion of the minister, offers the best value taking 
into consideration all or any of the factors described in 
the tender documents. 
 

(2) The minister is not required to accept any tender”. 
 
And then it goes on in the second part. I mean, I’m probably 
going to read the whole Act here, Mr. Speaker. And when we 
talk about amending: 
 

The Public Works and Services Act is repealed and the 
following substituted: 
 

“(3) Subject to subsection (4), the minister shall: 
 
(a) obtain competitive prices for the construction or 
alteration of all public works through the public tender 
process mentioned in subsection (1); and 
 
(b) award the contract to the bidder whose bid, in the 
opinion of the minister, offers the best value taking 
into consideration all or any of the factors described in 
the tender documents. 

 
The minister is not required to accept any tender. 

 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7535 

So you know, this is a little too late, but we’re glad to see that 
there’s something here so that there can be some consideration 
of some other factors. Now unfortunately the legislation doesn’t 
lay out the factors and doesn’t lay out the process. And we are 
hopeful that the process then also includes that if a contract is 
not accepted that there is some record of that, that it’s not just 
dismissed and then into some secretive file, and we don’t hear 
why, but there is some record of why a contract may not be 
accepted. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, in recent news in fact and recent 
question periods, we’ve had questions about SaskPower and 
some of their tendering contracts and what’s happening now. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I read in the Leader-Post just 
yesterday and it talks about, “Carbon Capture: Will there be 
fallout?” in here and what this applies, and I’m wondering if 
this is going to apply to this legislation. 
 
And I quote from page A2 of the Leader-Post from Wednesday, 
October 28th, and we were talking about, and I quote: 
 

Nor did a September 2014 SaskPower carbon capture 
briefing note, obtained by the NDP, which says SNC “is 
more concerned about getting paid for the 6.5 million 
[dollars] than fixing the deficiencies of our plant.” It goes 
on to note “very poor to no support from SNC Lavalin,” 
and “serious design deficiencies” in the project. 

 
But it goes on to say, “SaskPower CEO Mike Marsh says 
‘because there’s a contract dispute (with SNC) on one job, 
doesn’t mean we don’t use them on another job.’” 
 
So here you have kind of an odd situation, and I don’t know 
what this means for this kind of bill here where we talk about 
best value and procurement Act, and yet you can have disputes 
with a company on a major, major project like the 
carbon-capture project and yet on another project they’re still 
getting the contract, and that seems to be okay. 
 
I think that we really need to take a look at this and say, hey, 
this doesn’t make a lot of sense. This doesn’t make a lot of 
sense. And this is what’s so good about my colleague’s bill 
when we talk about the different factors that you should be 
considering. And he talks about, the following factors should be 
taken into account for each procurement: 
 

(a) initial price; 
(b) quality of goods or service; 
(c) product history; 
(d) supplier experience; 
(e) warranty; 
(f) delivery service; 
(g) final total price; 
(h) local knowledge and/or local net benefit; and 
(i) previous performance on government contacts, as 
specified in any applicable performance review. 

 
So here you have a situation with SNC not doing so well down 
at Boundary dam, and that’s in . . . you know, they’re doing 
their legal tussle over that, but yet they get another contract, 
another contract. How can this be with this government who 
prides themselves in management? But how do you do that? 
How do you do that? You’re in a legal tussle with them already, 

but yet you get it awarded, this other contract. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope they take a look at my colleague’s bill. 
It’s really worthwhile because it sets out the criteria that 
everybody knows. Here with this, it’s really left up to the 
minister, and we really don’t know what that means and we 
don’t know under what considerations it will be taken. And that 
will be of interest to people, to see what kind of track record 
happens. Because we know, we know, and we’ve seen 
examples of out-of-province companies coming in, swooping 
up a major local industry. And here they are, you know, killing 
local jobs, and this government has done nothing, nothing to 
remedy that. 
 
And I’m thinking particularly of the laundry services in Prince 
Albert, the K-Bro Linens, and they’re in Edmonton. Now they 
have a plant here, I understand. And there were questions raised 
at the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour], question 
about the quality of work they do. But if you read the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald, and I know the folks over there . . . about 
what the mayor said about April 4th, about April 4th. He’s 
telling everyone to remember K-Bro laundry; remember that. 
And that’s because it was a big hit. 
 
Those were decent jobs for decent folk in the community. And I 
mean, we read the Daily Herald and we saw how people felt 
about that last day at work. And in fact the manager was so 
broken up he couldn’t even come to the event, because he had 
given so much of his life and was so committed to the laundry 
facility he was broken-hearted. And you know, it was a sad, sad 
day. 
 
And I think for the folks over there, if they think . . . And we 
know the former member from Prince Albert Northcote, who 
just sort of brushed it off and is no longer sitting in the House, 
in fact we have a vacancy in this House . . . This is an issue. 
This is a real issue for real people, and yet they brush it off. 
 
And of course, we’ve been raising questions about the $1.8 
billion bypass to Paris-based Vinci. And I’ve raised the human 
rights questions there, this summer. This is the same company 
that’s tied to some other building projects in other parts of the 
world where there have been allegations of human rights abuses 
and extremely poor working conditions where people are dying 
at a tragic rate — tragic rate — completing some major projects 
for this company. 
 
We don’t know what the outcome of that is, but we did raise the 
question for the government, again, what is their process when 
we’re dealing with international companies like that where there 
have been charges laid against them in the public media? And 
we wait to see what happens with that. Of course the minister 
did come out and say they have some process but we don’t 
know what that process is, said they were aware but still 
proceeded with using this company. 
 
We also were very concerned about SaskPower and of course 
the whole issue about outsourcing the meter installations, the 
Grid One trucks. And many, many folks saw Texas plates in our 
communities when they were doing the smart meter 
installations, and that was really questionable. And of course 
then we raised the issue of the contracting out of food services 
to our prisons here in Saskatchewan, and we have real problems 



7536 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2015 

with that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Of course fishing and hunting licences, again, out to an 
American company, and the P3 school maintenance. And today 
I just had to say, I have to enjoy, it was like getting an award 
from your mom. “And the winner is.” When the members 
opposite stood up in the member statements and gave 
themselves a pat on the back about their P3 schools that have 
yet to be built, you know, Mr. Speaker, that was really grand. 
That was really grand. It was like getting an award from my 
mom. “And the winner is.” I mean, I’m going to see this, we’re 
going to see the whole wall plastered with these, you know, 
photocopied awards. “And the winner is.” 
 
Yes, this is just a little bit much. We need to see those schools 
operating and seeing what the real result is. In 30 years, then we 
can start to see whether there’s any value to see these schools. 
This is a little rich though, Mr. Speaker, to be standing up and 
patting ourselves on the backs before any of them are built or 
operational. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been in eight years waiting for 
schools here in Saskatchewan. And all of a sudden there’s . . . 
just reach around their backs, patting themselves on the back for 
these schools. I cannot believe, this really took a lot of nerve 
today to stand up and give themselves an award or pat on the 
back for an award that they got from . . . I don’t know what the 
company was, you know? 
 
When I was a teacher, it was American awards for classrooms 
that you could get them out of, and that’s what we often used 
for kids who had good attendance or had improved in math 
skills. That’s the book we got our awards out of. I don’t know 
where this award came from but, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take a look. 
But it was quite something and we were interestingly surprised. 
But I’ve got to tell you, to get an award before we actually see, 
before one kid crosses the threshold into a school, that’s 
something. Maybe we should just hold back on that. 
 
And of course we see, you know, a P3 school maintenance 
handed out to a company from Milwaukee, and that’s going to 
be interesting to see. We’re going to see, you know, plates from 
the States around our schools and what they’re going to do 
there. And the North Battleford hospital, I mean, this has been 
outsourced to a UK [United Kingdom]-based company called 
Carillion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that there’s lots of questions 
about this bill and what’s going to really happen. What’s going 
to be the real applications here in Saskatchewan? Are we going 
to see maybe one or two a year when the lobbying gets really 
intense? Or are we going to see a real framework where people 
can have a sense of what they can expect on some of our major 
projects, that in fact Saskatchewan companies will get half a 
chance, half a chance to participate? 
 
And I’m thinking that, you know, if they want to borrow some 
of the things from my colleagues, Bill No. 608, An Act 
respecting Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses in 
Government Procurement, I think they’d be very happy. We’d 
be very happy to do that, and that would be local procurement, 

but I mean particularly, you know, determining factors. 
 
And you know, it’s interesting because these aren’t things that 
we thought up by ourselves. It came from Manitoba, I believe, 
that the good work that my colleague from Regina Rosemont 
actually borrowed some of this work, because they’ve done 
work with P3s and thought, we’ve got to do something so we’re 
open and transparent. 
 
So these folks should take lessons, and they often do. I can 
remember eight years ago, I can remember eight years ago 
when we were talking about the essential services Act, where 
did they get their ideas from? [Inaudible] . . . well you know, 
Manitoba. Manitoba did it, so we’re going to ram this bill 
through right away because Manitoba does it. Well take a look 
at what Manitoba does when it comes to local procurement. 
Take a look at that. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Take a look at what they do in NHL 
[National Hockey League] hockey. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes. Take a look, take a look. They have some 
good things happening in Manitoba. We’re all behind some of 
the things in Manitoba like the Jets. We like the Jets. 
Unfortunately Montreal didn’t do so well last night, but I 
digress, Mr. Speaker. That was a tough break. That was a tough 
break. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me get back to Bill 188 and how I think I 
recommend to this government, take a look at the good work 
that’s been done before. It’s there. And I know the Minister of 
Justice prides himself on running a shop on a shoestring. He has 
often told me that it will hardly cost anything to do anything in 
his office. In fact, you know, I know that makes the Minister of 
Finance really happy when he hears that his budget’s hardly 
anything. You know, they can do anything on a shoestring. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, here is the opportunity. Here is the 
opportunity for the Minister of Justice who is responsible for 
this to borrow. We would be very happy to lend him and let him 
keep it, the determining factors for making sure you have fair 
and open transparency when it comes to local procurement. 
 
Everybody wants a level playing field, but everybody wants and 
needs to know what are the factors at play here, not a 
government that can, at its whim, decide to favour this company 
or favour that company or if you’re out of the bad books. And it 
must take an awful lot to get out of the bad books with this 
company. SNC is not in the bad books of this company, even 
though apparently they should be because they seem to be in 
trouble with them on some of their projects. I would think, I 
would think that they should take a look. They should take a 
look, and especially in terms of their legislation they have now 
that if there’s a poor performance, then maybe the company, 
that’s a factor in awarding them a new contract. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I mean this is a tough bill to . . . I 
mean I’ve read it all into the record, and I don’t know whether 
they want me to read it again into the record, you know. And so 
we feel, we feel that this is something that the intent has been 
called for a long time. What the question will be in committee, 
what are the unintended consequences especially because the 
depth isn’t there? And what are they going to do to make sure 



October 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7537 

there’s no unintended consequences but really gets to a level 
playing field, and especially that local companies can thrive 
because we’ve had, we’ve had in this economy some very good 
times over the last eight to ten years. We want to make sure that 
something is sustainable going in the years going ahead, 
forward. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 
Bill No. 188, An Act to amend certain Acts respecting 
Awarding of Contracts. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 
tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:09.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7513 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7514 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7514 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7514 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7514 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7515 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7516 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7516 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7516 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 45th Anniversary of Canadian Forces Snowbirds 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7516 
 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7517 
 Educational Partnership with Solomon Islands 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7517 
 A Chance to Speak Documentary  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7517 
 Grand Opening of Parkland College Trades and Technology Centre 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7517 
 Joint-Use School Project 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7518 
 Saskatoon’s Growth Outlook 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7518 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7518 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7519 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7521 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7522 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7523 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7525 
 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7527 
 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7529 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7532 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7534 
 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


