
























































Hansard: April 15, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6915 
 April 15, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m pleased to welcome a number of guests that 
have joined us in your gallery. First of all, Mr. Speaker, with 
my first set of introductions, seated in your gallery is Brianne 
Urzada and her spouse, Eric, as well as Kiriako Iatridis and his 
spouse, Shanda Buchanan. I hope I got the names right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over two years ago Brianne was diagnosed with 
stage III Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Kiriako is a photographer here 
in Regina, and he lost his father to large cell carcinoma, Mr. 
Speaker. These two individuals have joined up to produce a 
private art opening entitled Five Stages that depicts the five 
stages of cancer grief: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and 
acceptance. Through this live auction and through the sale of 
smaller prints, the exhibit raised $60,000, Mr. Speaker. All the 
proceeds are going to go to the Hospitals of Regina Foundation 
and the Allan Blair Centre. We’ll hear more about what that 
work, what those dollars are going to be used specifically for in 
a member’s statement. I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming these four citizens of this province to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And briefly, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also see in the 
Speaker’s gallery the mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle, Ron Osika, as 
well as Sean McKenzie who works with SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association]. Mr. Speaker, we had the 
opportunity, the Rural and Remote Health minister and myself, 
to meet with Ron in his capacity as a member of SUMA, in his 
role as shadow critic, Mr. Speaker, shadow cabinet role for 
health. We had, I think, a very good dialogue yesterday 
afternoon. And so I just want to also welcome these two 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the Minister of 
Health in welcoming the four individuals involved in such a 
worthy project in raising awareness about the fight against 
cancer and, as importantly, raising dollars to help those who 
need support. So I want to extend words of thanks and 
appreciation for their fine work and as well join in welcoming 
former Speaker of the Assembly and current mayor, Mr. Ron 
Osika, as well as Mr. McKenzie from SUMA. It’s always good 
to have both of you in the legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m pleased today 

to rise and recognize students of the Johnson-Shoyama graduate 
school of business that are here with us today. Seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, I can’t see a lot of them from my vantage 
point here but, Mr. Speaker, this school produces some of the 
finest graduates in public policy in all of Canada. Students who 
are a good source of knowledge and inspiration are exactly what 
we need to continue to be a robust and dedicated public service 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And later this evening, 
Mr. Speaker, these students will participate in a policy research 
poster competition where they will present research resulting 
from all of their course work. 
 
I would ask these students to stand and be acknowledged as I 
mention their names. And if I mispronounce your name, I 
apologize ahead of time: Brenda Schurr, Caitlynn Beckett, 
Colton Goertz, Hana Blazkova, Luis Corredor Duarte, Lydia 
Okunlola, Marc D’Eon, Maritza Lozano, Matthew Peron, 
Miranda Gouchie, Nigel Nelson, Nolen Berg, Petr Baranovsky, 
Raymond Thomson, Samantha Benesh, Sandra Milena 
Betancur Vesga, Tyler Kobel, Yawen Luo, Yi Feng, Yvonne 
Benjoe, Lisa Jane de Gara, Iuliia Khimchak, Meaghen Boiteau, 
and Ivana Catturani. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 
welcome these Johnson-Shoyama students to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these fine students 
from the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy. 
I’d like to welcome all of these graduate students, and I’ll forgo 
the listing them off one by one. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said on the floor of this 
Assembly before, I too am a student at the Johnson-Shoyama 
Graduate School of Public Policy. And certainly the Tansley 
dinner is a big affair; good to see this group that is, I think, 
primarily from outside of Regina coming here to Regina for the 
dinner. But good to see them coming to town for the Tansley 
dinner, certainly named for Don Tansley, another outstanding 
public servant in the tradition of Mr. Johnson and Mr. Shoyama. 
 
But good luck with the poster competition. I know that my 
team’s got an entry in it. We’ll see how that works out. I’m not 
sure about the member from Regina Walsh Acres, if he’s got a 
horse in the race or not. But anyway, it’s good to see these 
graduate students, these scholars, these hopefully future public 
servants, for not just Saskatchewan but indeed around the 
world, here at their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And if I might, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say a word of 
welcome to some public servants who are here for the public 
service outreach program. My colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana will be doing the honours for me as I’ll be in 
estimates with the Minister of Advanced Education during that 
time. But it’s good to see some public servants today at their 
Legislative Assembly taking a great interest in the process that 
they serve so well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these important individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 



6916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I would like to talk a little bit 
more about those public servants that were just mentioned. 
There are 13 seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re here 
as part of the parliamentary program for public service. 
Participants are employed in different ministries, Mr. Speaker: 
Economy, Education, Environment, Government Relations, 
Health, Justice, Public Service Commission, and Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here and it’s a very interesting day, I think, 
for them around the legislature. They participate in a tour of the 
Legislative Building and certainly learn about the history. 
They’re also here for briefings presented by the Legislative 
Library, Legislative Assembly committee branch, and 
Executive Council. They’re also, Mr. Speaker, sitting here in 
the Chamber of course and will witness question period. Then 
of course later on this afternoon, as was mentioned, they’ll meet 
with the opposition and, I believe, myself from this side of the 
House. But I’ve heard, from other groups that have been here, 
the most important part of their whole day is they get to meet 
with you, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to welcome them here to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont 
. . . Regina South.  
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, it’s my great pleasure to welcome a guest seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. It’s Mr. Joe Ralko, a citizen of Regina 
and a long-time resident of the Regina South constituency that I 
have the honour to represent. Now, Mr. Speaker, I can’t quite 
see him; I think he’s hidden by the post there. Perhaps you’ve 
got a better view than I, but I do know for a fact he’s with us 
here today. 
 
Joe has had a very impressive professional career in media and 
communications, and over the years, Mr. Speaker, he’s also 
given back to the community through very extensive 
involvement in amateur sports. I’ll be speaking a little bit more 
about his volunteer activities during members’ statements. In 
the meantime, I invite all members to help me welcome Joe to 
his legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just join 
very briefly with the member from Regina South and welcome 
Mr. Joe Ralko to his legislature. Certainly somebody who has 
served his community in many capacities, and it’s a pleasure to 
welcome Joe here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to join the members in welcoming our 
guests to the Assembly, especially former Speaker Ron Osika. 
 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for support for better 
schools here in Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many 
of our classrooms are overcrowded and under resourced and 
that the Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of 
educational assistant positions, and students often don’t get the 
one-on-one attention they need. And the condition of many of 
our schools are rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and this 
government refuses to release information on the $1.5 billion of 
known repairs that are needed in our school, and the 
government’s plan to rent schools from private corporations is 
expensive and reckless. Now we know that this is unacceptable, 
given the record revenues that this government has had over the 
last eight years. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping class sizes, increasing 
supports for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 
 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens, 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by this government 
on Dewdney Avenue, calling for actions to ensure safety. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and the infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul traffic, receive provincial funding, and be 
developed through consultation with the city of Regina, 
communities, and residents. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents once 
again of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — I rise today to present a petition. 
Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and other parts 
of the North and is getting worse. Shelter is a basic need for 
everyone, but under this government it’s getting harder and 
harder for people to find adequate housing, especially families, 
seniors, women, and children who face abusive situations. The 



April 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6917 

problem is getting worse because of the rising level of poverty 
and skyrocketing home ownership costs. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly take the following action: to 
cause the Saskatchewan government to build a homeless 
shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet the needs of 
addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today again to present a petition on building a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. 
 

And the petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as the city 
of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from senior 
governments. 
 
And as in duty bound, [Mr. Speaker], your petitioners will 
ever pray. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina, but the many other petitions have been 
signed by people from all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. Yarrow Youth Farm 
is a facility for low-risk teens who benefit from an open custody 
home with a caring, supportive environment with programs to 
help residents live more productive lives. Saskatoon also has 
Kilburn Hall, a secure custody unit for youth considered a 
greater risk to their communities. And the government is 
planning to close Yarrow Farm and create an open-custody 
wing in Kilburn Hall to accommodate Yarrow’s residents. 
 
The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared 
he could not endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens 
could be influenced and pressured by close proximity to 
high-risk youth who may be involved in serious crimes or 
gangs. Kilburn Hall is a more institutional environment that can 
intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a 
caring home environment for youth who have committed 
minor offences and to provide support to help these young 
people redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals in Saskatoon, Regina, 
and Kindersley. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Five Stages Contributes to Cancer Patient Care 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As was mentioned in 
introductions, we have a very special guest here today, Brianne 
Urzada. At the age of 23, Brianne was diagnosed with stage III 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. She was approached by friend and 
photographer, Kiriako Iatridis, about documenting her 
experience with cancer through photography. Both Brianne and 
Kiriako decided to use Elisabeth Kübler-Ross’s five stages 
model of grief to depict Brianne’s experience. 
 
After her fourth chemotherapy treatment, the pair did a very 
powerful photo shoot depicting the five stages of grief through 
her body and emotions. These photographs show a very unique 
look at the vulnerability exposed by someone going through 
cancer. Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to be able to say that 
Brianne is now in remission, and she and her husband will be 
expecting their first child. 
 
Both she and Kiriako wanted to give back to the programs that 
made her experience with cancer easier, so on March 27th they 
held a private art opening called Five Stages, which auctioned 
off the five featured photographs and one painting. Mr. 
Speaker, they raised just over $60,000. Money raised is going to 
the Hospitals of Regina Foundation to buy a new pathology 
device to be used during oncology surgeries, and the rest of the 
proceeds going to the patient comfort at the Allan Blair Cancer 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Brianne 
Urzada and Kiriako Iatridis for their very powerful pieces and 
for donating the money to improving cancer patient care. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Parkinson’s Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today in 
recognition of national Parkinson’s disease month. Parkinson’s 
disease affects the nervous system and causes people to have 
less control over their muscles. Today there is no known 
prevention or cure for Parkinson’s disease and the treatments 
available only help to manage the symptoms. 
 
Parkinson’s disease takes a huge toll on families, and the 
treatment options that are available can be extremely expensive 
for patients. The average Parkinson’s patient in Canada pays 
$1,100 a month in out-of-pocket expenses for prescription 
drugs. That’s a huge cost for any family, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
especially difficult in the later stages when Parkinson’s takes 
patients out of the workforce. 
 
But as always, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are stepping 
up all across our province to help raise funds and provide 



6918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2015 

support for patients and their families. The Parkinson’s Society 
Saskatchewan has chapters in every corner of the province 
including Humboldt, Kindersley, Moose Jaw, Moosomin, North 
Battleford, Prince Albert, Regina, two in Saskatoon, 
Spiritwood, Swift Current, Tisdale, Yorkton, and Watrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of the Assembly join me 
in recognizing April as national Parkinson’s disease month and 
also in thanking all of the volunteers who work hard to raise 
awareness of Parkinson’s disease. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 

Basketball Coach Honoured 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I rise to recognize the achievements of a constituent who 
we just introduced a moment ago, recently honoured with the 
Fred Frolick Award for the Spirit of Basketball. 
 
Joe Ralko has served the sport of basketball at the local, 
provincial, and national levels for more than 30 years, most of 
that right here in Regina. However, Joe got his start as a 
community league coach in Prince George, British Columbia. 
Arriving in Regina, he initially coached in the Regina 
Community Basketball Association — that’s the RCBA — and 
then at Robert Usher Collegiate where he resurrected the senior 
boys’ program. 
 
Joe is a fully certified level 3 NCCP [national coaching 
certification program] basketball coach and was in fact the first 
provincial team coach for the bantam boys’ program. He was 
president of Basketball Saskatchewan for six years. He was also 
elected twice to the Canada Basketball board of directors where 
he served as vice-president. During the basketball season, Joe 
can still be found Saturday mornings in the gym mentoring 
first-year officials for the RCBA. 
 
Joe is also a two-time cancer survivor who has had 13 
operations and endured 12 hours of chemotherapy. Joe says he 
worked hard to return to the floor because he believed there was 
a new generation of coaches, parents, and players that deserved 
the right to yell at him. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I encourage my fellow 
members to join me in congratulating Mr. Joe Ralko, recipient 
of the 2015 Spirit of Basketball Award. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

University Students Offer Healthy Food 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to recognize a new project at the 
University of Saskatchewan. A group of students at the 
university has set up a table selling healthy food to people in the 
Health Sciences Building. It’s a place where lots of staff, 
students, and especially patients and their families are often 
hustling through and under a lot of stress, and they don’t have 
much access to healthy food. 
 
Tatiana Rac is a medical student with the group. And she told 

CBC News that, and I quote: 
 
There is limited availability within this building. We have 
a Tim Hortons, which is very delicious, and also a vending 
machine, which is also very delicious, but sometimes 
instead of that second or third doughnut of the day, it’d be 
nice to have an apple, a banana, or an avocado. 

 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, that proper nutrition plays an 
important role in helping stressed people deal with their 
anxieties and helping sick people to heal and get better. I know 
that there are many other places in our province where it’s 
tough to find healthy food, particularly in places with poverty 
and inequality. 
 
So I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing 
the important work of Erin Beresch, Tatiana Rac, Sarah Finch, 
Jennifer Peterson, and everyone else at the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] who helped make this program a success and 
to remember that so much more needs to be done to make sure 
everyone across our province has access to healthy food. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

Ellen Manton Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
often that we get a chance to celebrate specific and important 
milestones, such as a birthday, with our constituents, but today 
is a special exception. Today a resident from Saskatoon 
Greystone is celebrating a very special birthday. Mrs. Ellen 
Manton turns 100 today, and she made a special request for a 
public mention from her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Born on April 15th, 1915 on a farm near Donovan, Ellen is the 
oldest of six children. Being the oldest, Ellen recalls that she 
was more like a mother than a sister to her siblings, including 
seeing three brothers go off to war. She was fortunate, as all 
three returned home. 
 
Ellen and her late husband raised their children, and along the 
way she moved into Saskatoon, making the City of Bridges her 
new home. Like many seniors in our province, she now enjoys 
the company of her kids and her seven grandchildren and 11 
great-grandchildren. Ellen has made Saskatchewan home for all 
these years and the province is all the better for that. In fact she 
still enjoys lawn bowling. She’s a formidable bridge player and, 
of course, an avid curler at Saskatoon’s Nutana Curling Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we not only wish Ellen a happy birthday, 
but recognize her many contributions to her family, to her 
friends, to many Saskatchewan communities, indeed to her 
province. We offer our sincere thanks for her many efforts. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in wishing Ellen a very 
happy 100th birthday, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

 



April 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6919 

Surgical Wait Times 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Institute of Health Information, or CIHI, report was 
released yesterday regarding wait times for priority procedures 
in Canada 2015. The report shows that Saskatchewan patients 
are benefiting from improved access to surgery with surgical 
wait times being among the shortest in the country. In 
Saskatchewan, 90 per cent of all patients had an offer of surgery 
within three months of booking between December 2014 and 
February 2015. 
 
The Saskatchewan surgical initiative has made tremendous 
improvements in patients’ access to surgery, Mr. Speaker. We 
have seen almost 10,000 more surgeries performed last year 
compared to five years ago. As well the number of patients 
waiting more than three months for surgery has dropped by 87 
per cent over that same time period. Sometimes it’s easy to 
forget, but these 10,000 more surgeries represent 10,000 more 
people who are getting the care they need faster. The CIHI 
report shows Saskatchewan is doing especially well in 
comparison to other provinces. This includes the best wait times 
for bypass surgery in Canada, the best wait times for bladder 
cancer surgery and lung cancer surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there is always more work to be 
done but these statistics show that the initiatives advanced by 
our government are working and people across Saskatchewan 
are getting more timely access to the surgeries they need to 
improve their quality of life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Company to Supply Uranium 
for Electricity Generation in India 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to stand in the House today and congratulate one of 
Saskatchewan’s largest companies, Cameco, for signing a 
historic supply deal with India earlier today. This contract sets 
the stage for shipments of Canadian uranium to India for 
electricity generation. 
 
The Premier was in Ottawa this morning for the signing of the 
contract, along with Prime Minister Harper and Indian Prime 
Minister Modi. As the members of this House will know, the 
Premier has been a tireless advocate through missions to India 
and work here at home. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy continues to show strength through 
its diversity, and today’s historic uranium energy deal signing 
marks yet another milestone in our province’s success. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is home to 100 per cent of Canada’s 
uranium mining industry, and we are the world’s 
second-leading producer of uranium. With India’s nuclear 
energy program being second only to China’s in scale, this 
partnership signals long-term sustainability for Cameco. Mr. 
Speaker, India has a dynamic and growing nuclear energy 
program, and Cameco’s record as a great corporate citizen in 
Saskatchewan speaks for itself. 
 
We will continue to work with the federal government to 

encourage commercial partnerships like this one which help 
bolster our strong economy. I would ask all members to join me 
in congratulating Cameco for this historic contract. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ambulance Service Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — In February, Calvin Vollet had surgery at the 
Regina General. The surgeon nicked his artery and he suffered 
from profuse bleeding. His nephrologist ordered that he be 
urgently transferred to St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. He was 
charged a massive amount for this medically necessary 
ambulance transfer, an ambulance transfer between two 
hospitals on doctor’s orders, out of urgent medical necessity. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only province that 
charges patients for medically necessary transfers between 
health centres, and that needs to stop. How can the Premier 
possibly keep justifying this practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to take the 
question on behalf of the government in the absence of the 
Premier. Certainly I think members will know that ambulance 
fees are not an insured service under the Canada Health Act, 
but we do choose to heavily subsidize ambulance fees in 
Saskatchewan, as do most other provinces do, Mr. Speaker. 
Approximately 71 per cent of the cost of an ambulance, the cost 
of taking an ambulance is borne by the taxpayers through the 
general revenue of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly this government has provided increased 
support to add ambulance capacity in a number of areas, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as to ensure that we have a highly competent 
staff all across this province, a 50 per cent increase in our 
ambulance funding for regional health authorities. Mr. Speaker, 
we also as well continue to have supports in place, whether that 
be for low-income individuals as well as our seniors’ program, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re always looking to how we can enhance the programs that 
we do operate, Mr. Speaker. But this is a program that’s been in 
place, the basis of the program hasn’t changed over the last 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to fund 
ambulance fees on a heavily subsidized basis going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only 
province that charges for medically necessary transfers between 
centres, and that needs to change. The bill that Calvin received 
for his medically necessary transfer between the two hospitals 
was $1,235, a bill for $1,235 because a specialist ordered, his 
physician ordered that he be transferred from one hospital to 
another. That’s outrageous enough. This government should 
stop charging people for transfers between health facilities. 
 
But Calvin was also charged for part of the ambulance’s round 
trip from Saskatoon to Regina, even though he was left in 



6920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2015 

Saskatoon and the ambulance picked up another patient at 
Royal University Hospital and transferred that other patient 
back to Regina. Mr. Speaker, that amounts to double billing 
patients, and it needs to stop. How can the Premier justify this? 
When will the Premier end this? Will he end this unfair practice 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly the members opposite will know that the 
program that we have in place for ambulance fees, while there 
are some adjustments along the way, on the ground ambulance 
side hasn’t substantially changed in terms of what was operated 
under the previous government, under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker, going back a number of years 
to the point where it is heavily subsidized by the people of this 
province. 
 
The residents of this province have the option to look at some 
additional assistance programs, whether they are low-income 
individuals, whether or not they are seniors, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are eligible for the seniors’ CAP [Canada assistance plan] 
program, Mr. Speaker, as well as private insurance. Many 
citizens choose to purchase private insurance, Mr. Speaker, to 
augment the publicly funded system here in this province, 
whether it be for ambulances or other types of non-Canada 
Health Act insurance services. 
 
[14:00] 
 
It’s interesting though to hear from the NDP that this is 
apparently their new policy, to not have a patient pay for 
transfer fees, when this was in fact their policy in the 1999 
election, starting by eliminating all fees for transfers between 
health institutions, Mr. Speaker. That was what they promised 
in 1999. They didn’t get it done. Interesting that apparently this 
is now their new policy again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is this government that has 
increased fees for ambulances in this province. We’re the only 
province in the country that is charging for medically necessary 
transfers between facilities. Calvin thinks it’s wrong that that 
exists and he thinks it should end. But he’s especially frustrated, 
especially frustrated that this government allows for double 
billing for the same trip. It defies common sense. 
 
Calvin contacted the minister’s office. He spoke with a number 
of individuals on the minister’s staff, and finally they said to 
him, well those are the rules. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is time to 
change those rules. Will the Premier finally do this today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, in the absence 
of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that 
the Leader of the Opposition wants that rule changed today, 
when in fact as a party they wanted it changed in 1999, Mr. 
Speaker. They had eight years to make that change, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact the policy says, and Roy Romanow’s on the 

front cover here, 1999 NDP Platform: Building A Bright Future 
Together The Saskatchewan Way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know how that went for the people of this province. But it 
says: 
 

Publicly funded ambulance services. We’ll introduce a 
single reasonable fee for ambulance services, and we’ll 
begin to reduce ambulance charges throughout the 
province, starting by eliminating all fees for transfers 
between health institutions. 

 
They had eight years to do it, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t get it 
done. But the Leader of the Opposition yet wants it done today 
by this government.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll always look to see, make improvements to 
the system that we have in place, Mr. Speaker. We will work, 
we’ll have our regions work with their patients to ensure that 
the charges are reasonable, Mr. Speaker. This is a policy that’s 
been in place for many years under the NDP, as it is today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister seems to forget that 
their party’s been in power for close to eight years, Mr. 
Speaker, during times of record revenues. And he wants to talk 
about things that happened, Mr. Speaker, when the two of us 
were barely out of high school. Talk about backwards-looking 
and a failure, Mr. Speaker, to be actually recognizing the huge 
burden that is being placed on patients here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government, this government was 
alerted to this issue because Calvin spoke with several political 
staffers. Has the Premier looked into the practice of double 
billing for the same ambulance trips? Has the Premier looked 
into the practice of double billing for the same ambulance trips, 
and how often is this happening? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, while we’re on the topic of 
NDP platforms, it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, and I 
understand the member opposite at one point claimed that at 
that time he was still in high school, but now he was just 
recently out of high school, Mr. Speaker. It’s good that he 
clarified that for the House. 
 
But even at the same time, Mr. Speaker, when they were 
promising the people to eliminate all inter-hospital transfers for 
the people of this province, they’re also promising to reduce 
wait times for surgery by at least 30 per cent over the next four 
years. Well, Mr. Speaker, how did that go for the people of this 
province? They just missed it by this much, Mr. Speaker, 
reducing wait times for surgeries by 30 per cent. What 
happened, Mr. Speaker? Wait times for surgeries went up 61 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. They missed it on that. They missed it on 
ambulance fees. They promised to hire 500 more health care 
providers, Mr. Speaker. They missed it on that mark. That’s 
what we got from the NDP government. That’s why the 
Saskatchewan Party is on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



April 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6921 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Calvin is here at the Assembly 
today. He came to this Assembly because he was concerned 
about this aspect of double billing. He’s concerned about how 
this is placing a burden on Saskatchewan patients, Mr. Speaker, 
for necessary medical treatment based on the recommendations 
of their physicians. And to have this dismissive approach from 
the government, Mr. Speaker, is astonishing. How they can just 
say this isn’t an issue and not affecting patients is beyond 
belief. 
 
We can think of other people who have come to the Legislature. 
Dave Carr, who came to share his experience. We think of Sara 
Bucsis-Gunn, who spoke about the unfairness of the system as 
it related to the proper medical care of her daughter, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re frustrated that this government has refused, 
despite times of massive revenue increases, to fix our 
ambulance system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact, the government has chosen to raise the amount that 
patients are charged for ambulances. We know that 30 per cent 
of all ambulance bills sent to patients are because of transfers 
from one facility to another. So that’s about $4.5 million that 
patients are paying for medically necessary transfers — 
patients, Mr. Speaker, who are here today in the Assembly. 
 
Meanwhile this government happily gives a $5 million gift to 
the American manufacturer of the failed smart meters. 
Meanwhile this government happily spends $3 million on the 
Premier’s American lobbyist, but they are unwilling to fix our 
ambulance system. How on earth can the government continue 
to defend this practice, which is the worst in the entire country, 
Mr. Speaker, and allows for double billing for the same 
ambulance trip? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said before, ambulance subsidies are provided by 
the taxpayers on behalf of patients, Mr. Speaker. What we put 
in in terms of the ambulance fees, Mr. Speaker, is up 50 per 
cent over the last seven years under this government. What the 
Leader of the Opposition also fails to note is the over $10 
million a year that this government puts in to ensure that we 
have STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air 
ambulance in the province, Mr. Speaker, which we never had 
before under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
recognize that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will certainly be looking into the specifics of this 
case again, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s specific questions. But what I’ll do first, Mr. 
Speaker, is I will check the facts, Mr. Speaker. I will check with 
the ministry. I will check with the regional health authority. I 
will consult, Mr. Speaker, with the facility or with the 
organization in any case that comes forward to me. I will 
consult if possible, Mr. Speaker, with the family that comes 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll also consult with Google, which members 
opposite apparently didn’t consult with Google yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on this side we want to ensure that we’re 
dealing with facts, Mr. Speaker, that we ensure that we’re 
dealing with the facts, unlike the members opposite. And we 

saw that many times this week alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Calvin is here in the Chamber 
today. He has come to Regina because of his concerns about 
this issue. He has brought his bill, Mr. Speaker, that he received 
for a medically necessary transfer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the worst ambulance fees in the entire 
country. The government refuses to take action and fix the 
ridiculous interest fees that we see being charged to patients. It 
refuses to stop charging patients for ambulance transfers 
between health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, and it refuses to put 
a cap on ambulance fees, stop adding the per-kilometre rate that 
patients have to pay for. It refuses to do any of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But Calvin has . . . out of all of these concerns, there is one that 
is most frustrating to him. And he is here today, Mr. Speaker, 
and he deserves a better answer than what we have heard so far. 
Will the Premier at least listen to Calvin and promise to stop 
double billing for the same trips? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. Certainly, I think 
members will know that ambulance fees, ambulance services 
are not insured under the Canada Health Act, Mr. Speaker. But 
provinces, all provinces, choose different coverage levels when 
it comes to non-insured benefits under the Canada Health Act, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So for instance, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to Saskatchewan, 
our coverage of cancer drugs, in particular those secondary 
cancer drugs like anti-nausea medication, are covered 100 per 
cent by the province of Saskatchewan where other provinces 
choose not to cover those services and those particular drugs, 
Mr. Speaker. We have to make those types of choices, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also have to make the choices like investing over $10 
million a year to ensure that we have STARS operating in this 
province for those people, particularly in rural and remote areas, 
Mr. Speaker, that need that life-saving support, something that 
wasn’t available under the NDP, especially at a time when 
health centres and hospitals were being closed and access to 
emergency services in rural and remote areas were being 
drastically cut back, Mr. Speaker. We want to ensure that our 
citizens all across this province have that benefit, Mr. Speaker, 
and those are the choices that we’ve had to make. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Physician Services in Craik and District 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the second 
Health minister made a promise to the people of Craik and area. 
Why have they failed to keep their promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 



6922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2015 

Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — I’m sorry for the delay, Mr. Speaker. 
I wasn’t sure who the second Health critic was talking to. When 
it comes to the people of Craik, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has made the commitment to stabilize services there by 
committing to putting a permanent four-day-a-week doctor in 
place, a permanent nurse practitioner in place five days a week, 
unchanged services, Mr. Speaker. That commitment continues 
and we will carry forward with that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to direct their questions 
to the appropriate person by their titles, not by some other 
designation. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on the first day of the spring 
sitting we had about 70 people come from Craik and area to the 
legislature to rally to save the health care services in their 
community. And they heard the promises that this government 
made, Mr. Speaker, and they’re not pleased with the carry 
through that is certainly not happening. 
 
The Premier promised that the government would ensure that 
Craik had a doctor four days a week, and the minister promised 
the people of Craik and area that there would be a doctor in 
place by the end of March. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Craik health 
care task force wrote to the Premier on April 1st, and this is 
what they said, “Unfortunately these commitments made by you 
and your minister are not being acted out on the ground.” 
 
So again, why did the Premier not follow through on his 
commitment to the people of Craik and area? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think that was directed 
to the Premier this time, so I’ll take that question on his behalf 
and on behalf of the government in his absence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before and I’ll say again, the 
commitment of this government is to put a permanent physician 
in place in Craik. We tried time and time again to negotiate, 
have the ministry, have the region, have the SMA 
[Saskatchewan Medical Association] aid in negotiating a 
contract with the previous physician who refused to sit down. In 
fact at the posting of this position, now over the past number of 
weeks, he still hasn’t chosen to exercise his interest in that 
position.  
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the position has been posted. There has 
been two applicants that have so far toured the facility, two 
others that are interested that we know of as of today. That 
position will be filled, Mr. Speaker. Up to this point, there has 
been locum coverage. The new doctor in Davidson has been 
doing coverage in Craik to get herself familiarized with the 
facility to take part in that team system that’s going to be in 
place, Mr. Speaker, in the coming weeks and months. And it’s 
all rolling out very well, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite 
would be patient. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think this minister needs to get 
his facts straight and speak to the people in Craik about what 
the reality is on the ground, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
not coming, Mr. Speaker, to the Assembly, they’re not raising 
these concerns, they’re not writing to the Premier or to the 
ministers, Mr. Speaker, because they’re satisfied with the 
actions. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, since February 1st there has 
only been, there has only been limited and sporadic service in 
Craik by physicians.  
 
The people of Craik and area have brought . . . have had enough 
of this government failing to follow through on their promise. 
So the Craik health care task force wrote to the Premier 
yesterday and this is what they said just yesterday, Mr. Speaker: 
“The community has decided, in the interests of maintaining the 
health and well-being of local residents, to immediately begin 
actively recruiting a doctor to open a private practice in Craik.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the community should not have to do this. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they are having to do it because the Premier and 
the Health ministers have failed to deliver for them, have failed 
to listen to them, Mr. Speaker, and have failed to find a solution 
and to be flexible. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier at least listen? 
Will he at least listen and promise the people of Craik that the 
fee-for-service doctor that they recruit will be able to access all 
the support services at the health care centre, including the lab, 
the X-ray services, and the treatment room? Will he commit to 
that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talks about wanting to get the facts straight, Mr. 
Speaker. These are the facts. In the last week alone, just in the 
last seven days, the Leader of the Opposition approved a news 
release going out from his office which claimed that a resident 
had dementia, Mr. Speaker, which that resident read about in 
the newspaper the next day. Mr. Speaker, that resident didn’t 
have dementia, doesn’t have dementia, doesn’t have a 
diagnosis. That’s the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition, we know what happened 
with him, Mr. Speaker, and the facts of what happened there, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just yesterday the Leader of the 
Opposition got up in his place, and speaking on behalf of a 
resident, Mr. Speaker, in care, in long-term care said that the 
resident was on anti-psychotic medication without a diagnosis. 
 
All he had to do was google, Mr. Speaker, and come up with a 
court case from 2010 that involved that same family member, 
that same resident, Mr. Speaker, where on page 2 it says, with 
respect “. . . these dependant adults continue to suffer the 
underlying conditions of Alzheimers and, in respect of Bernal, 
that she is psychotic.” 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we found this information out by the time the 
Highways minister was answering questions. Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the Leader of the Opposition, either he doesn’t fact 
check, Mr. Speaker, or he just doesn’t care. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to caution members to choose 



April 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6923 

their words carefully in these matters. This goes for both sides 
of the House that sometimes the language pushes the 
boundaries, and I expect both sides to be careful in this matter. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education and the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, anyone close to education 
knows that this government’s put a lot of pressure on kids’ 
classrooms. The ratio of EAs [educational assistants] to students 
has not caught up since this government slashed the number of 
educational assistants. Classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced and we have at least $1.5 billion in much 
needed repairs to schools that this government is ignoring. 
 
And defying common sense, this government has cut $15 
million this year by scrapping the mid-year funding for 
enrolment growth that’s so desperately needed. So with all that, 
how can this Education minister justify spending time and 
resources and school divisions’ time and already inadequate 
resources on this government’s lean pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before we can take questions from the members opposite, we 
need to put things in perspective just a little bit. The legacy that 
they left was in 2007, they had an education budget of $943 
million, a capital budget in that year of $19 million. Mr. 
Speaker, 2014-2015, an education budget of $2 billion. That’s 
the legacy that they left us. That’s what we’re working our way 
through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about cuts. There was no cuts. Each and 
every school division received more money than they did the 
previous year. Mr. Speaker, I can give you some other statistics 
as well. Mr. Speaker, there are more teachers in our classroom 
than ever before: 614 more teachers; student support teachers, 
200 more. And there are more professionals working for our 
students: psychologists, up 45 per cent; speech language 
pathologists, up 24 per cent; occupational therapists, up 53 per 
cent; social workers, up 14 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no 
lessons from the people opposite. We’ll work to fix the deficit 
that they left. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers in education 
haven’t kept pace with student realities and student numbers, 
Mr. Speaker. And everyone knows that classrooms across 
Saskatchewan are under-resourced and overcrowded, Mr. 
Speaker. And if you want to talk about misplaced priorities of 
this government again, this government actually found it 
somehow that they should be spending all the needed dollars 
that are needed within education to train 90 per cent of the 
Education ministry staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the next year, this government expects school divisions 
to deliver 58 lean events, taking away from divisions’ already 
insufficient resources. Teachers, administrators, and students 
will be pulled out of the classroom to attend these events in 
support of this government’s pet project. Doesn’t the Education 

minister think that students and teachers should be in the 
classroom instead of its costly lean events? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk 
about whether we adequately fund education enrolment. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s something that the members opposite never had to 
deal with because they were dealing with decline. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to go back and look at what happened in the past. In the 
year 2007, the last year the members were in government, they 
closed 23 schools. Mr. Speaker, in 2006 the members opposite 
closed nine schools; 2005, five schools; 2004, eight schools. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on and on — 176 
schools. Schools that don’t exist. Schools that we’re not worried 
about classroom sizes. Schools that we’re not worried about 
where the students are. We’re not worried about leaking roofs 
in those schools because they’re closed. They’re empty 
buildings. The students that were there are now living in 
Calgary and Edmonton because those people drove them away, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re not taking lessons from those people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister, 
that government, is clearly out of touch with the realities in 
everyday classrooms across Saskatchewan. Here’s what that 
minister said about the school year ahead when I asked in 
committee. He said the target he has for school divisions for 
2015-2016 is for every division to complete two lean events, 58 
in total, including the “. . . development and implementation of 
a lean communications plan to describe how lean is adding 
value and eliminating inefficiencies.” 
 
Seriously, Mr. Speaker, a lean communications plan. We don’t 
need a lean go-team in health care, and we sure as heck don’t 
need a lean go-team in education, Mr. Speaker. How can the 
minister justify using resources meant for students and for 
schools to create pro-lean talking points for this government’s 
pet project? Why won’t he come to his senses and scrap this 
foolish plan and put the dollars to work where they make a 
difference in the life of students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve used lean in 
education. We’ve used lean to reduce the amount of time it took 
to get a contract approved, so the wait time for contract 
completions went from 20 to 40 days to 8 days — cost savings, 
$200,000. Mr. Speaker, we’ve used lean to review the teachers’ 
certification process to streamline the process — cost savings, 
$100,000. We’ve used it for the capital approval process — cost 
savings, $80,000. Results have been fewer consultants working 
on more projects, reduced process errors, duplication efforts, 
and . . . [inaudible]. 
 
This is done on a voluntary basis with divisions, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s producing positive results, and we’re going to continue to 
do that type of thing. We have a $2 billion budget. We want to 
keep our resources where they belong, in the classroom rather 
than on other things, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the resources 
should be in our province, helping our kids learn. 



6924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:22.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6916 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6916 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6916 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6916 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6916 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6916 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6916 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Five Stages Contributes to Cancer Patient Care 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 
 Parkinson’s Awareness Month 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 
 Basketball Coach Honoured 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6918 
 University Students Offer Healthy Food 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6918 
 Ellen Manton Celebrates 100th Birthday 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6918 
 Surgical Wait Times 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6918 
 Saskatchewan Company to Supply Uranium for Electricity Generation in India 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6919 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Ambulance Service Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6919 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6919 
 Physician Services in Craik and District 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6921 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6922 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6922 
 Funding for Education and the Lean Initiative 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6923 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6923 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


