




















































Hansard: March 09, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 9, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6475 

 March 9, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — It being Commonwealth Day today, we have 

a number of guests in the Speaker’s gallery that I would like to 

introduce: from the Canadian International Council, Dr. 

Michael Jackson and Alexander Shalashniy; representing 

Barbados, Bert Clarke; representing India, Renu Kapoor and 

Rani Bilkhu; representing Jamaica, Mavis Ashbourne-Palmer 

and guest, Pam Taylor; representing Sierra Leone, Muna De 

Ciman; representing Trinidad and Tobago, Patricia 

Harvey-Roberts; representing Uganda, Mike Luti; representing 

Zambia, Chimuka Simasiku and guest, Grace Musenge; 

representing the United Kingdom, Teresa Walker and guest, 

Elaine Morgan. I would ask all members to welcome them to 

our Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to welcome four women to the legislature today 

who are making a tremendous difference in our community 

through their dedicated work with the Regina Sexual Assault 

Centre. Seated in your gallery are Debbie House, the centre 

administrator — maybe just give us a little wave; thank you — 

counsellor Cindy Bote and board members Crystal Giesbrecht 

and Jasmine Collier. 

 

As we will hear momentarily from my colleague in Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, the centre is now celebrating its 40th year 

providing services to victims of interpersonal violence and 

abuse. The centre provides a range of invaluable services, 

including counselling and a 24-hour sexual assault line, and 

also undertakes education and awareness initiatives, including 

the Be More Than a Bystander campaign which I would 

encourage all members and guests to review. 

 

Our government is a proud partner of the centre, providing 

annual funding of over $275,000, and looks forward to their 

continued success as they begin their next 40 years, Mr. 

Speaker. I would ask all members to join me in welcoming our 

special guests in recognition of the centre’s 40th anniversary. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the Minister of Justice in congratulating the centre on 

40 years of good service in the city of Regina. I know that there 

are many citizens of the city, but also of the province, who are 

very thankful for the help that they’ve received from you, and 

we look forward to many more years of service here in the 

community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted 

to add a couple of comments of welcome to the community 

leaders that are here today, Mr. Speaker, for Commonwealth 

Day. I want to thank all the leaders that have joined us here 

today, Dr. Jackson and all guests. 

 

But I wanted to specifically thank Mr. Bert Clarke that’s joined 

us here today. It was a pleasure to take in Black History Month 

gala with Mr. Clarke just a couple of weeks ago. 

 

It’s a pleasure to have Ms. Renu Kapoor with us here today, a 

leader and a force within our community for so many good 

projects, and recently the well-deserving recipient of the U of R 

[University of Regina] President’s Award for a lifetime of 

community service. It’s a pleasure also to welcome Ms. Rani 

Bilkhu, a good friend, a wonderful person, a leader within our 

community, and a wonderful family to join us here today. 

 

And it’s a pleasure to welcome Ms. Muna De Ciman to her 

Assembly here today. And many will be familiar with Muna. 

She’s a force as well within our community. Her family are an 

exceptional family within our community, whether that be her 

daughter Phoebe or her son Chan, right now who is likely as 

well one of the best football and basketball players within our 

province, Mr. Speaker, and has exciting years ahead on that 

front, but also an exceptional student. 

 

So these are a few leaders that make our community better here 

in Regina, make our province stronger, and I want to join in 

welcoming them here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce a former member of this House, Mr. 

Sherwin Petersen, and his wife, Pauline. I want to welcome 

them. They now reside in Manitou where they’ve been enjoying 

life there. I’d ask all members to welcome Mr. Petersen and his 

wife to his legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts. 

 

And we know that in September of 2014 this government 

walked away from a new 48-unit affordable housing project in 

Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take control of 

and rent the units at full market price. This government allowed 

the private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract 

without any penalties, setting a dangerous precedent for this 

type of default. And further, when asked to explain the 

government’s decision, the Minister of Social Services said, and 

I quote, “You’re assuming there’s these desperate homeless 

people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 

realities within our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer now: 



6476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to recognize that 

there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 

and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 

private developers with whom the government has close 

relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 

affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the unsafe 

conditions created by that government on Dewdney Avenue, 

Mr. Speaker, relating directly to that government’s failure to 

plan appropriately and a failure to ensure safe flow of traffic, 

resulting in Dewdney Avenue, a residential artery, being 

inundated with heavy-haul truck traffic that’s certainly 

dangerous and also degrading infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 

Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 

and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 

the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 

and be developed through consultation with the city of 

Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

39th Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend I had the great pleasure of answering phones for the 

39th Kinsmen Telemiracle. This successful event was hosted by 

Bob McGrath and held at TCU Place in Saskatoon. With the 

phones ringing off the hooks and pledges coming in from all 

over Saskatchewan, Telemiracle 39 raised a grand total of 

$4,312,457 for the Kinsmen Foundation. This weekend once 

again demonstrated the tremendous generosity from all 

residents across this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Kinsmen Foundation raises funds every year 

to support those that require special needs equipment and access 

to medical assistance to improve their quality of life. All funds 

raised in this province stay in this province and support 

Saskatchewan citizens. All donations, big or small, go a long 

way to support this incredible cause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say a very special thank you to Bob 

McGrath for doing a wonderful job of hosting again this year. 

Bob has been hosting the telethon every year except one since 

1977. Unfortunately he announced this was his last year. His 

dedication to helping the people of the province has been 

outstanding and he will be greatly missed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in thanking Bob 

McGrath and the many talented performers, and the people of 

Saskatchewan for their donations. I’d also like to congratulate 

the Kinsmen Foundation for a very successful Telemiracle 

telethon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to recognize Telemiracle 39 and that it took place in 

Saskatoon over this past weekend. And once again 

Saskatchewan people opened their hearts and their wallets by 

raising the remarkable sum of $4,312,457. And Telemiracle has 

now raised a total of over $105 million, all of which has gone to 

help people living with illness and disability. It’s an incredible 

testament to the tremendous spirit of Saskatchewan people, the 

incredible generosity and the care we have for our neighbours. 

 

This year’s Telemiracle also marks the end of an era. The 

long-time Telemiracle host, Bob McGrath, announced 

yesterday that this year’s telethon will be his last after leading 

38 of the last 39 shows. Bob has done a remarkable job of 

hosting this yearly tradition and he certainly leaves big shoes to 

fill for the next host. 

 

Incoming Telemiracle Chair Todd Bedore announced on 

Saturday night the launch of a new website to collect the stories 

of people whose lives have been affected by funds raised at the 

telethon. The stories will be shared through commercials and 

social media posts throughout the year to promote Telemiracle 

2016. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking Bob McGrath for his 

years of service to Telemiracle and his incredible contributions 

to our province. 

 

And I also ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Telemiracle Chairperson Bonnie Ireland, all of the Kinsmen and 

Kinettes, and all the Saskatchewan people who helped make 

this year’s telethon another great success. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise in the House today to speak about March 8th, 

International Women’s Day. International Women’s Day is 

observed annually to celebrate the economic, political, and 

social achievement of women everywhere. 

 

In Saskatchewan the theme this year is Influential Women: 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6477 

Agents of Change. Mr. Speaker, this theme is most appropriate. 

International Women’s Day is an important opportunity for us 

to celebrate the many accomplishments of women right here in 

our province. 

 

That is why our government is helping to recognize these 

efforts by providing International Women’s Day grants to 

support events in the communities across the province this 

month. I, along with a number of my colleagues, attended 

events throughout this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also had the pleasure of attending the 40th 

annual anniversary breakfast for Regina Sexual Assault Centre 

this morning. This centre is a progressive organization 

dedicated to working towards a non-violent society by 

empowering individuals who experience violence and abuse. 

The centre offers free counselling to abuse victims and their 

families. They provide a 24-hour sexual assault line. They 

continue to work to improve public awareness of issues 

surrounding sexual and physical violence. 

 

International Women’s Day is a great time to empower women 

in our communities who have been victims of abuse. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask everyone here to join me in paying tribute to the 

many women across Saskatchewan and to congratulate the 

Regina Sexual Assault Centre on providing support to victims 

and families for over 40 years. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, leading American feminist 

Gloria Steinem said, “The story of women’s struggle for 

equality belongs to no single feminist, not to any one 

organization, but to the collective efforts of all who care about 

human rights.” 

 

On Sunday, March 8th, we marked International Women’s Day 

across the world to celebrate the economic, political, and social 

achievements of women who have gone before us, those in our 

midst now, and those who will advance our future. We 

celebrate past achievements for women’s advancement while 

reminding ourselves to be vigilant and to work to ensure 

women’s equality and dignity everywhere. In countries around 

the world, people are marching and holding events to honour 

women’s achievements. 

 

[13:45] 

 

In Saskatoon I had the privilege of participating, with the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview, in a panel discussion entitled 

Influential Women as Agents of Change: Past, Present, and 

Future, hosted by International Women of Saskatoon, the 

Saskatoon Intercultural Association, and Family Service 

Saskatoon. The panellists raised the many conflicts, challenges, 

and responsibilities of women today. 

 

On March 4th I also attended the screening of The Motherload 

at the Saskatoon Public Library. This film documentary 

encourages women to embrace leadership roles despite 

conflicting family, community, and workplace responsibilities. 

The Canadian Federation of University Women and the 

Saskatoon Council of Women presented the film. Local Global 

News TV anchor, Lisa Dutton, moderated the interesting, 

inspiring, and sometimes humorous discussion that followed. 

 

I also had an opportunity to participate in a wonderful event at 

the UFCW [United Food & Commercial Workers] 1400 

Women’s Conference on Friday where many women told brief 

stories about their own journeys as voices of change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking all 

those individuals and organizations in Saskatchewan who 

continue to work to foster all women’s equality and dignity here 

and abroad. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Talented Saskatchewan Curlers 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been an 

unbelievably successful last few weeks for Saskatchewan 

curling. Not only did the city of Moose Jaw host the very 

successful 2014 Scotties Tournament of Hearts, but 

Saskatchewan’s Team Laycock won bronze and Moose Jaw’s 

own Pat Simmons led the men’s Canada team to a gold finish 

last night. 

 

Defeating Newfoundland’s Brad Gushue in the 11th end, Steve 

Laycock and third Kirk Muyres and second Colton Flasch and 

lead Dallan Muyres stole 2 in the extra end, leading to a 7-5 

win. 

 

After a mix-up in positions part way through the round robin 

play, Pat Simmons took over for John Morris as skip and led 

second Carter Rycroft and Nolan Thiessen to the Brier 

championship against northern Ontario. With a slow start to the 

game and a lot of blanked ends, the game went into an extra 

11th end. Moose Jaw’s own Pat Simmons was the one who 

clinched that gold medal with a draw to get a piece of the button 

against a northern Ontario rock on the four-foot.  

 

It is clear that Saskatchewan curlers clearly have talent in their 

veins and can still fill up the podium. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

that all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

Team Laycock for their bronze medal finish as well as Pat 

Simmons for his win at the 2015 Brier. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

2014 Business of the Year 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize an excellent northern Saskatchewan 

business, Athabasca business development. SaskBusiness 

magazine recognized Athabasca Basin Development as their 

2014 Business of the Year. 

 

ABD [Athabasca Basin Development] is jointly owned by 

seven Aboriginal communities from the Athabasca Basin 

region. Mr. Speaker, when the company first began operating in 

2002, it was mainly centred in uranium mines with a few 



6478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

contracts. Having an initial value of $1 million in ’02, ABD has 

grown tremendously in 12 years, achieving consolidated 

revenues of $176 million in 2014. ABD now has whole or 

partial ownership in 10 companies with plans for continued 

expansion and diversification. 

 

ABD has stayed true to its founding values of giving back by 

donating to charities which support northerners and paying 

dividends to its shareholders. Some of these charities are St. 

Paul’s Hospital Foundation, Northern Spirit Showcase, 

Christmas in the North, and the Athabasca Youth Care Home. 

SaskBusiness magazine touted the company’s philanthropic 

efforts as the reason ABD was most deserving of this honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Athabasca business development on receiving 2014 Business of 

the Year and in wishing them continued success. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Saskatchewan Citizens Awarded Medal of Bravery 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am honoured 

to stand in the House to recognize the heroic acts of Constable 

Steven Enns of the Estevan Police Service. While on patrol in 

the early morning hours of May 18th, 2012, Constable Enns 

saw what he believed to be a dumpster fire. Mr. Speaker, this 

was not a dumpster fire, but a fire quickly engulfing a 

two-storey home where four people were still sleeping inside. 

Constable Enns risked his own life and entered the home. 

Because of his heroic actions, he saved the lives of the four 

people inside, including a two-year-old boy who was still 

sleeping. 

 

Constable Enns is receiving the Governor General’s Medal of 

Bravery at a ceremony this Friday in Ottawa. Joining him are 

three other people from Saskatchewan, including Sergeant 

Jason Cary Bromstad of Regina for pulling a man from a 

burning vehicle, as well as security officers Tyler Andrew 

Campbell of Weyburn and Christopher Clark from Saskatoon 

for rescuing a woman from a burning hospital room in 

Saskatoon. 

 

We have a lot to be proud of in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but 

it is truly people like Constable Steven Enns who put their lives 

on the line. I would ask all my colleagues to join me in 

congratulating all the recipients of the Governor General’s 

Medal of Bravery and thank them for being there when we need 

them the most. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

State of Provincial Educational Facilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier had very serious concerns raised directly with him 

about the P.J. Gillen School in Esterhazy. Has he looked into 

those concerns and what can he report to the House? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for raising the question. He’s correct: concerns with 

respect to the school in Esterhazy were raised on the floor at the 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

meeting in the bear-pit session. And a response was provided by 

the Ministry of Education at the time, as well as an undertaking 

that our government would be looking into the matter with the 

school board, the school division in the area to see if a solution 

could be found, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The issues at the school are serious. And we’re going to let the 

minister here, as question period moves on, elaborate on his 

discussions with the board and our hopes for a resolution to the 

matter, a prompt resolution to the matter, Mr. Speaker. School 

capital, the building of schools, and the maintenance of schools 

in this province has been a top priority for the government . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well it has, Mr. Speaker. It has. 

There is obviously work that still needs to be done. And we are 

earnestly looking at solutions with respect to the school, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Minister of Education can report more fully to 

the House here in a few moments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, at the SUMA convention, here’s 

what a delegate had to say to the Premier: 

 

If you walk through the school today, it’s missing flooring. 

The kids can’t drink out of the fountains. When it’s raining 

outside, it’s raining inside. This is the elementary school. 

We went from number two on the list to now number 100 

to be fixed. My concern is all the schools from 1 to 99. 

What do they look like? 

 

Mr. Speaker, members on the opposite side, I heard the member 

from Northeast heckling. These are concerns that parents are 

raising about the quality of their schools here in Saskatchewan. 

To get heckled when they come to the legislature is 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: what is his answer to that question? 

What do the 99 worst schools look like, and why did P.J. Gillen 

elementary school drop from number 2 to number 100? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, we 

looked into the matter immediately after the question came 

from the floor, and the Minister of Education reported and the 

Minister of Finance reported to me, who was the previous 

Minister of Education, that there’s no such list. There isn’t a list 

that would even contemplate 100 schools. Now that’s not to say 

that this is a very compelling case, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not to 

say that action has already occurred. 

 

I do think it’s important to remind the members of this House, 

the folks that are here from Esterhazy, parents right across the 

province, that this government did inherit a $1.2 billion 

infrastructure deficit in terms of school capital . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, this is the truth. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite when they were in government, far from maintaining 

schools, closed 176 schools in this province. 

 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6479 

Mr. Speaker, our record is that we have increased school capital 

over the last seven years by 268 per cent. Mr. Speaker, our 

record is that there are 40 new replacement schools and 25 

major renovations occurring, have occurred already in the last 

seven years. There are joint-use schools being built. The 

maintenance of schools has been a priority and has exceeded 

that which occurred in the province when they were in office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that a comparing of the records 

on this side of the House doesn’t help the situation in Esterhazy. 

That’s why the Ministry of Education has been engaged with 

the school board. That’s why I am hopeful we’ll have a prompt 

solution to this very serious issue. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the record is clear. We inherited an 

infrastructure deficit in terms of schools, from the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], of $1.2 billion. We’ve almost now 

recovered from that infrastructure deficit, but there’s more work 

to be, there’s more work to be done. And we’ll get that job 

done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you know what action this 

government took once they were notified of this at SUMA? A 

letter was sent out to parents telling them to bundle up their 

kids, Mr. Speaker, because the windows have to be opened 

because the air quality is so bad in the middle of winter. That’s 

what was communicated from this government, Mr. Speaker, to 

the parents. 

 

Meanwhile the heating system isn’t even working. They’re 

using portable electric heaters, and sometimes the temperature 

in the kids’ classrooms goes as low as 13 degrees. My question 

to the Premier: was he aware of this and what does he have to 

say about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. The health and safety of our students continues to be 

paramount. We are aware of the situation at P.J. Gillen. We are 

in contact with the school community. The ministry officials 

have attended at the school. They’ve met with the 

administration. I’ve personally reached out to members of the 

community, and earlier today I spoke with school division 

officials and board members. Mr. Speaker, this is something we 

want to resolve as quickly as we can. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that we’re seeing a large 

expansion with the potash mine. It’s a $1.7 billion expansion. 

That will bring hundreds of families into the school. It’s of 

course a priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if it was a priority for this 

government, there would be a fix other than telling parents that 

they should put more layers on their children because windows 

have to be propped open in the middle of winter because of the 

poor air quality in the school. They would have heaters, Mr. 

Speaker, that actually worked through the system so that there 

can be the proper learning conditions for children in the school. 

It’s absolutely unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite all of this talk, what we see is more delays 

from this government. We have parents that are traveling many 

hours to come to the legislature to raise their concerns because 

this government is not taking the issue seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier, although he has 

passed the baton to the minister, but the parents who have 

travelled here today want to meet with the Premier. Will he 

meet with these parents? Will he listen to their concerns, and 

will he finally commit to fix their children’s school? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware that these 

people have come to the legislature today. I have arranged to 

meet with them later this afternoon. I’ll be pleased to discuss 

this matter with them. It’s a matter that is important to all of the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

We were left with a large deficit from the members opposite. 

The school division took temporary steps to try and address this 

matter. They’ve now come to the sense that this not 

satisfactory. Mr. Speaker, we are going to work with the school 

division and we are going to find a resolution, unlike the $1.2 

billion deficit that we were left with when we formed 

government, Mr. Speaker. Closing 176 schools, deferring 

maintenance, scaring away 35,000 students is not a way to deal 

with the education system in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these answers that we’re getting 

from the government are absolutely pathetic. They have been in 

power for seven years, Mr. Speaker, with record windfall 

revenues due to the strength of our natural resources and the 

hard work of Saskatchewan people. But this government — and 

we see it again today and we see their treatment of these folks 

from Esterhazy, Mr. Speaker — has failed to deliver on the 

things that matter to Saskatchewan families. And this is 

frustration that I hear from parents all over the province as I 

travel. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the quality of our school buildings 

are not where they should be, especially after the windfall 

revenues that this government has had. We know that there are 

at least $1.5 billion dollars in urgent infrastructure needs in our 

schools, but the Premier, this government refuses, Mr. Speaker, 

to release any information on that. They say that it’s only for 

the eyes of cabinet, only for the eyes of the Premier. They will 

not release information on the urgent infrastructure needs of our 

schools, the 1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, that needs to be fixed. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he stand today in the 

Assembly and explain to parents why this information is some 

big government secret? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say this to the member 

opposite and I’ll say this to the people of Saskatchewan: this is 

a problem; we take it seriously. Mr. Speaker, what we intend to 



6480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

do, and we have made the offer to the division earlier today, we 

are prepared to provide $800,000 towards the cost of this issue. 

Mr. Speaker, the total cost is approximately $1.2 million. The 

division has got several million dollars in reserves. They have 

indicated they are going to take it back to the next board 

meeting. We expect that they will approve it and, Mr. Speaker, 

the work shall be able to commence immediately thereafter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that this side of the House takes 

seriously, as opposed to members opposite that drove out 

35,000 students out of our province, Mr. Speaker. This is 

something we intend to deal with and we take very seriously. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have at least $1.5 billion in 

urgent infrastructure needs in our schools here in the province. 

We have school roofs that are being propped up with temporary 

posts. We have little kids, Mr. Speaker, who are being told to 

bundle up with extra layers because the windows have to be 

propped open in the middle of winter because of the air quality 

in their classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this Premier, this government will not release any 

information. They say it’s a big secret. The minister, Mr. 

Speaker, is not being open and transparent with the people of 

the province about the state of our schools. And Saskatchewan 

parents, Saskatchewan students, deserve to know, they deserve 

to know the quality of the education, Mr. Speaker, that is being 

threatened because of buildings that are falling down, heating 

systems that aren’t working, Mr. Speaker, and roofs that are 

leaking. Saskatchewan people deserve to know what is the list. 

 

Will the Premier at least today, instead of having the chit-chat 

with the Deputy Premier, will the Premier at least stand up 

today and explain to the people of Saskatchewan how many 

other schools in the province have to have their windows 

propped open in winter because of poor air quality? How many 

other schools have that state of learning conditions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like the Leader of the 

Opposition to turn around and speak to the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre who is getting two replacement schools: 

Sacred Heart and Seven Stones. Mr. Speaker, those aren’t on 

the list anymore because we’ve taken them off. 

 

I’d also like him to turn around and talk to the member from 

Regina Lakeview who’s getting a replacement school for 

Connaught. I’d also like him to turn backwards and talk to the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale who’s received already a $16 

million state-of-the-art replacement school for St. Mary’s. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d also ask that he talk to the member for Saskatoon 

Centre who received $6 million in renovations for E.D. Feehan. 

Mr. Speaker, he may also want to talk to the Deputy Leader, the 

member for Regina Rosemont, who has received new licensed 

child care spaces in the same building as his constituency 

office. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, I’d like him 

just to look at himself because he himself is receiving a brand 

new joint-use school in Hampton Village, something that’s 

worth millions and millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. What I’d 

like him to do is say thank you to the people of Saskatchewan 

for providing that to his constituents because they need it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on a day where parents travel 

hundreds of kilometres to the legislature because they have not 

had their concerns addressed by this government, a day when 

parents are concerned about the learning environment for their 

children because of poor air quality, where there are health 

concerns, Mr. Speaker, of lethargic . . . where the students 

become because of the bad air quality, where there are 

headaches, Mr. Speaker, for this government to stand up and 

praise itself is absolutely offensive to the parents who came 

here and offensive to the parents throughout this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who want and deserve the best learning condition for 

their children. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. How many other 

schools in the province have these types of air quality concerns? 

What is the true state of the condition of our schools? Will he 

stand up and release that information to Saskatchewan parents 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition has a difficult time accepting yes for an answer. 

We’ve indicated we’re intending to deal with that situation. 

We’ve announced today how many dollars we’ve offered on 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made a record investment in education in 

our province. In capital, we have $700 million on school 

projects, big and small; 40 new schools including nine joint-use 

schools; 25 major renovations and additions; $96.2 million in 

the 2014-15 budget which provides for four new projects, seven 

ongoing projects like those in Langenburg and Gravelbourg; 29 

new relocatables; and a 23 per cent increase in preventive 

maintenance funding, as opposed to 27 in 2007-2008 where the 

NDP spent a total of $18 million on school capital. Mr. 

Speaker, that year we spent over $20 million on preventive 

maintenance alone. Mr. Speaker, our schools are old, but we’re 

working hard to fix them up. We have more work today, and we 

are continuing to make progress. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Government Procurement Policy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last June, the Premier 

appointed the member for Saskatoon Meewasin as the 

Legislative Secretary supposedly responsible for fixing this 

government’s terribly flawed procurement policy. 

 

We put in a request under the access to information legislation 

for any documents and any internal correspondence related to 

the Legislative Secretary’s work. The government told us that 

he has produced absolutely no documents, and we were 

provided with internal emails amounting to about 100 words 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6481 

written by the Legislative Secretary, all of them very 

insignificant. 

 

To the Premier: when will this government get serious about 

fixing its terribly flawed procurement policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last year we formed Priority Saskatchewan whose sole purpose 

is to look at the procurement policies, not only within executive 

government but within the Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those meetings have been ongoing. There has 

been over 175 meetings with stakeholders, not only with 

industry, Mr. Speaker, but with other parties that are associated 

with procurement, Mr. Speaker. And we’re expecting to get 

some further work done by Priority Saskatchewan so that we 

can report to the people of Saskatchewan what changes might 

be needed with respect to procurement in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As far as the work of the Legislative Secretary, we’re thankful 

that he arranged a number of meetings with a number of people 

within the construction industry, Mr. Speaker. Those were 

valuable contacts that Priority Saskatchewan had through the 

able leadership of Lionel LaBelle, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be 

able to report back to the House in very short order with respect 

to the progress that we’re making on Priority Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the reality of this 

government’s approach is that it’s hurting the bottom line of 

Saskatchewan businesses, or having their interests sold out by 

this government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve hammered hard to get 

this onto the radar of government, and all we see from this 

government is delay after delay after delay when there’s 

common sense solutions that businesses have put on the table. 

 

This government continues to fork out contracts to companies 

from Ontario, Quebec, California, Texas, and beyond, and at a 

time, Mr. Speaker, when many Saskatchewan companies like 

local steel fabricators are in layoff mode because of the, as a 

direct result of this government’s policies. So instead of moping 

around about the price of oil, Mr. Speaker, this Premier should 

be working actively to boost and diversify our economy to 

allow us to be as strong as we can be and help local businesses 

by fixing his flawed procurement policy. 

 

To the Premier: when can we expect this government to get 

serious about putting Saskatchewan businesses first? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the 

member opposite didn’t appreciate about my last answer. We 

are doing extensive consultations through Priority 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I think the opposition would 

agree that appropriate consultation, full consultation with 

industry is an important thing when we’re moving forward with 

changing procurement policies, Mr. Speaker. We will have 

something to report to the legislature in short order, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to procurement, and I think that the 

member opposite should wait for that. 

 

But to say that we shouldn’t be consulting, that we should just 

be moving on and changing policies willy-nilly without having 

those consultations, also, Mr. Speaker, having regard to the 

trade agreements, which are serious to the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, delay, delay, delay from 

this government on something that’s critically important to 

Saskatchewan businesses, that’s important to taxpayers, that’s 

important to our economy, Mr. Speaker. Right now the 

government’s approach is incredibly naive and focuses only on 

the lowest initial price. It fails to take into account a bunch of 

other factors that often lead to higher final prices for taxpayers, 

reduce quality, and a hollowing out of industry right here in 

Saskatchewan. New Democrats want to fix that, Mr. Speaker. 

Taxpayers and Saskatchewan businesses deserve nothing less. 

 

Now we brought forward a private member’s bill, Mr. Speaker, 

that would bring forward a much more sophisticated 

procurement policy, that would give Saskatchewan businesses a 

level playing field and ensure that we get best value for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, and that should be our goals, Mr. 

Speaker. To the Premier: why won’t he just agree to work 

together, to work to pass that legislation and finally put 

Saskatchewan’s interests first, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how 

much consultation the opposition did when they were drafting 

their bill, but I can tell you we’re doing extensive consultation 

on this side of the House because we want to make sure we get 

it right, not only for participants in the industry, Mr. Speaker, 

but for those that are buying those products through the 

procurement, Mr. Speaker. And we’re doing that broadly: we’re 

talking about executive government, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

talking about the Crown corporations. So having extensive 

consultation is very important when you’re talking about 

procurement, Mr. Speaker, because there’s not a simple one fix 

for all solutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that if we can wait, we’ll wait for the report from 

Priority Saskatchewan to come forward. We can look at some 

of the recommendations that are coming forward and decide 

how we’re going to move forward. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

appreciated the issue. That’s why we formed Priority 

Saskatchewan in the first place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Environmental Protection and Essential Travel 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, officials within the Ministry of 

Environment have told me they’re no longer allowed to do vital 



6482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

inspections because the Sask Party government doesn’t consider 

it to be essential travel. How can the Environment minister 

justify that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll go through this 

next year. It’s been alluded to a number of times by members of 

this side as the challenges, the fiscal challenges that we’re faced 

with with the provincial budget as we move forward this next 

year, Mr. Speaker. But I can assure you that the environmental 

protection and the continued support for our Environment 

department will be there, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward this 

fiscal year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what environmental protection 

workers are telling me is that they’re not allowed to do crucial 

inspections anymore, and the reason they’ve been given that is 

that this government doesn’t consider it essential. To the 

minister: who made that decision and how was it 

communicated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many members 

of the legislature know that we have an environmental impact 

assessment for a number of projects across the province of 

Saskatchewan that’s been in place. We’ve updated it a few 

years ago, Mr. Speaker, to make it more streamlined and more 

effective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had, just recently in this past year, the introduction of the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Code, Mr. Speaker, which is a 

results-based system, a risk-based system if you will, Mr. 

Speaker, to streamline our environmental protection, Mr. 

Speaker, and make it a better environmental protection, Mr. 

Speaker, for all of Saskatchewan’s residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real shame when we talk 

about streamlining and it turns out it’s removing inspections 

that protect the lives and health of people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government’s approach to essential travel is getting more 

and more ridiculous. This is the same government that thinks 

it’s perfectly fine to send a representative to an Oscar party in 

Hollywood, and this is also the same government that thinks it’s 

perfectly fine to spend almost 1.3 million to send another 140 

health care administrators to tour an airbag factory in Utah. 

 

To the minister: how does this make any sense? What exactly is 

this government’s policy on essential travel? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there is an air of 

ridiculousness in this House here this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, 

when you talk about this government’s policies with regards to 

financial measures in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has taken unprecedented initiatives in 

debt reduction in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve taken unprecedented initiatives with regards to tax 

reduction for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, with the 

money still being in those people’s pockets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken, as we talked about earlier today on 

education, Mr. Speaker, unprecedented investment in our 

infrastructure, whether it be 13 long-term care facilities across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether it be schools in rural 

Saskatchewan and some of the members in the urban centres as 

well, Mr. Speaker, as the new joint-use facilities that are 

coming on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the member asks about what has been 

important with investment and financial investment with this 

government, Mr. Speaker, I ask her to look no further than this 

government’s record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely no answers 

coming over from that minister. He obviously has no idea why 

this travel freeze has been imposed on his staff. Who’s making 

the decisions in his own ministry? All we’re asking is why was 

that decision made for environmental inspections and audits, 

and how is it communicated to the staff? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There has been 

decisions made with travel outside of the province and outside 

of the country, Mr. Speaker, in the air of financial prudence and 

fiscal probity. Mr. Speaker, in light of this year’s financials, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m not aware of the member and her comments 

regarding travel that may be within the province, Mr. Speaker, 

but we’ll look into it and be happy to get back to her. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — What’s incredibly frustrating for public 

servants and for Saskatchewan people is that this government’s 

approach to essential travel is overflowing with misplaced 

priorities. A trip to Hollywood is essential, but environmental 

inspection is not? Sending 140 health care workers to an airbag 

factory in Utah is essential, but environmental inspection is not? 

 

Again to the minister: exactly what is this government’s policy 

and your ministry’s policy on essential travel, and will you table 

it today? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, this 

government is fiscal prudence and looking at our expenses, Mr. 

Speaker, as a government whether it be in travel within or 

outside the province, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at it to ensure 

that we are managing Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6483 

prudently and on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, as we go into the 

next years. 

 

But in light of that, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, there’s been 

unprecedented investments, investments in debt reduction, Mr. 

Speaker, investments in infrastructure across the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as well as investments in tax 

reduction for Saskatchewan people all across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Expansion of K3 Potash Mine in Esterhazy 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we had a special announcement, a very positive 

announcement, just earlier this day with respect to a major 

expansion in the potash industry, actually in the community of 

Esterhazy, as the Minister of Education has alluded to. I have 

had the chance if only in terms of short notice to send over the 

press release to the Leader of the Opposition, and I hope we can 

hear from him, the Leader of the Opposition, on this issue as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that, I mean today we’ve had a debate 

around education. We’ve had a debate over the last number of 

days around health care. There’s only really one way to sustain 

the kind of quality of life we want in the province, to sustain the 

investments in education and in health care that we want, here 

in Esterhazy for example, in Regina, right across the province, 

and that’s a thriving economy, that’s a growing economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has a program, 

if you will, with respect to its royalty structure for the potash 

industry. The royalty structure that we have, Mr. Speaker, is 

actually the highest in the world. If you remove the incentives 

for growth, which are part of that program and part of today’s 

announcement, if you remove the incentives that have been put 

in place for trying to attract new investment, we would have the 

highest potash taxes on the planet — higher than Russia, higher 

than Israel, higher than Brazil, higher than anywhere else. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the program of the government has been now 

— for some time actually, encouraged by our party in 

opposition, but implemented by the previous New Democratic 

Party government — the policy and the program of the 

government is to have had an incentive in place to balance off 

that relatively high royalty rate so that companies would want 

to invest here. When a potash company looks to expand, they 

could do that in Russia. They could do that in Belarus. They 

could do that in Israel. They could do it around the world. We 

want them to choose Saskatchewan for those jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce today, to confirm to the 

Assembly today by way of ministerial statement that Mosaic, a 

potash company that has operated in our province now for 

decades and operated very well and very successfully, has 

announced a $1.7 billion expansion at K3 in Esterhazy, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting announcement because it 

comes at a time when obviously there’s some challenges around 

the energy sector, and there have even been layoffs in the oil 

service side of things. We saw even it touch the city of Regina 

with respect to Halliburton, with changes coming there. And for 

each of those announcements, we worry about those families 

that are affected. We also worry about what might come with 

respect to some energy sector adjustments down the road. 

 

What we have in our province though is a diversified economy. 

Not only do we have diversified natural resources from which 

to draw economic strength when perhaps one sector’s 

struggling, but our diversity includes other sectors. The 

manufacturing sector, Mr. Speaker. The innovation sector is 

something that’s strong in our province. The trade sector, the 

financial services sector, all of the logistics sector, 

transportation — all of these things are creating opportunity, 

continue to create relative strength in our economy. 

 

Today’s announcement though is crucial. And we want to, 

through this Assembly, acknowledge that these incentives are 

working. We want to acknowledge Mosaic and the 2,300 people 

that work for that company — including, by the way, 135 or so 

that work at their new Canadian headquarters located right here 

in the city of Regina — because of taxation changes that this 

government made, because of a decision we made with respect 

to that Mosaic building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge their head office presence. We 

acknowledge this new investment, this expansion, the new jobs 

that will come in from construction, roughly 600 is the estimate 

or 300 per year, and then potentially operational employment 

increases as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important for this province to have 

competitive royalties. It’s important for us always to balance 

the interest of the owners of the resource, and that’s the people 

of the province, with our desire, our plan on this side to also 

have an attractive business climate and an attractive investment 

environment. 

 

And I know the opposite side does not agree here. The other 

side would like to increase royalties. They campaigned on that. 

They want to jack up royalties in the potash sector, in the 

energy sector. This is not the right time for that. What we need 

is continuing with the program we have, that I’m pleased to 

confirm and affirm today on behalf of the government, and in 

so doing to acknowledge the good people at Mosaic and thank 

them for this $1.7 billion investment in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

follow the Premier’s response here today about something . . . 

I’m pleased to follow the Premier here today on what’s 

certainly a positive announcement for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I think the Premier maybe got a little more into the 

politics than he needed to in his celebration of what’s been an 

important announcement here for the people of Saskatchewan. 

But when we look at the potash sector and those world-class 

companies, that world-class resource, the exceptional workers 



6484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

in this province, we have an incredibly important industry here 

in this province. Certainly that’s evidenced by this 

announcement here today. And a $1.7 billion commitment to 

the expansion of K3, the second phase, is something that’s very 

important to Saskatchewan people. It’s something that we 

welcome and it’s something that we’re pleased to see, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Certainly as we’ve looked at the past decade, Mr. Speaker, the 

past decade, I know that Saskatchewan New Democrats were in 

government at a time where a royalty and regime change 

occurred that was created, Mr. Speaker, to in large part induce 

investment into Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, from that the 

results have been unprecedented. And as we know, this 

government has left that policy in place. 

 

It’s important for us, when we’re looking at this vital industry 

to Saskatchewan people, that we look at it in a balanced way by 

important investments like this one here today, like the 

important jobs that are provided in this sector, Mr. Speaker, and 

yes, by way of the royalties that are paid, Mr. Speaker. These 

are the real returns that are important to Saskatchewan people. 

Getting that balance right is incredibly important to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I would urge, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, 

that it’s important for government to be mindful that it’s time to 

review and make sure they’re fully understanding all of the 

forces, the current economic environment, and make sure that 

they’re setting an environment that’s serving the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people from a perspective of investment, from 

a perspective of jobs, and from a perspective of royalties. But as 

it relates to Mosaic, a very fine company, a world-class potash 

producer with exceptional workers, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure 

to welcome this investment here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the Premier got into a bit of political games in his 

remarks, Mr. Speaker. I think what’s important for 

Saskatchewan people to recognize is that, you know, it’s not 

good enough, Mr. Speaker, to boost and boast during times of 

economic prosperity; that the Premier and a government has a 

direct responsibility to improve the lives of Saskatchewan 

people and make sure they’re getting the job done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know we’ve come through a decade-long run of 

increased royalties on things like oil, Mr. Speaker, with a boom 

of windfall revenues to this government, but what do we see, 

Mr. Speaker? Higher debt by this government, no long-term 

savings fund, public infrastructure in disarray, and really a 

government that has failed to diversify our economy the way 

that they should, Mr. Speaker, which is in part why we’ll 

continue to push this government to improve its 

procurement . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please let the member finish his 

statement. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And, Mr. Speaker, this is in part why 

we’ll continue to urge this government to take full opportunity 

of the strength that’s been presented to Saskatchewan people 

and to do a better job of diversifying that economy. A part of 

that would certainly be fixing the procurement policy, providing 

a fair shot to Saskatchewan companies. 

We know that this potash sector and those companies in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, do a fine job of engaging Saskatchewan 

companies. They do an exceptional job on that front. That’s in 

part why this capital investment is so important, Mr. Speaker. 

But we, you know, certainly do look to government at times of 

economic prosperity runs that we’ve seen and any time, Mr. 

Speaker, focusing on delivering for Saskatchewan people and 

improving their lives. But we certainly welcome this investment 

by Mosaic into this expansion of an important one to 

Saskatchewan people, hopefully for generations forward, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 

Bill No. 169 — The Surface Rights Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to rule 

15(2), I wish to withdraw item no. 1, Bill No. 169, The Surface 

Rights Act from the order paper. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 15(2), item no. 1 is 

withdrawn. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 

QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a message 

from Her Majesty the Queen. Please rise. 

 

Message from Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the 

Commonwealth, March 9th, 2015. 

 

One simple lesson from history is that when people come 

together to talk, to exchange ideas, and to develop common 

goals, wonderful things can happen. So many of the 

world’s greatest technological and industrial achievements 

have begun as partnerships between families, countries, and 

even continents, but as we are often reminded, the opposite 

can also be true. When common goals fall apart, so does 

the exchange of ideas and if people no longer trust or 

understand each other, the talking will soon stop too. 

 

In the Commonwealth we are a group of 54 nations of 

dramatically different sizes and climates. But over the 

years, drawing on our shared history, we have seen and 

acted upon the huge advantages of mutual co-operation and 

understanding for the benefit of our countries and the 

people who live in them. 

 

Not only are there tremendous rewards for this 

co-operation, but through dialogue we protect ourselves 

against the dangers that can so easily arise from a failure to 

talk or to see each other person’s point of view. 

 

Indeed, it seems to me that now, in the second decade of 

the 21st century, what we share through being members of 

the Commonwealth is more important and worthy of 

protection than perhaps at any other time in the 

Commonwealth’s existence. We are guardians of a 

precious flame, and it is our duty not only to keep it 

burning brightly but to keep it replenished for the 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6485 

decades ahead. 

 

With this in mind, I think it apt that on this day we 

celebrate “A Young Commonwealth” and all that it has to 

offer. As a concept that is unique to human history, the 

Commonwealth can only flourish if its ideas and ideals 

continue to be young and fresh and relevant to all 

generations. 

 

The youthfulness and vitality that motivate our collective 

endeavours were seen in abundance last year in Glasgow. 

They will be seen again in a few months time when young 

leaders from islands and continents gather to make new 

friendships and to work on exciting initiatives that can help 

to build a safer world for future generations. And last 

November in India, talented young scientists from 

universities and research institutes conferred with eminent 

professors and pioneers of discovery at the Commonwealth 

Science Conference, where together they shared thoughts 

on insights and inventions that promise a more sustainable 

future. 

 

These are stirring examples of what is meant by “A Young 

Commonwealth.” It is a globally diverse and inclusive 

community that opens up new possibilities for development 

through trust and encouragement. Commonwealth Day 

provides each of us as members of this worldwide family 

with a chance to recommit ourselves to upholding the 

values of the Commonwealth Charter. 

 

It has the power to enrich us all, but just as importantly in 

an uncertain world, it gives us a good reason to keep 

talking. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to move a motion regarding changes to the membership of 

standing committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion regarding the members of standing 

committees. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Committee Membership 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Doreen Eagles be added to the 

membership of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Doreen Eagles be added to the 

membership of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of June Draude be substituted for the name 

of Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of June Draude be substituted for the name 

of Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 607 to 618. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has ordered 

responses to questions 607 to 618. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 163 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Going and 

looking at the Minister of Education coming in and I guess after 



6486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

passing a bill that he went ahead with, and I guess taking the 

school year for students in the province, and as he I guess 

decided to go ahead and introduce legislation that would allow 

the minister to set a date . . . And you know, we heard a lot of 

frustration out there in the province from parents, from teachers, 

administrators, boards of education. Many of them were 

concerned about the way this information and the decision was 

made without consulting and talking with the education 

professionals that are out there, families, students. People felt 

that when a government makes this type of a change, and at the 

end of the day they can argue it was for the tourism industry 

and we heard different stories why, you know, the government 

wanted to push this and have students come back September 

long weekend. And we look at that issue. And I want to come 

back to that. 

 

But I also want to talk about a few areas that when you talk 

about education and we see some of the challenges that we’re 

seeing . . . And we had family members here today, and parents, 

who are raising concerns about education. And it’s not just 

about the quality of education. When we look at tutors, you 

know, we look at the lack and the cuts that have gone on there, 

within resources to classrooms, the overcrowding, there are so 

many issues facing our students today, our teachers, the parents, 

to make sure that our children in Saskatchewan have a class act, 

number one education system. And we should have that. Our 

children, my grandchildren, should all have that, as well as 

every member in this House and every individual in this 

province who have children, grandchildren. We should make 

sure that our children and our grandchildren are getting the 

quality of education that they are entitled to. 

 

And there are individuals, Mr. Speaker, with many challenges. 

We understand that. There’s individuals with disabilities, 

struggles. But we have to make sure that there’s resources for 

those individuals who struggle in that environment, learning 

environment. We have to make sure they are successful. We 

have to make sure we provide the resources that they need. And 

the government could do that. And there’s provisions. 

 

When we talk about making amendments, it gives us a good 

opportunity when we’re debating these bills, why government 

chooses to do what it’s doing without consulting. And I know 

there’s many out there that are feeling like the current 

government does not consult, does not share what it’s doing. 

For some reason it wants to just come out and say, this is the 

way it will be. And people are tired of that type of a 

government, you know, coming from the top down. And it’s 

supposed to be the other way. You’re supposed to listen, talk, 

consult. And we see that many times. 

 

And I don’t want to get into that because time after time we’ve 

heard, whether it’s municipal leaders, whether it’s Aboriginal 

leaders, families, seniors, there’s so many in this province that 

are feeling they’re not being heard, and they want to be heard 

and they want to share. They have good ideas. And the people 

in our province, whether they’re professionals, whether they’re 

families raising their children, they want governments that are 

willing to open and listen to their great ideas and good ideas 

when it comes to education, when it comes to the quality of life, 

when it comes to housing affordability challenges. And I talked 

about that. But they want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 

resources are there. They want to make sure that the quality of 

education are there. They want to make the life that 

Saskatchewan brags about. 

 

We talk about record revenue, and I think that’s so important in 

our province. You know, the province for eight years this 

government has had record revenue. It could have done so 

much for Saskatchewan people, but they’re stuck on their 

priorities, Mr. Speaker, priorities that do not match 

Saskatchewan families who are struggling, many living in 

poverty. And members can heckle all they want about that. 

There are challenges. Many families are struggling to make 

ends meet in this province. They hear about the great times, but 

they’re not feeling it. They are wondering why aren’t they a part 

of that. And that’s amazing. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the struggles that are going on for 

many families, they’re not feeling the prosperity and all the 

great things that this government likes to put out there and 

feel-good stories. It’s not happening to everyone. I mean there 

are success stories out there and some are doing really good, 

and great for them. They are doing really good. And you know, 

Mr. Speaker, that all that Saskatchewan people are asking for is 

a government, a ministry, a minister willing to hear their issues 

and involve them in the decision making to make sure that their 

views are taken forward, that their input is valued, and to act on 

that. 

 

And you can say, well we consulted them by going to a 

meeting. And you know, it’s interesting. I met with some of the 

leadership, First Nations leaders. They talked about that. 

Government officials, bureaucrats come in. They talk about 

something they’re doing. Next thing you know, it’s been that 

they were consulted, and they weren’t. They were given some 

information. Those individuals leave, and they feel like, oh 

well, we consulted them. They didn’t raise any issues. 

 

And that’s not the way you do true consultation, whether it’s 

First Nations leader, municipalities, whether it’s, you know, 

urban, rural leadership, whether it’s parents, students, teachers, 

administrators, board of education, business people. We talk 

about that. That is not the way you do it. You do not consult in 

that way. And this government has a track record, and people 

out there are talking about it and they know that. 

 

You know, and I talked about the education. And this Act, this 

amendment, is going to give the minister an opportunity. Had 

he done the research and done some work and consulted with 

the teachers, administrators, boards of education, they probably 

would have identified that for himself, that, you know what? 

This may not work in some years. You want to, you know, have 

the school year start after the September long weekend. It may 

not have worked, Mr. Speaker, that the date would have gone 

on too long. 

 

Now we see the amendment and you know, the minister and the 

government’s coming forward to amend that, saying, well if it’s 

September 5th or a date that goes on longer than that, he has the 

power to . . . This gives an amendment to allow him to fix it, 

you know. 

 

But instead of fixing things, they should make sure that 

legislation that they’re introducing, Mr. Speaker, is done with 

consultation to the professionals that are out there — to the 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6487 

parents, to the students, to administrators, to boards of 

education, municipalities, to the business. They could have 

reached out and got some good ideas. They could have reached 

out and got some answers that they needed when they were, you 

know, adopting and bringing this legislation into place. They 

could have done that, Mr. Speaker, but they chose not to. 

Again, it shows. 

 

And we have heard that — whether you talk to teachers, 

whether you go to their conventions, whether you see them in 

the classroom, whether you see them on the street — teachers 

are not happy. You know, they’re not being valued. They don’t 

feel like they’re getting respect from government the way things 

have been handled, the way the government has actually 

attacked them. And then we’ve seen what this government has 

done and the way they’ve handled and the way they’ve treated 

teachers. 

 

So having said that, you know, Mr. Speaker, we just see a 

pattern here and, you know, there’s such opportunities for 

government to do some good legislation and, you know, yes, 

bring in some things that help the province. And we don’t have 

anything against tourism. You want to make sure it’s thriving, 

it’s good. But consult with those that are being impacted. You 

don’t come heavy-handed down and tell them, this is the way 

it’s going to be, and then later come back and you’ve got to fix 

it because you’ve got to amend it because you didn’t consult the 

individuals that if you would have, probably would have given 

you some good advice saying, here’s some of the challenges 

that we see with this legislation. 

 

But again, this government’s not into consulting and it’s, you 

know . . . And every now and then they’ll say they do that, you 

know, and they try to make it sound like that and then you find 

out, well going to a meeting and just telling them what you’re 

doing isn’t consulting. That’s not what it is. Consulting is a 

different way and, you know, and a way of doing it. You want 

to make sure that the input’s given. You want to make sure that 

they have that opportunity. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague, the critic 

for education from Regina Rosemont, will be in committee and 

I know we’ll be asking a lot of questions and get the 

opportunity. And I know he goes out and he has a lot of talks, 

as that was his profession before as a teacher. He has a way of 

communicating with the teachers. He has many friendships in 

that and I know he will get the answers. He will meet with the 

boards of education. He’ll find out what kind of questions they 

would have and what would have worked. And maybe 

government can take those suggestions next time when they’re 

developing legislation and to consult with the boards of 

education, the teachers, parents . . . And I know he will do that. 

He will ask some tough questions. And I have colleagues that 

will have more to say on this bill before it goes to committee. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments and 

I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this Bill 163. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 

Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 

164, The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 

And I guess the Act being introduced and looking at some of 

the comments of the minister . . . And previous members have a 

comment about this bill and the changes that are being proposed 

here. And I know that the critic will have a lot more comments 

in committee, and my colleagues will have questions at it. 

 

But I guess some of it takes it from Health, Saskatchewan 

Health, and it goes from the ministry and it’ll be going to 

eHealth where they’ll monitor information. And I guess it’s 

providing certain protections from privacy, your health privacy. 

Nobody wants to see our records out there in public where 

we’ve seen in the last I think four or five years, where we’ve 

seen issues with, you know, health records out in the public and 

in, you know, bins, and having to go through and finding, the 

Privacy Commissioner finding that stuff. And you know, trying 

to say that . . . 

 

So maybe these changes are what’s needed. And some of the 

comments you talk about here, I think the Act will actually give 

more powers to authority to make sure that should charges 

come forward by somebody taking health records and not 

disposing them in the proper way, following regulations and 

provisions that are provided to protect all of our health 

information for those individuals who have those files out there, 

this gives it easier. And I think some penalties to prosecute, 

should there be a reason why after an investigation, you know, 

that there’s a reason to charge someone and, you know, fine 

them or do whatever needs to be taken, the provisions are there. 

 

We know that that’s part of this Act, and bringing it into effect 

will give an opportunity. And I think it’s an eye-opener for 

individuals out there whether, you know, that are handling 

health records, that they have to make sure. And I know the 

Privacy Commissioner has voiced concerns and that office, an 

independent office, has made it very clear, more had to be done. 

And I think in light of that we see something, some pressure 

being put on, and government is acting on it. It’s the right thing 

to do and the government should do that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So we see that area where they’re giving the provision to also 

transfer, like I said, the health records to eHealth within that’s 

what eHealth does. It can take care of that, but it also gives I 

guess the clear message out there and clarification that you 

better make sure that those health records are protected. And we 

have to protect individuals’ private information when it comes 

to health records. But not only that. There’s other areas where 

we have to ensure, and I know the Privacy Commissioner 

oversees that, when people out there in the province have 



6488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

complaints, whether it’s with your health records or anything 

else that’s going on, this will take care of it. 

 

Another area where it looks at if someone is going to go 

snooping into someone’s health record, and you could have 

somebody working who’s dealing with those files, and some of 

those files are confidential information — they’re private — 

and if someone’s going to go snooping around in there and 

looking, and you could have that situation where somebody 

wants to just have a peek at somebody’s health record, and they 

can go ahead and do that, this actually gives an opportunity for 

the powers to be to hold those individuals to account so that 

they’re not digging into health records that, you know, for 

whatever reason, just wanted to check somebody’s health 

records. It won’t be allowed and if they’re found doing it, 

there’s provisions to handle that and deal with that in a very I 

guess quick and harsh way for penalties to come. 

 

So some of these changes, I know, whether it’s the health 

professions, I’m not sure who all the government consulted on 

this. But I know my colleague will be doing all the work that is 

required as critic for Health, to make sure that the records are 

protected. And we want to make sure that people’s health 

records are protected, and there’s provisions when it needs to be 

acted on and if it’s reported, that there is some action taken and 

it’s not, well we investigated and there’s not much we can do. 

Now this Act and with this provisions will give the authority to 

individuals within the Act to proceed charges and do whatever 

action needs to be taken to correct something if something has 

been, someone’s privacy has been violated and that sort of 

thing. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know again in committee there 

will be more work from my colleagues. We’ll have more to say 

in committee. There’s more work to do. I know we’ll be 

consulting and checking with people, and if this is the right 

thing to do and people feel good, that’s great. But I guess that 

gives us an opportunity to ask some tough questions and make 

sure people’s privacy are protected. 

 

So at this point I have no further questions and I am prepared to 

adjourn on 164. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

to enter the debate today, as always, on the Bill No. 165, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister had his second reading speech on this 

particular bill back in December, December 1st actually. And 

he points out that the Premier back in August announced that 

the government would be bringing “. . . forward legislation to 

allow Saskatchewan residents to have some alcohol shipped 

directly to them.” And the minister talks about this being a 

move to provide opportunities for consumers to seek out and 

purchase unique products, but it also demonstrates this 

province’s continuing commitment to remove barriers to 

interprovincial trade within Canada. 

 

The minister goes on to talk about how Bill No. 165 is about 

“. . . setting the framework to allow Saskatchewan consumers 

access to a much broader selection of Canadian wines and craft 

spirits than previously available.” But this is just the first step, 

Mr. Speaker. Implementation, once these changes are in place, 

it’ll also require amendments to The Alcohol Control 

Regulations, 2013. 

 

What this particular bill though does, Mr. Speaker, is it . . . And 

the minister outlines this in his second reading speech. It 

allows: 

 

. . . Saskatchewan to enter into agreements with Canada 

and other provinces regarding direct-to-consumer alcohol 

shipments; [it] allows individuals to import alcohol for 

personal consumption from other provinces where such 

agreements exist; and [it also] create regulation-making 

authority regarding issues such as type and amount of 

alcohol, type of seller, and province from which the 

product originated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. In the news release the minister 

points out that . . . or pardon me. A news release released on 

November 27th, 2014, when the bill had its first reading, 

specifically mentions British Columbia and how . . . Well the 

minister goes on to talk about “. . . eliminating inter-provincial 

trade barriers that restrict the flow of product between our two 

provinces and hinder economic growth,” but specifically 

mentions, the news release specifically mentions BC [British 

Columbia]. 

 

Once the legislation is passed, expected in spring 2015, 

consumers in Saskatchewan will be able to make direct 

purchases of wine and craft spirits from B.C. 

manufacturers and have it delivered directly to their door. 

 

So there have been conversations between our government or 

this government, Mr. Speaker, and the Government of BC. So 

this is to open up the door, not just to BC though obviously. But 

I think it’s important to mention although this will allow direct 

purchase here of BC spirits and wines, the goal I think 

obviously should be to have some of our stellar distillers and 

wineries here in Saskatchewan doing the same thing in BC and 

across the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The goal should be to have LB Distillers in Saskatoon shipping 

directly to consumers in BC. Some of their products — I’ve 

never had some of LB Distillers’ products — but I’ve heard 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6489 

very good things about them, the Western Dry gin, the vodka. 

Their marketing campaign, Mr. Speaker, is very clever as well. 

I don’t know if, I know they refer to themselves as LB 

Distillers, and I don’t know if that term is parliamentary, so I’m 

going to refrain from saying the common name of the company 

in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. But they do also, they make 

some lovely liqueurs, I’m told as well: Seabuckthorn Liqueur, 

Carmine Jewel Cherry Liqueur, Crème de Cassis, and Haskap, 

which is blue honeysuckle, Mr. Speaker. So some lovely 

Saskatchewan spirits, and then infused with some really 

wonderful Saskatchewan fruits, Mr. Speaker, and essences. 

 

I know Last Mountain Distillery, I’ve heard really good things 

about the Dill Pickle Vodka. Again, I’ve not had an opportunity 

to give it a try myself, but my constituency assistant is a big fan 

of it. So we have some very good . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And the member from Elphinstone here next to me is 

testifying that the Dill Pickle Vodka is quite fine as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So the end goal, I think, again should be to get the 

Saskatchewan products that we here in Saskatchewan have the 

opportunity to enjoy into other provinces as well. 

 

I’ve had an opportunity when I’ve been in Vancouver in the 

past year, Mr. Speaker, to tour a couple local distilleries there. 

Actually it’s interesting: aquavit, I’d never heard of aquavit, 

Mr. Speaker, until I became an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and acquainted with my colleague from 

Lakeview — my Norwegian colleague from Lakeview — who 

has often had aquavit for all of us to sample, Mr. Speaker. But 

I’ve had an opportunity, when I’ve been in BC at a couple of 

these distillers, to realize that aquavit must be pretty darn 

popular because a couple of these distillers offered aquavit as 

one of their offerings. I see by the look on your face that that 

isn’t your choice beverage, Mr. Speaker, but apparently it is 

quite a popular beverage. So perhaps there will be people from 

Saskatchewan ordering directly from a couple of these 

distilleries in British Columbia. 

 

I know that when we talk about some of the rules around 

alcohol, Mr. Speaker, so today we’re talking about spirits and 

wine, and this is opening up the opportunity for sale of . . . 

Actually it’s opening up the opportunity for purchase of 

products from other provinces. In particular it sounds like BC, 

that groundwork has been laid, but this hopefully is the first 

step to get our products elsewhere. 

 

But we can talk about some of the great microbreweries that 

have opened up here in Saskatchewan in recent years, Mr. 

Speaker, and continue to pop up — some really wonderful 

products. And this bill doesn’t address that, but I know there are 

many microbreweries who are interested in seeing some of the 

alcohol regulations change, modernize, so they become more 

supportive of that industry as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do know I have colleagues who will also want to speak to 

Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2014. So with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 166 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 

Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join on Bill No. 

166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. Just to give 

some brief comments, and I realize there’s a number of areas 

where there’s been changing, but I would like to talk a little bit 

about before I get into details of the actual bill. 

 

We want to make sure that voters out there, when you’re in a 

federal election, provincial election, municipal election, board 

of education election, whether you live in rural, urban, cities, 

that those individuals . . . And that’s always going to be, you 

know, a concern for those individuals that go to a poll, and for 

whatever reason. And you know, the voter ID [identification] 

thing has been a huge issue for many. And we look at different 

groups of people and those in poverty have challenges. Our 

seniors sometimes have challenges with the ID. We have 

Aboriginal people, First Nations, Métis sometimes have the 

challenges with getting the proper ID when you look at housing. 

 

So we see some of the changes that the government’s bringing 

forward under The Election Act, and governments will say, oh 

well, it’s just, you know, we’re making a name change. We’re 

changing this. We’re changing that. Some of the struggles we 

wonder about, who’s asked for this? And we’ve seen where 

government has introduced legislation in 2012 to make changes 

to The Election Act when it came to voter ID. And the changes 

that are going on, really the changes weren’t warranted and 

wanted by individuals, saying you know, there wasn’t abuse, 

widespread abuse. There was no proof of that. We never heard 

any proof. Where were the complaints, like people filing within 

the Elections Saskatchewan? You know, where were all these 

complaints about voter ID? 

 

I think at the end of the day you look at municipal elections, 

and probably federally we look at the voter turnout, and the low 

turnout that’s going on right now in Canada when you look at 

federal elections, provincial elections. But I think municipal 

elections, you know, from the information I’ve heard and that 

people have shared with me, are even lower to get people out 

for mayor and council and for your reeves, your RMs [rural 

municipality], and all that. 

 

So there’s already a challenge in getting people engaged, and 

we don’t know the reasons why sometimes. But I do know this: 

if you have individuals who are willing to go to the poll and 

they want to cast a ballot and go and take the time to vote in this 

province, we should make sure that that person has a right to 

vote. Now there’s provisions there, and I think there has been 

provisions to sign an affidavit, to have them sign on your behalf 

saying they know you — you’re from the community; you’re 

from the province. You would sign this. This is binding on you, 

and should you sign a false declaration or information saying 



6490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

someone’s who they are, charges could be laid and people could 

be held to account for that. So I don’t think people went out and 

signed these things just whatever . . . it was widespread and you 

had problems. 

 

And sometimes that’s been the frustration. It’s just the way 

government wants to perceive it. And it’s kind of been, I guess 

when you hear people talk about, you know, the far right and 

those individuals, those parties, whether it’s the far right and 

that movement wants to, for whatever reason, wants to hold 

more . . . And maybe for whatever reason, they figure that the 

more people or the less people that come to the polls, the better 

it often . . . We don’t know what it is, but I think it’s not the 

right way that it should be. It isn’t fair to people who come to 

the polls to vote. 

 

You know, and you talk about that. And I’ve heard some say, 

well why make a big deal out of it? Well if we’re going to say 

that . . . And I think about this and, you know, we talk about 

respecting our veterans. And I know my grandfather, you know, 

as a World War II veteran, a very proud man, a Métis, an 

Aboriginal person, he was a very proud man. He fought. He 

fought for rights for people to have that democratic right, to 

have their voice and to speak and be heard, but also, you know, 

to vote. 

 

And I sometimes think we have to realize . . . And for me I 

respect that and I do. I respect, and it is an honour to say and 

I’m proud to say, you know, my grandfather was a veteran and 

he fought. And as a Métis person, he was very proud. He 

encouraged people to get out and vote. He made sure we were 

engaged to vote, his grandchildren, his children. That was 

important to him, you know, whether you heard the stories and 

what he shared about. It’s important that individuals who are 

going to go to the polls have a right to vote and have a voice. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And when you’re voting . . . And I know we’re trying to engage 

our population, you know, within the province and Canada to 

get involved in the election. That’s crucial. Some countries 

there isn’t an opportunity to go out and cast a vote and tell 

government. Sometimes it’s sending a message, and sometimes 

some governments from time to time — I say it this way — 

they kind of go in the penalty box for a while because the 

residents in the province are saying, you know, we’re not happy 

with the way you’ve been governing, so we’re going to put you 

in a penalty box. But I also remind individuals, governments 

change and people’s minds change, and things change that 

make people change when they see things happening. 

 

But we’re encouraging people to get out and vote, and we say 

it’s important. And when those individuals come out, and the 

frustration is when those individuals want to come out and it’s 

shown that for the ID . . . This bill, if you look at the Bill 166, it 

makes some changes, and I know they’ll say, oh no, it doesn’t 

change anything. We’re just making, you know, there might be 

some name changes. There might be . . . There’s different 

things. 

 

And I know as you go through the bill itself, and I know my 

colleagues will go through that, and we’ll talk to people, and 

we’ll have an opportunity in committee to ask a lot of 

questions. But when you’re hearing just the words out there and 

people’s frustration and concern, you know, when you see, at 

election, someone’s turned away . . . And I look at, you know, 

the provision that’s here for municipal elections, and whether 

the North, rural, urban, they’re making some changes. But it’s 

always about, at the end of the day to me, it’s when individuals 

are turned away, and they have that right to vote and cast their 

ballot. 

 

But having said that, I know my colleagues have talked long 

and hard. We have talked about and warned government about 

not stopping people from casting their ballots when they come 

to the polls. Make sure it’s easier. Let’s not make hurdles and 

make it harder for individuals and turn people away saying, I’m 

not going to bother. It’s too frustrating. I’m hoping that doesn’t 

happen. 

 

We have to change. We have to make it easier for individuals in 

our province to cast a ballot. Whether it’s a federal, provincial, 

or municipal election, we have to do that, boards of education. 

We have to ensure that individuals who take the time and are 

good citizens of this province come out. Whether they are 

somebody who is somebody who may be living in poverty or 

it’s a senior or it’s an Aboriginal person or it’s a business 

person, whoever, we make it possible for that person to cast 

their ballot. It doesn’t matter. It’s important that those 

individuals have a right to vote and, you know, you don’t want 

to be making hurdles for them. 

 

So having said that, you know, I know in committee we’ll have 

some questions. There is definitely more concerns that we’re 

hearing. We want to make sure that individuals — and we’ll 

keep pushing for that and we’ll keep advocating — those 

individuals, and I encourage them to, individuals out there with 

concerns about the voter ID, let’s get the vote out. And there’s 

different groups pushing that, making sure, you know, the 

Aboriginal vote, that whether it’s seniors, it doesn’t matter, that 

all citizens get out there and vote. It’s important. And Elections 

Saskatchewan, Elections Canada have a role, and they’ll do 

their part. We need to do our parts and encourage our citizens to 

get out, cast their vote, how important it is. 

 

But at this point, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to 

adjourn debate on Bill 166, The Local Government Election 

Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 

Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6491 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

167, The Local Government Election Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. Really again this Act is making a name 

change. From what I can look at it, it’s consequential. There’s 

not a lot in it and I think, like I said, it makes a name change. 

Looking at some of the documents that have been provided, it is 

a name change. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t really have any 

further comments. I know we’ll follow up in committee, as I 

said before. And at this point I’m prepared to adjourn on 167, 

The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 167, The Local 

Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 

Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to join in on debate of Bill No. 168 this afternoon, The 

Government Relations Administration Act, 2014. 

 

This is very much a machinery of government piece of 

legislation in that it’s reconstituting what is now the Ministry of 

Government Relations and duly consolidating the authority of 

this ministry in legislation as, in this case, The Government 

Relations Administration Act. The need arises for this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are four main points that the minister talks about in the 

second reading speech, all of which are valid points, but in the 

main, this is about consolidating legislation and the mandate of 

this ministry in government relations as concerns the 

government’s engagement or relation with a number of groups. 

 

I’m speaking of course of northern people through what used to 

be the Ministry of Northern Affairs. I’m talking about the rural 

and urban municipalities, which have generally been 

well-represented in terms of the cabinet structure or the general 

sort of legislative landscape of government, and I’m talking 

about the First Nations and Métis people of this province that 

have been rolled into this consolidation legislation. This 

legislation, I think for me, Mr. Speaker, represents formalizing 

the downgrading of the importance of the relationship as is 

particularly the case for northern people and First Nations and 

Métis people and the affairs of this government. 

We’ve seen a significant evolution take place where once was 

the time First Nations and Métis affairs had its own minister, its 

own deputy minister representing these issues around the 

cabinet table, where northern affairs once had its own minister 

and deputy minister, and again the accordant resources attached 

to those positions to make sure that those interests were well 

represented at the cabinet level, at the cabinet committee level, 

and indeed throughout government in the various 

interdepartmental committees that arise from time to time. They 

have been rolled into one piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

Where we once would see a ministry of First Nations and Métis 

Relations, instead now we see an office of the interlocutor for 

First Nations and Métis affairs. Again a significant 

downgrading in terms of mandate and resources by this 

government in terms of making sure that relationship is 

properly attended to I think can only be described as a bad 

choice that is being made by this government. 

 

We look to our neighbours here in Western Canada — British 

Columbia, where there have been significant efforts put into the 

whole question of reconciliation and trying to describe a better 

path forward for First Nations, Métis people, and all British 

Columbians. 

 

We look to the province of Alberta where the Premier himself, 

Premier Prentice . . . And certainly I don’t agree with 

everything that that individual does, but one thing I noted with 

great interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was one of his first acts on 

taking power as the new Premier of the province of Alberta was 

to retain the Ministry of Aboriginal Relations for himself. Such 

is the importance that that individual places on the whole 

question of First Nations and Métis issues in the province of 

Alberta. 

 

And in the province of Manitoba, we’ve seen a Premier there 

that has played a very interested role in the questions arising 

around First Nations and Métis relations, around questions 

arising in northern Manitoba, and indeed has no lesser light than 

the Deputy Premier of the government in Manitoba holding the 

Aboriginal relations portfolio. 

 

Then we come to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where again, as I 

pointed out earlier in my comments, we don’t have a . . . We’ve 

seen this government eliminate the minister and the deputy 

minister for First Nations and Métis Relations. We’ve seen it 

rolled into a much less significant footing into the workings of 

Government Relations. Again, Government Relations does I 

think an admirable job in terms of working in concert with 

urban and rural municipalities in this province. There are some 

things that work well in Northern Affairs. There are some 

things that could work a whole heck of a lot better. 

 

But the way that . . . The glaring piece of this piece of 

legislation for me, Mr. Speaker, is the way that First Nations 

and Métis issues continue to be downgraded in importance for 

this government. Because it’s what you do with your budget 

and what you do with your people: that’s where you find out 

about the priorities of the government. And so that you don’t 

have a minister of First Nations and Métis relations. You don’t 

have the attendant resources being devoted to this incredibly 

important and complex set of files by this government. Again I 

find it to be a bad choice and certainly reflects poorly on the 

province of Saskatchewan and serves the province of 



6492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

Saskatchewan very poorly, especially when you look at the 

importance that the issue is being accorded by our neighbours 

either to the east or to the west. And surely to goodness we 

could look and see something to be gained from those 

examples. 

 

So as regards to the consolidation and just the sort of technical 

aspects of this legislation, it’s fair enough there and fairly 

commonplace in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But what it 

says about the lack of urgency with which this government 

approaches the relationship with First Nations and Métis people 

in this province in particular, I think, speaks volumes and I 

think represents a series of bad choices being made by this 

government, and in a time when First Nations and Métis issues 

and the success of those issues and making sure that they’re 

being properly addressed and that they’re properly on the radar 

of a government, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t be more important. 

 

So again this legislation in some respects fairly commonplace, 

in other respects fairly significantly disappointing as regards to 

the formalizing of the downgrading of the relationships, that 

this government puts on the importance of relationships with 

First Nations and Métis people in this province. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues have participated in this 

debate so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know that others I’m 

sure will add further voice to what we see as the deficiencies 

and the strengths of this legislation. But with that I would move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 

Administration Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

168, The Government Relations Administration Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 170 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 

Safety Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the discussion about Bill No. 170, The Fire 

Safety Act. Mr. Speaker, this is not an amending bill; it’s a 

brand new bill. And as the minister has pointed out, if this bill is 

passed, it “. . . will replace The Fire Prevention Act, 1992 and 

update the powers and responsibilities of local fire services and 

the provincial fire service.” 

 

The minister has pointed out that this particular bill, in 

replacing the current Act: 

 

. . . will update powers, definitions, and other terminology 

to better reflect the current realities and requirements of the 

full scope of modern fire departments, and better support 

fire safety and response across the province. 

 

There have been few amendments to that original Act that was 

passed approximately 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and much has 

changed in the world of firefighting, I understand. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The bill will also: 

 

. . . provide local authorities, their firefighters and fire 

inspectors [the minister says] with more transparent rules 

regarding entry in situations involving fire, along with 

additional measures to prevent the risks of fire and other 

emergencies. 

 

And the third thing this bill does, Mr. Speaker, it: 

 

. . . will provide the province, through the fire 

commissioner, with clear authority and greater ability to 

assist and support communities and local fire departments 

when requested or required by a fire situation or emergency 

event. 

 

So this was the minister’s second reading speech, him summing 

up what exactly the bill will do, but in a little bit further detail, 

Mr. Speaker. Again the minister points out that the current fire 

prevention Act, the one under which we are functioning right 

now, is dated, and he points out that: 

 

. . . local and provincial fire responsibilities have changed 

considerably over time, [but] there has been little in the 

way of amendments . . . [to this particular bill] since it 

came into force over 20 years ago. [So the minister points 

out that] . . . fire departments now respond to [things like] 

industrial accidents, train derailments, flooding, hazardous 

material spills . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a real pleasure to introduce two former members of this 

Legislative Assembly and indeed a former Deputy Speaker and 

a former Speaker of this Assembly. I’m speaking of course of 

Myron Kowalsky and Graham Addley. Myron Kowalsky 

served the people of P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton with 

distinction from 1986 to 2007; Graham, a bit of a shorter stretch 

but we’ll see how that works out in the future, but representing 

the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland from 1999 to 2007. 

Anyway two individuals that made a great contribution to the 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6493 

life of this province and able servants of the people of this 

province. So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

Graham Addley and Myron Kowalsky to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, I’d also like to welcome the former 

Speaker and former Deputy Speaker to their Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

take a moment too just to say welcome to Mr. Kowalsky and 

Mr. Addley, and welcome them to their legislature. I never had 

an opportunity to serve with them, but I’ve heard very positive 

things about them from my current colleagues, and I know that 

their record stands as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, continuing on with Bill No. 170, The Fire 

Safety Act, I was just talking about how this bill will replace . . . 

It’s not an amending bill. It will replace an existing bill, The 

Fire Prevention Act, 1992. The minister had pointed out that 

many things have changed in firefighting over the years. While 

local and provincial fire responsibilities have evolved, there 

have been few amendments to the existing Act. 

 

Some of the things that fire professionals have taken on now, 

we see them responding to “. . . industrial accidents, train 

derailments, flooding, hazardous material spills, and other 

emergencies. They also provide fire code and other bylaw 

enforcement, search and rescue services, fire prevention 

awareness, and general public safety education.” 

 

I do want to add one more thing that I know firefighters in 

Saskatoon actually are doing that isn’t on this list — that I think 

the Minister of Health, I’ve had this discussion with him in 

committee but should be of concern — firefighters are being 

called out, fairly frequently actually depending on where your 

fire hall is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more often than not in certain 

areas, to do lifts actually because many personal care homes are 

not equipped to do two-person lifts. 

 

And the reality is it’s gotten harder and harder to get into 

long-term care so the needs in personal care homes . . . Because 

if you can’t get into long-term care and you don’t have the 

supports that you need to stay in home, your only other option 

is a personal care home. So firefighters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are doing lifts in personal care homes when someone falls, well 

anywhere, off the toilet, Mr. Speaker, in the tub. And so our fire 

professionals, not one has complained to me about this, but they 

have pointed out the fact that they are frequently doing these 

lifts. 

 

In fact about a year and a half ago or almost two years now, the 

Saskatoon Health Region has started, the fire department, the 

Saskatoon Fire and Protective Services actually, asked the 

health region to start documenting those kinds of numbers of 

interactions fire professionals were having in personal care 

homes, Mr. Speaker, because it wasn’t a one-off. The reality is 

it was a frequent thing to get called out to do a two-person lift, 

again because it’s gotten harder and harder to get into long-term 

care, and the needs in long-term care are significant. 

 

We had a fellow last summer, Mr. Speaker, who was almost 94 

years old, who had multiple types of cancer, had taken multiple 

trips to the hospital in an ambulance, Mr. Speaker, in the 

previous six months, and he was still not eligible for long-term 

care. So if you think an almost 94-year-old man, who was that 

profoundly ill can’t get into long-term care, who can, Mr. 

Speaker? This particular individual, he was deemed, assessed 

ineligible because he could dress himself in the morning, but it 

was noted that once he dressed himself, he was done for the 

morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can see why our fire professionals in Saskatoon are having 

to come out and assist with the lifts because personal care 

homes are not equipped to do two-person lifts in many cases, 

Mr. Speaker, so I would have added that to the minister’s list of 

duties that have grown for fire professionals. Having spoken to 

firefighters in other centres as well, I understand it has 

happened there as well, but I’m very familiar with the cases in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This bill updates “. . . the province’s fire safety legislation [as 

the minister says] to be current with everyday fire and 

emergency response services, with advances in technology and 

with best practices such as incident command structures.” 

 

Another key part of the improvements that the minister says this 

Act will make is providing: 

 

. . . municipalities and local fire services with more 

transparent rules regarding entry in situations involving 

fire, along with additional measures to prevent the risk of 

fire and emergencies. [And the minister points out] 

Specifically this new Act will authorize actions to prevent 

and address the imminent risk of fire or an emergency. The 

current Act focuses almost entirely on putting out fires and 

very little on preventing fires. As a result it does not 

provide adequate authority to firefighters to take 

pre-emptive measures that protect persons, property, or the 

environment from potential harm or danger. The new Act 

will explicitly authorize such measures. 

 

I think that that’ll be an opportunity in committee to find out a 

little bit in further detail, Mr. Speaker, how it will be, what 

some of those pre-emptive measures will be, and how that will 

look, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also, this new proposed Act will “. . . provide the ability to 

inspect places open to the public without notice or warrant to 

better deal with situations such as overcrowding and hazardous 

materials.” But the minister also points out in his second 

reading speech that it provides clear direction that a warrant or 

consent is required in going into a private residence, so this is 

the opportunity to balance protection of public safety with the 

rights of property owners. So there’ll be, I’m sure, questions in 

committee by our critic on that issue as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 



6494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

This Act allows municipalities to register fire safety orders on 

land titles. And the minister says: 

 

This is something the municipal sector has requested to 

assist in compelling property owners to comply with these 

orders and to improve transparency for potential property 

buyers that a fire safety order is outstanding. 

 

The minister also references another ask from municipalities 

that allows “. . . municipalities to pass bylaws that exceed the 

minimum requirements of the National Fire Code.” And this 

was again requested by the municipal sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. So it’s important to talk to and 

listen to all stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. And clearly the 

municipalities have huge . . . have much to . . . They are a huge 

stakeholder in this issue, in fire safety obviously, Mr. Speaker. 

But I know we’ve had the opportunity, in every year actually, 

Mr. Speaker, almost every year that I’ve been an MLA, to 

connect with the professional firefighters of Saskatchewan. And 

I know they feel like they . . . They’re wondering how they 

have this government listen to some of their issues or concerns 

that they’re raising that have a very real impact on your safety 

and my safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we have government 

who is clearly listening to some of the stakeholders at the table, 

but not listening to all of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So a few other things that this Act does. The minister points out 

that it doesn’t: 

 

. . . change the autonomy of local authorities regarding 

fires services that they provide, [but] it will introduce 

requirements for municipalities to report locally and 

provincially on the fire services available in their 

community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill does a number of things. And I know 

that our able critic, when this bill moves to committee, will 

have many detailed questions about this bill and the opportunity 

perhaps to talk a little bit about the abysmal fire safety 

protection that’s afforded to families and individuals who live 

on-reserve, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was a report just a year 

or two ago that illustrates that if you live on-reserve, you’re ten 

times more likely to die in a fire, Mr. Speaker, than you or I, 

which is unacceptable. I don’t care what jurisdiction it falls 

under, people . . . As provincial leaders, Mr. Speaker, we need 

to all get our act together to make sure that fire safety and every 

community in Saskatchewan has the appropriate and necessary 

fire services in place to ensure the safety of their community, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 170, The 

Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried 

 

Bill No. 172 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 

Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate this afternoon as it relates to Bill 

No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. And the changes that 

are brought forward seem to be reasonable changes that may 

reflect more of a modernization than anything else, Mr. 

Speaker. That being said, it’s going to be critically important 

for us to be fully engaged in consultation on this front to make 

sure that these changes are practical and that there’s not a host 

of unintended consequences with these changes. 

 

I know that this bill sets up a framework for a college of 

naturopathic doctors of Saskatchewan. And certainly as such, 

there seems to be an important role of ensuring a regulatory 

body for naturopathic doctors, naturopathic medicine, and also 

of course paramount, protecting the public at large. 

 

Certainly in Saskatchewan there’s been an Act in place in 

naturopathic medicine since well back to the 1950s, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly it plays an important role within health 

care in this province and for many individuals who access 

naturopathic doctors, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly in all of our 

interests to make sure that those doctors have a regulatory body 

that works, Mr. Speaker, and, as I say, most importantly is there 

to serve the public at large. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no explanatory notes at this point in time 

accompanying this legislation. The comments of the minister 

are rather brief at this point in time. I do know that it’s going to 

be important for us to follow up directly with that minister in 

committee to understand the consultative process that he has or 

hasn’t engaged in, Mr. Speaker, and also to make sure that 

we’re working directly with Saskatchewan people and those 

stakeholders on this front. 

 

I certainly invite, Mr. Speaker, anyone that has input and has 

perspective on this legislation to contact the official opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly it’s our interest to work with 

Saskatchewan people, to listen to Saskatchewan people, to 

listen to stakeholders, and make sure that legislation will serve 

Saskatchewan people’s best interest and serve us for 

generations forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, with the limited 

information we have on this bill, I will adjourn debate for Bill 

No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 172. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6495 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 174 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 

Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 174, An Act respecting the 

Regulation of Teachers and making consequential amendments 

to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that’s been brought forward by 

the Minister of Education to set up a different format for 

regulation of teachers and the teaching profession in 

Saskatchewan. It’s something that has been developed by the 

ministry. I think the teachers have had a system of basically 

regulation and discipline and other aspects for teachers for 

many, many years, and there are many procedures there.  

 

This legislation steps in and replaces that, and we don’t totally 

know what the effect of this will be. But what it does do is 

follow professional legislation that we have in other areas and 

creates a separate organization to do this. Mr. Speaker, this is 

not unusual in our province, but it is different or it is a change 

for teachers. And so I think what we have to be cognizant of as 

we’re looking at this legislation is that there will be some 

growing pains. There will be some things that will happen with 

this legislation that may not be exactly what the Premier or the 

minister intended. 

 

Other professions have a professional regulatory body. So if 

you’re a doctor, there’s a College of Physicians and Surgeons 

that deals with the licensing issues, the discipline issues, those 

kinds of things. And then there’s the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, which is more of the professional organization that 

deals with the financial issues, deals with some of the 

bargaining with the Ministry of Health, other issues like that. 

Same thing you have in the legal profession with the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan handling the regulatory and 

professional issues, and the Canadian Bar Association dealing 

with a whole number of other issues that relate to the perhaps 

more political sides of what the profession’s about. And we end 

up then having it with nursing, with a whole number of areas. 

The legislation that the member just was talking about, the 

naturopathy Act, also adopts a form of regulatory body to 

regulate that industry. 

 

So we’re not dealing with something that’s an unknown, but we 

are dealing with something that changes some of the 

long-standing practices that we have in our education system. 

And so the question comes is, how much was the older system 

broken? How much did it cost? How much will this system 

cost? And I think that’s a bit of a wild card. We don’t totally 

know how much all of the procedures that are here will cost in 

the total scheme of things. 

 

Now what we do know is that in the health professions, the 

provincial government virtually pays all of the professional fees 

for the various health professions, and that’s on top of what 

kinds of salaries that people get, but especially for the salaried 

workers. 

 

We’re not certain whether that’s what’s going to happen in 

education or not, but it probably will end up being a point of 

bargaining. And maybe there are some arrangements, given that 

the Finance minister is a former teacher, that he understands 

that this legislation being brought forward here has financial 

consequences for the provincial budget. So we’re not totally 

certain how that’s going to work. Right now the cost, I think, of 

regulation has been borne through the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation. And so that’s how the costs are dealt with. 

 

Now the independent board that’s involved will involve not just 

teachers, but also the leadership: the principals, which has now 

had their own sort of organization; the League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents; and then there’s 

the others that are involved in this area as well. And so what 

will happen is that there’ll be some changes in that world as 

well because the matters will all be dealt with by one 

professional body. 

 

And so when you the look at the legislation, you can see that 

it’s pretty heavily organized to set up a new organization, and I 

guess that’s as it should be. But much of the meat or much of 

the substance of what the legislation will do or how it’s going to 

be done will be handled through bylaws and through various 

procedures that are set up by the body as it moves forward. 

 

And so I think that we should be aware that that’s going to take 

some time, and it may not go as simply or as smoothly as has 

been planned because that’s kind of usually what does happen. 

 

The ultimate sort of result of dealing with all of these things 

will be the fact that there’s final review of this, of the bylaws 

and amendments that are going to come to the legislature. And I 

think that’s probably fine, and I guess practically, whether it’s 

written or unwritten, it’s part of all of the professional 

legislation that we do have in the province. 

 

So I think that practically we need to recognize that it’s going to 

be a change. It’s going to cost more money. There’ll be a 

discussion about who is going to pay for that extra cost — I 

assume it’s going to be the public taxpayer — and it will take 

some time for all of the procedures to be put in place. Whether 

it’s a bad or a good situation, I think that we’ll end up having 

that decision made after we’ve operated with this system for a 

few years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it appears to be legislation that we can look 

at. I know some of my colleagues have some more comments to 

make about this one, but at this point I would move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



6496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

Bill No. 175 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 

Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 175, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Registered Teachers Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again this is bilingual legislation because 

there are a number of pieces of legislation that need to be 

amended in both French and English. And there are relatively 

straightforward issues, I guess would be the best way to put it, 

but it is important that the legislation be in both French and 

English. And practically we do this in Saskatchewan because of 

the orders of the court and the arrangements by the government 

to put as many important pieces of legislation as possible into 

both of the official languages of Canada. I think the ultimate 

goal is that all legislation would be bilingual, but we’re not 

there yet. But when we do make amendments to legislation that 

affects bilingual legislation, then we have to pass a separate Act 

to do that. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there are any dramatic 

consequences in this section of the effects of the bilingual 

legislation, but I know some of my colleagues may have some 

comments about it. But at this point I’ll move to adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered 

Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 176 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s my pleasure to enter into a brief 

debate here today of Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act. I guess this was brought forward because the 

Act that was brought forward by government maybe hadn’t 

considered all of the consultations that it could have, or I guess 

it’s the here-to-fix legislation that was brought forward by this 

government. 

Certainly when we’re looking at changes to this Act, our 

paramount focus has to be improving safety on Saskatchewan 

roads and highways, addressing the safety challenges that far 

too many face, Mr. Speaker. Every year we see loss of life on 

our highways that is sad and tragic and far too often 

preventable, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s incredibly important that 

we build legislation that puts the safety of Saskatchewan people 

first, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the lens we’ll look at these 

changes through. 

 

I know there’s a couple of practical changes that have been 

brought forward as I interpret the minister’s comments. I 

believe that there will now be a potential for a suspension of a 

licence for someone driving a commercial vehicle. That 

certainly seems to make sense. That’ll be the driver themself, so 

potentially an employee within the conduct of their carrying out 

their work, Mr. Speaker, and that’s important because certainly 

they shouldn’t be free from disciplinary action, and certainly 

they do have responsibility for their conduct behind the wheel, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this introduces a three-day suspension for someone driving a 

commercial vehicle, and certainly that’s something that seems 

more than practical. I guess some of the analysis that we’ll want 

to engage in as to whether or not this measure is as effective as 

it can be, and if three days is the right number, Mr. Speaker, or 

if it shouldn’t be a more significant penalty. 

 

We’ll also, of course, need to put in context that those that are 

working and behind the wheel, we need to make sure that the 

employer is providing the right environment to allow the 

employee to conduct their work in a safe manner, Mr. Speaker, 

and a legal manner, one that protects lives. 

 

Another change here that I think is an important change, one 

that seemed to be a real gap of the legislation that moved 

forward before, is to allow an appeal mechanism for a company, 

Mr. Speaker, an employer whose vehicle may be seized through 

the course of, I guess, the employee being in breach of the laws, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that seems to me to be to be eminently reasonable, that 

there should be a fair appeal process for, and an expedient 

process for a business or for an employer, Mr. Speaker, because 

certainly if a driver that’s employed, Mr. Speaker, is negligent 

in their duties, if they’re in breach of our laws then they have a 

direct responsibility, and there’s now a disciplinary process laid 

out on that front, Mr. Speaker. And if that breach is separate 

and apart from any of the environmental aspects set by the 

employer, it’s important that the employee be, the one that’s 

driving the vehicle, be accountable. But there are broader, 

certainly, circumstances that may need to be considered about 

making sure that the employers are setting the right 

environments that will allow safe travel and safe roads, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I certainly support an appeal mechanism being put in place 

to ensure that an employer isn’t penalized for the action of an 

employee when breaching some of our laws and putting 

Saskatchewan lives at risk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ll engage in broader consultations on this front and make 

sure that government gets it right this time, Mr. Speaker. I know 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6497 

that this bill is fixing the flaws in this government’s previous 

legislation, and I guess that’s a good thing. It is, you know, 

notable though, Mr. Speaker, that far too often we see this 

government fail to do the consultation they should to build good 

legislation in the first place, Mr. Speaker. But on this front we’ll 

certainly be willing to be constructive and make sure that, as we 

come through this process, we have legislation that better serves 

all Saskatchewan people, that front and centre, Mr. Speaker, 

protects lives here in Saskatchewan on our roads and highways. 

So at this point in time, I adjourn debate of Bill No. 176, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 176. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 177 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 

Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I really 

appreciate the opportunity to rise in the House and enter in the 

debate about The Insurance Act, No. 177. It’s an important 

piece of legislation. It’s a thorough piece of legislation. It’s 

comprehensive, and it’s one that has a huge impact on security 

of mind. 

 

And of course in our Saskatchewan society we really value 

strong, strong insurance. And whether that be flood, fire, 

accident, or life, and the list actually goes on, it’s amazing what 

you can insure these days, but those are the basic ones. And you 

know, I don’t want to give the impression or . . . I think when 

you get into this kind of legislation, it is very technical and it’s 

very thorough. And of course it obviously has to be, because the 

unintentional consequences of getting it not quite right could 

have the dire consequences for people when they’re in an 

unfortunate circumstance where they may find themselves 

whether it be, as I said, in one of those fire, floods, an accident, 

or, God forbid, a loss of life prematurely. And so we want to 

make sure the legislation is good. 

 

I do think it’s quite . . . I want to thank the ministry for the 

technical briefing. I couldn’t partake in it, but I understand it 

was very thorough and it answered a lot of questions that we 

had. You know, when we get this kind of legislation, as I said, it 

is very technical, and we need the people who have put a lot of 

energy and expertise into this, and we appreciate that. It will be 

interesting when we get into committee whether we will have 

that same access to experts within Justice, but perhaps maybe 

even if we could have people outside Justice give us their points 

of view of this. 

 

This is a thing that, you know, when we’ve had the committee 

structure, we’ve only had it a couple of times where we’ve 

actually had experts come in and tell us what they’ve thought of 

legislation. One that comes to mind, the other one, is the 

asbestos registry, where we had the Cancer Society — of whom 

we’re going to go visit in just a short little while — we had 

them come and give us their thoughts on the legislation. We had 

the heart and lung people come and tell us what they thought. 

We had the electrical workers, who have a real experience with 

asbestos, come and tell us what they thought about how good it 

is to be proactive on registries such as the asbestos registry. 

 

So I think it would be something for the committee to be 

considering when we look at this bill in committee, that not 

only will we have the folks from Justice come but perhaps some 

of the folks from industry come and give their two cents too. 

This would be really worthwhile. I mean, it would be . . . We 

could ask questions ourselves but we maybe need to dig into 

that. 

 

And you know just, I think it’s tomorrow that we’re going to be 

visiting with the IBAS folks, the Insurance Brokers’ 

Association. This’ll be, I’m sure, a topic of what they might 

want to talk about with us, who knows. But it is an important 

one, that this is why we have people come and visit with us, to 

have their points of view. They’ve probably been following this 

along the way, I would imagine. I would hope that would be, if 

they happen . . . that would be quite appropriate for them to be 

included in some of the conversations. They’re very, very 

important stakeholders. 

 

But I think it’s important for us to avail ourselves of some of 

that expertise and actually get it on record. Get it on record of 

what the intention is. Because I know we love to give the 

government gears about, the gears about this because we’ll 

probably see the amended, the insurance amendment Act here 

next year. You know, I’ll make that prediction right now, that I 

bet a dollar we’ll see that Act before the House next year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which one? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — The insurance amendment Act. I bet that’ll be 

before the House next year because there will be a couple of 

things. I know in this bill, it’s 293 pages . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . We’re on. Okay, we’ll take it from there. 

 

And it is just what happens. When you have such a 

comprehensive piece of legislation, how can you not . . . The 

odds are that something will be either overlooked or the 

potential for misinterpretation will happen. And the case will be 

made to the ministry officials that, you know, you really need to 

tighten this up, or is this what you really meant to say? And so 

that’ll happen. 

 

But we may save ourselves a bit by having some expert 

witnesses come in and talk a bit about this. And of course at the 

end of the day, at the end of the day, we all want to make sure 

that we have good strong insurance legislation and regulations 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course it only makes sense that as much as possible, but 

considering the unique qualities of Saskatchewan, but as much 

as possible they can be consistent across the country. And so 



6498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2015 

that when you get, when you . . . We know people move a fair 

bit. They may move for school; they may move for university. 

They may move for training, a very good job but then they 

come back, or we might entice them to come to Saskatchewan 

as newcomers. But they’re used to insurance in other provinces. 

And so we want to try to make it as consistent as much as 

possible but not giving up on the good things that we have here 

in Saskatchewan. If we’ve got a superior product or a superior 

regulation or statute here, we want to make sure that that is 

maintained. And we don’t want to lose that and take a step 

backwards actually because of what’s happening in other parts 

of the country. 

 

So we know some are calling this a good piece of legislation 

because it protects a consumer. I think of the real estate agent or 

the real estate market . . . When house prices are high and the 

market is tight, it’s a really good thing for sellers. When 

markets are a little looser, it’s a really good thing for buyers. So 

it’s all good for the consumer whether you’re buying or selling, 

so I like to know more about why it is good for consumers. 

 

One particular area that I’d be interested in hearing more about 

— and this is something that happened a few years ago and I’ll 

be maybe raising this in committee — was what happened was 

a fire in an apartment block in Saskatoon. It was owned by, it is 

owned by Quint and operated by Quint, a community-based 

organization, well-known organization in the city and has done 

an awful lot of good work for low-income folk. And what 

happened in their apartment block, there was a fire. Fortunately 

no one was hurt, but there was a lot of damage to personal 

goods in the apartment block. 

 

And really what happened was that it made us all become very 

aware, very aware of how tenants don’t often get insurance. 

They feel that they don’t have enough. It’s just not part of their 

financial thinking. And this is something that I explored with 

some of the insurance brokers and companies about, what are 

the barriers to have more access to good tenant insurance? 

Because here you have a situation where people, for what 

would be a relatively small amount, it might be you would want 

to have insurance for maybe 10,000 or 20, maybe $50,000, but 

you’re not insuring a brand new home. And so what would be 

the value of that? 

 

And so it’s interesting when you have a circumstance that 

drives a little bit of learning. We understand that it’s just not 

taken up. Some people do, particularly in condos or in 

circumstances where you might have a significant amount of 

personal property, whether that be jewellery or art or clothing, 

but for low-income people, it’s not a priority. 

 

Now interestingly what’ll happen tomorrow night, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And I’m not sure if you’ve ever had the good fortune of 

winning, but I’ve won the IBAS purple blankets where you get 

50 blankets. You get to donate it to whoever, whatever cause. 

And that year I did donate it to — it just so happened that was 

the year of the fire — I donated it to the tenants, and they were 

quite appreciative of the fact that they all got purple blankets. 

Now I wonder how many of those purple blankets are still in 

that building. But IBAS makes a real good point about how 

insurance is like a blanket, and it’s like a security thing, and it’s 

what keeps us, gives us peace of mind. It really made me think 

about insurance, and this will be one set of questions that I hope 

that the minister can help us be more proactive. 

 

Because as we see, our society changes. The minister referred to 

the fact that the first insurance Act was 1913. Now I don’t think 

this is a rewrite of a 1913 piece of legislation. It’s probably 

been rewritten since then. The fact is that insurance goes a long 

way back in our legislature, but I think it’s important for us to 

be looking forward for innovation. Where are the challenges for 

us in terms of insurance, that piece of mind that we want? 

Because things that we hold near and dear or have a lot of 

value, we don’t want to have something disappear suddenly, 

whether it be by accident or something else. We want to make 

sure that we’re all covered and that we have that piece of mind. 

 

And so with this piece of legislation, I think it’s important that 

we take a look at it. We thoroughly understand the pros and 

cons of each of the different sections. I don’t intend to go on 

today with each section, but if there are comments I think that I 

can make that will be helpful, that would be a very good thing. 

 

But as I said, here in Saskatchewan we see circumstances that 

are kind of unique, I know particularly with flood. It was very 

interesting that already we’re starting to see and hear issues 

about flooded basements. Someone in my own neighbourhood 

over the weekend did major renovations on the basement. And 

this may be something that we should all think about when we 

do renovations in our basement — make sure you fix the eaves 

first. The problem was the contractor said, we’ll fix the eaves in 

the spring. You should do it the other way around. First things 

first. Fix the eaves so that you don’t have any damage, and this 

is going to . . . You’ll solve a lot of problems later on. 

 

And so here we have a situation of making sure you get things 

right, but flooding can happen any time, any time. You know, 

we’re all looking forward, especially this weekend that’s 

coming up, and we’re having double-digit, warm weather. 

We’re all thinking this is going to be great, but we’re going to 

have some repercussions of it. And it will be interesting to see 

what happens in our basements and that type of thing. So 

weather can play an amazing part in how we live our lives here 

in Saskatchewan. We can get pretty pumped up about the warm 

weather, and then all of a sudden we have issues around 

flooding, so this can be a real problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope in terms of the legislation here today that 

we have before us that we think about this carefully and make 

sure that there are no unintended consequences, that in fact we 

can be innovative. In fact when people have called this good for 

the consumer, what does that really mean? What does that 

really mean? 

 

And I know that there are pieces in this, and I don’t mean to get 

into some of the technical language, whether it’s unsolicited 

insurance, whether it’s a trafficking or anti-trafficking aspects 

of buying and selling of insurance. These are things that sound 

very foreign to the regular consumer or the regular buyer of 

insurance. But the fact of the matter is that we all need to make 

sure that those who have the responsibility, and in this case the 

Ministry of Justice, are looking carefully at the pros and cons 

and making sure the legislation is completely well written and 

that when we have questions from people who want us to make 

sure that we are doing the right thing, we’re not seeing the bill 

come back year after year with amendments, maybe only just 



March 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6499 

once, but the fact is that we will have done our job here and that 

Bill 177 is a thorough piece of legislation, a very good piece of 

legislation, and one that we can all be proud of. But of course 

the proof will be in the pudding, but we need to make sure that 

we have a full understanding of it. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So there are parts of it that, you know, the language, whether 

it’s reverse mortgage, the trafficking provisions, all of that, you 

know, leaves us sometimes scratching our heads. What does 

that really mean? But we hope. And we do appreciate the 

side-by-side, the meeting with the ministry officials the other 

day to help us understand. Unfortunately we couldn’t all be 

there, but I do appreciate that, and it leads to a lot more 

confidence, a lot more confidence in this piece of legislation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’ll be many more people 

who will want to stand and talk about this piece of legislation. I 

know that, as I said, the fact is that in Saskatchewan we do have 

a lot of natural challenges, whether that be fire, flood, all of that 

kind of thing. Of course the big ones are personal life insurance, 

accidental insurance, all of that. We want to make sure we get it 

right, that in fact consumers are truly protected, that they’re 

getting a fair deal, a deal that’s struck in English, plain English, 

or in French if that’s what it’s required to be. We want to make 

sure that the people, the consumers fully understand and really 

get the benefit of good consumer insurance. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that it would be time and 

quite appropriate for me to move adjournment of Bill No. 177, 

The Insurance Act. I do so move. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 177, The Insurance 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:03.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6475 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6475 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6475 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6475 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6475 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6492 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6475 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6476 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 39th Kinsmen Telemiracle 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6476 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6476 

 International Women’s Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6476 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6477 

 Talented Saskatchewan Curlers 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6477 

 2014 Business of the Year 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6477 

 Saskatchewan Citizens Awarded Medal of Bravery 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6478 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 State of Provincial Educational Facilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6478 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6478 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6479 

 Government Procurement Policy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6480 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6481 

 Environmental Protection and Essential Travel 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6481 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6482 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Expansion of K3 Potash Mine in Esterhazy 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6483 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6483 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 Bill No. 169 — The Surface Rights Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6484 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6484 

MOTIONS 

 Committee Membership 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6485 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6485 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6485 

 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6487 

 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6488 

 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6489 

  



 

 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6491 

 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6491 

 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6492 

 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6494 

 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6495 

 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6496 

 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6496 

 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6497 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




