
























































Hansard: March 30, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 42A  MONDAY, MARCH 30, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6813 
 March 30, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
sitting in the west gallery, I’ve got a group here that have done 
this province proud. Mr. Speaker. from February 13th to March 
1st, 317 members of Team Sask travelled to Prince George, BC 
[British Columbia], to participate in the 2015 Canada Winter 
Games. These members included coaches, managers, mission 
staff, and athletes ranging in ages from 12 to 35. Collectively 
Team Sask participated in 19 different sports and competed 
against talented athletes from across the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to share that Team Sask captured 28 
medals in Prince George: 6 gold, 8 silver, 14 bronze, and 
finished in 5th place overall. This is an increase of five medals 
compared with the 2011 Winter Games. Well done. In addition 
to this impressive finish, Team Sask Mission Team was 
presented with the Claude Hardy Award in recognition of their 
leadership, co-operation, and integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce some 
of the coaches, athletes, and mission staff who are seated in the 
gallery today. These individuals represent Team Sask 
participants from across the province. 
 
From Team Sask mission staff we have chef de mission, who is 
the head of the commission, Lorne Lasuita from the 
Saskatchewan Games Council. Just give us a wave when I say 
your names. Thanks. Executive director Mark Bracken from the 
Saskatchewan Games Council; senior policy analyst Ross Lynd 
from the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have with us members of Team Sask 
women’s curling team: skip Kaitlyn Jones, third Sara England, 
second Shantel Hutton, lead Rayann Zerr, joining us today with 
their coach, Clint Krismer. This team captured a bronze medal 
for their skills on the ice. I wouldn’t be surprised if we see them 
competing in the Scotties in the near future. 
 
Seated in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, we also have Matthew Pullar 
who represented Saskatchewan in the sport of judo. Matthew 
displayed his remarkable strength and skill against 10 other 
athletes and earned a bronze medal in the up-to-66-kilogram 

male category. Also joining us today is Madison Hart. Madison 
is an impressive archer who brought home a silver medal in the 
female individual compound event. 
 
Some family members of our visiting athletes are here as well: 
Shannon England, Sara’s father; Shirley Schmirler, Sara’s 
grandmother; Carla and Kevin Jones, Kaitlyn’s parents; Jeff 
Hutton, Shantel’s father; Nadine, Rose, and Eugene Zerr, 
Rayann’s relatives; Peter and Jeannie Yakymyk, Rayann’s 
relatives; Terri Pullar, Matthew’s mother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate the Year of Sport in Canada, I am 
proud to see so much athletic excellence here in our province. 
Team Sask has made Saskatchewan proud, and I ask, Mr. 
Speaker, that all members please join me in congratulating and 
welcoming these guests to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the official opposition, I too would like to extend a warm 
welcome to all the officials, the athletes, their families to your 
legislature today. We’re very, very proud of your 
accomplishments in Prince George and, like the minister said, 
we look forward to even bigger and better things from you in 
the future. 
 
It takes an incredible amount of support and community effort 
to bring these athletes to the peaks that they have reached 
already, and certainly I think a big congratulation goes out to all 
their communities as well: the teachers, the coaches, and the 
family members who support all these individuals as they 
pursue their dreams. So again on behalf of the official 
opposition, we too would like to welcome all these fine folks to 
their Assembly. And now you get to see the sport of question 
period, so you’re going to enjoy that as well. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the House, it is my pleasure to 
introduce three individuals in the Speaker’s gallery here today 
from Carrier Forest Products. They are Bill Kordyban, president 
of Carrier Forest Products; Mr. Terry Kuzma, woodlands 
manager for Carrier Forest Products; and Mr. Dave Knight, 
woodlands manager for Carrier Forest Products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure of getting to know these 
gentlemen over the last number of years, and they have 
achieved great things in our province. Perhaps the biggest 
achievement is the purchase and successful operation of the Big 
River saw mill, as we all know that it was shut down in 2006 
and it held its grand reopening about a year ago. This is a 
significant investment in our province and we want to thank 
them for the investment and for the people that they employ in 
Saskatchewan. I look forward to meeting with them later today. 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 
the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



6814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2015 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just join with 
the minister here today and welcome these leaders here today 
from Carrier Forest Products and thank them for their work in 
our province and their investment and the employment they 
provide, and join with the minister to provide a warm welcome 
to these individuals here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I would like to extend a welcome and 
introduction to a number of individuals seated in your gallery. 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are a number of the 
constituency assistants for members belonging to the official 
opposition, and I would like to take a moment to thank all of 
them for their commitment to their job, their commitment to 
serving our constituents and people from across the province, 
and also thank them for their patience in dealing with all of the 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to have them here in the Assembly and I just want to 
express our gratitude and appreciation for all the work that they 
do on a daily basis. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to also 
recognize someone seated in the west gallery. Rose Zerr served 
for 30 years as the journal clerk of the Assembly. She didn’t 
actually get to see what happened on the floor here very much, 
but she read and wrote about it. So I’d ask members to 
recognize Rose and welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling for greater support for education here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that education is one of the most 
vital services the government can provide to its citizens, but yet 
this government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and 
vision and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence. And we know that this government has 
failed to develop a real plan to close the Aboriginal education 
gap, support English as additional language students, support 
community schools and their communities and students. I’d like 
to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and a plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this come from Cupar, La 
Ronge, Langenburg, Cut Knife, and Vanscoy. I do so present. 
Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 
relates to that government creating an unsafe condition on 
Dewdney Avenue with their failure to properly plan safe flow 
of heavy-haul truck traffic. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and getting worse. Shelter is a basic 
need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting harder 
and harder for people to find adequate housing, especially 
families, seniors, women, and children who face abusive 
situations. The problem is getting worse because of the rising 
level of poverty and skyrocketing home ownership costs. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am proud to stand in my place to present a petition on 
building a second bridge for Prince Albert: 
 

The petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan as well as the city of 
Prince Albert will receive a commitment from senior 
governments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
all throughout Saskatchewan and, on this particular page of 
many pages, the people that have signed the petition are from 



March 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6815 

primarily from Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that many 
aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 
government. The petitioners talk about that this government has 
removed the regulations requiring a minimum standard of care 
for seniors, which results in neglect; and they point out that 
chronic understaffing in long-term care facilities results in 
unacceptable conditions, including unanswered calls for help, 
infrequent bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst 
residents. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to commit to the 
creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team and to reintroduce actual numbers of 
staff to match the level of care needs and the number of 
residents under their care in long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again this petition is signed by a swath of 
citizens from across Saskatchewan, including Regina, 
Kelvington, Melfort, Pilot Butte, Warman, Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, Makwa, Raymore, Buffalo Narrows, Lloydminster, 
Moose Jaw, Preeceville, and Tisdale. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The petitioners point 
out that the government is planning to close Yarrow Youth 
Farm and create an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall to 
accommodate Yarrow’s residents, that the provincial Advocate 
for Children and Youth declared he could not endorse such a 
rationalization as low-risk teens could be influenced and 
pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth who may be 
involved in serious crimes or gangs, and that Kilburn Hall is a 
more institutional environment that could intimidate and 
alienate teens that have committed minor offences. And so here 
is the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences and provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Children’s Wish Foundation Grants Wish 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Garrett Gamble Jr.’s 
week changed quickly last Thursday with a surprise wish 
granted from the Children’s Wish Foundation. Eleven-year-old 
Garrett suffers from Morquio syndrome, a rare disease that 
affects his bones, heart, and hearing. But even more 
importantly, Garrett is an avid hockey fan, and his dream of 
hanging out with the Toronto Maple Leafs for a day is coming 
true. 
 
After finding out at the school assembly in Duck Lake, Garrett 
will be meeting with Brendan Shanahan to sign his one-day 
contract with the Leafs, officially becoming a member of the 
team. Garrett will meet the entire team at their morning skate at 
the Air Canada Centre. He will also lead the Leafs onto the ice 
and puck drop during a ceremonial faceoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Wish Foundation grants between 
50 and 60 wishes a year in Saskatchewan alone, with every 
wish as unique as the child receiving it. A wish to a sick child 
can make a tremendous difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure Garrett will have lots of stories to share 
with his school when he comes back to Duck Lake. I would ask 
all members to join me in thanking the Children’s Wish 
Foundation for their tireless efforts, as well as to wish Garrett 
Gamble Jr. and his family a great trip. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Tribute to Medicare Pioneer 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize a medicare pioneer who sadly is 
no longer with us. Mildred Hjertaas passed away earlier this 
month at the age of 94. She was married to Dr. Orville Hjertaas 
who is remembered as the Vice-Chair of the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission and is one of the doctors who broke 
ranks during the doctors’ strike. Together Millie and Orville 
founded the Prince Albert Co-operative Health Centre in 1962 
where she worked as a registered nurse. 
 
Millie was never named to the Order of Canada or awarded the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit for her years of work on the front 
lines building medicare in our province, but her contribution 
behind the scenes should never be forgotten. Far too often our 
official recollections of history fail to capture the important role 
played by women like Millie, whose work never took on the 
high-profile status of her male colleagues. Nevertheless she had 
a lasting impact on the lives of her patients and all of us here 
today who enjoy the benefits of our universal health care. 
 
I ask all members to join me in remembering Millie and her 
family today, and in recognizing the contributions of Millie and 
all of the other women who worked tirelessly to bring 



6816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2015 

affordable, accessible, and equitable medicare to everyone in 
our province and across our country. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 

Saskatchewan Health Care Excellence Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise in the House today to recognize the Eden Care 
Communities for winning the Saskatchewan Health Care 
Excellence Award this past weekend. Mr. Speaker, Eden Care 
Communities was recognized for its resident-centred approach 
to seniors’ care and housing. A long-term special care home 
tailors its activities and offerings to the residents’ needs, which 
helps to combat boredom, loneliness, and helplessness. 
 
The Eden’s motto is that it is their home, not an institution, and 
that the residents have a large say in the care that they receive. 
They are focused on making their residents’ lives full of 
respect, dignity, and spontaneity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing the best 
care for all seniors in our province. That is why our budget 
includes a $10 million investment in new, targeted funding to 
support seniors living in their own homes as well as improving 
the quality of long-term care. Our government wants our 
seniors to be happy, well cared for, and respected in their care 
homes, and we commend Eden Care Communities for the great 
work that they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Eden Care Communities on winning the Saskatchewan Health 
Care Excellence Award and for all the work that they do in our 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Annual Banquet of Hindu Society of Saskatchewan  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday evening I had the pleasure to attend the Hindu Society 
of Saskatchewan’s 30th annual vegetarian banquet, along with 
the Leader of the Opposition and members from Saskatoon 
Nutana, Silverwood, Meewasin, Greystone, and Fairview. 
 
As always, the food was fantastic. The guest speakers, National 
Chief Perry Bellegarde of the Assembly of First Nations, and 
Swamini Shivpriyananda of Chinmaya Mission, Toronto, were 
thought provoking and well received. The music and dancing 
was vibrant and upbeat. Mr. Speaker, there were people from all 
over Saskatchewan to show their support for our province’s 
Hindu community. 
 
It was a very enjoyable evening, and all of the money raised 
each year goes towards a very worthy cause, the Shri Lakshmi 
Narayan Temple in Saskatoon. Our city’s only Hindu temple 
was built in 1985. We were delighted to be part of this sold-out 
event that supports the growth and expansion of this important 
cultural and spiritual institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Hindu community in 
Saskatchewan continues to grow by leaps and bounds. India, 

Pakistan, and Bangladesh are among the top countries that 
newcomers to our province arrive from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Hindu Society of Saskatchewan on another successful banquet 
and to join me in thanking the Hindu community for their 
contributions that enrich our province, Saskatchewan. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Saskatchewan Physician Honoured for 50 Years of Service 

 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
working for half a century is a milestone, but having the same 
career in the same community is even more impressive. For 50 
years Dr. Michael Bishop has been practising medicine in the 
Kamsack area. In 1965 Dr. Bishop left his home in England and 
moved to Kamsack to set up a medical practice. He stayed in 
Kamsack and raised three children with his wife, Sally. 
 
Dr. Bishop had plenty of opportunity over the years to move to 
Manitoba or Alberta. However Dr. Bishop said, and I quote, 
“Never. Saskatchewan is a great place to live.” Mr. Speaker, Dr. 
Bishop’s children must also agree. All three still live in 
Saskatchewan and have started families of their own right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
At the age of 78, Dr. Bishop has now scaled back his workload. 
He goes to a nursing home once a week and tends to some of 
his regular patients when needed. The Sunrise Health Region 
announced earlier this month that a new family physician, Dr. 
Balbir Chhina, is now practising in Kamsack alongside Dr. 
Bishop. 
 
On March 31st, tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, the Kamsack Legion 
will host a celebration to commemorate Dr. Bishop’s 50 years 
of service. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in thanking Dr. Bishop for his tremendous 
work and continued service. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Hoopla 2015 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan’s own version of March Madness kicked off last 
Thursday in Saskatoon for Hoopla 2015. 
 
Organized out of Bedford Road, Bethlehem, Mount Royal and 
Tommy Douglas high schools in Saskatoon this year, Hoopla 
features 48 teams and 54 games from across the province. Mr. 
Speaker, with multiple divisions and both girls’ and boys’ 
teams playing, Hoopla is a unique and exciting tournament in 
our province. 
 
For the boys, the winner of the 1A class was the team from 
Coronach. The 2A bracket was the team from St. Brieux. 3A 
winners was the Regina Christian School. 4A boys winners 
were the team from Melfort, and the 5A division winners was 
the team from Regina LeBoldus, defeating Saskatoon St. 
Joseph. 
 



March 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6817 

The girls 1A winners was the team from Middle Lake. The 2A 
girls was the team from Wynyard. The 3A girls winners are 
from Caronport and the 4A girls’ team was Moose Jaw 
Peacock. The 5A girls winner was the Holy Cross Crusaders. 
 
With many exciting games and some fierce competition, this 
event could have not been possible without the Saskatchewan 
High Schools Athletic Association who organized the 
tournament. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to 
join with me in congratulating all of the 48 teams who 
competed this weekend as well as all the parents, volunteers, 
coaches, and trainers who supported all of our young athletes. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Provincial Cheerleading Championships 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, earlier this month 
Yara Centre in Moose Jaw was filled with upbeat music, 
colourful uniforms, and dazzling pompoms as more than 1,400 
cheerleaders from across the province assembled in the Friendly 
City for the 9th Annual Saskatchewan Provincial Cheerleading 
Championships. 
 
This event brought together scholastics and all-star programs 
with cheerleading, pom squads, and jazz teams. Athletes as 
young as four years of age competed, demonstrating the 
strength, fitness, coordination, and enthusiasm that combine to 
make this sport of cheerleading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 3,500 attendees came to see flyers, tumblers, 
bases, and thirds complete stunts including jumps, tosses, flips, 
and lifts. Spectators were also treated to choreographed dancing 
and pompom routines. There were more than 100 performers 
during the two sessions. 
 
The all-star cheerleading team and the Vanier Collegiate cheer 
and pom teams were co-hosts of the competition. Cheerleading 
is a growing sport in Saskatchewan, with new programs starting 
in recent years and the number of talented teams competing on 
the national and international stage. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the athletes 
who competed in the 2015 provincial cheerleading 
championships, and in thanking the volunteers in Moose Jaw 
who made this event such a success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has previously said in 
this House that health care workers should have no fear in 
speaking out about their concerns and about their ideas. The 
Premier said that health care workers should “. . . feel 
completely confident, completely comfortable and protected in 
bringing forward any information they have in the interests of 
patient safety and patient care.” 
 
He said that health care workers do not have to worry about 

bringing their concerns forward to health region officials, to the 
government, or to the opposition. And he said health care 
workers don’t have to worry when they speak up and write 
letters to the editor. Is that still the Premier’s position? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, certainly it’s my position. It’s 
the position of the Minister of Health, both ministers involved 
in health care. It would be the position of the government. I 
would take it from the member’s line of questioning that there 
may be an example where this commitment’s not been 
honoured and, if that’s the case, we want to hear the details, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Peter Bowden has been a care aid 
at several care facilities in Saskatoon for over a decade. He’s 
speaking out today because he wants Saskatchewan people to 
know the truth about the quality of care being provided to 
seniors in care facilities. I met with Peter earlier today, Mr. 
Speaker, and I can tell the Premier that Peter cares passionately 
about seniors with dementia. He wants to see real 
improvements to their quality of care. Will the Premier meet 
with Peter today to hear first-hand the concerns of care aids 
here in Saskatchewan, and will the Premier guarantee that Peter 
won’t face retribution for speaking up? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health will meet with Peter to 
canvass the issues that he has raised to determine exactly what 
his concerns are and also to listen to any solutions and 
constructive suggestions he may have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I know Peter was looking forward 
to the opportunity to sit with the Premier and convey the 
concerns that he and care aids have experienced. And Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important for the Premier to clearly state 
that no retribution would be received for the words that he 
expresses because Peter is incredibly concerned about the care 
of seniors. 
 
He talks about horribly inadequate staffing levels. He says, on 
paper it’s roughly one care aid for 23 residents during the night, 
but in reality it’s usually just one care aid for 28 residents. And 
for part of the night, Peter says, they have just one care aid for 
32 residents with dementia. He talks about residents with 
dementia fighting with one another or punching and kicking 
staff, and he talks about a quality of care for our most 
vulnerable seniors that is far from adequate. 
 
Does the Premier recognize that these types of staffing levels 
are not safe and do not provide the quality of care that seniors 
deserve and require? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 



6818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2015 

government has understood, since we had the honour of first 
being elected in 2007, that the staffing complement was not 
adequate in terms of, not just seniors’ care in Saskatchewan, but 
also in terms of acute care and the number of doctors practising. 
And that’s why adding to the complement of health care 
workers has been at the top of the list of priorities for this 
government, spanning two different ministers of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s why there are 400-plus more doctors practising 
today. And we’ve completely overhauled the process for 
attracting foreign-trained doctors. We’re training more here in 
the province. 
 
It’s why there are 2,600 more, more nurses of every designation 
working in Saskatchewan today than there were when members 
opposite were the government, when they had a chance to do 
more than talk and actually undertake some action, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s also why this government, specific to the 
member’s question, has increased the complement of long-term 
and integrated care front-line personnel by almost 800 since 
2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work to be done in seniors’ 
care. That’s why in a very, very tight budget we were able to 
allocate additional resources for seniors’ care, some $10 million 
more on top of some of the emergent funding we’ve already 
provided, Mr. Speaker. We know that more is needed to be 
done. But I can assure members of this House that as we have 
increased resources for seniors’ care, increased the complement 
of care aids, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], and nurses 
providing that care, so too will we be working for continuous 
improvement in the future. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking with Peter, he’s very 
clear that staffing levels and the conditions that he and other 
care aids are working under have gotten worse over the past 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government admits that they don’t know if the dollars 
are getting to the front lines, and that’s backed up by the 
experience of those health care workers who are coming 
forward. It was the minister himself who said, “I do want to 
have some assurance from the deputy minister that those are 
indeed going to the front lines of long-term care, and so we’re 
working to confirm that.” Mr. Speaker, they know where 
they’ve spent when it comes to lean consultants and those with 
stopwatches, Mr. Speaker. But when you speak to those on the 
front lines, it’s a very different reality. 
 
My question goes back to an earlier question that I had to the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. I asked if Peter can be assured that he 
will face no retribution for speaking out today. Can the Premier 
confirm that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that was his very first 
question, this member’s very first question. I provided that 
answer; that remains the position of the government. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The second question I 
asked, if Peter indeed will be safe, and I appreciate the 
Premier’s assurance on that. 
 
Peter says the staffing levels only allow for a resident to be 
changed once a night. That means many seniors are left for 
hours, hours with their incontinence pads soaking wet, feeling 
extremely uncomfortable and cold. He also says staffing levels 
only allow for a resident to be repositioned once a night. That 
means these seniors are left in painful positions for many hours 
and are susceptible to bedsores. How can the Premier possibly 
defend that kind of neglect of our most vulnerable seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to be able to confirm with the House today that since this 
government took office in 2007, there’s a 781 full-time 
equivalent increase in long-term care in our integrated facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. And I can confirm that that is based on payroll, so 
in fact those individuals are not only being paid, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re being paid for the work that they’re doing in long-term 
care. So I can confirm that for the Leader of the Opposition 
today. 
 
For LPNs, that’s an increase of 40 per cent. For continuing care 
aids, that’s an increase of 11 per cent from the time that they 
were the government. And RNs [registered nurse] in long-term 
care and in integrated facilities, that’s an increase of 6 per cent.  
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to issues of pain and proximity and 
positioning, that’s why this government in this budget, in what 
was a tight budget, we allocated $1 million to begin purposeful 
rounding training in all of our facilities, Mr. Speaker. This will 
ensure that our residents know and can be confident to know 
that a staff member will be looking in on them at a set time, Mr. 
Speaker, throughout the day, to ensure that they’re looking at 
the 4-Ps [personal care, positioning, possessions/proximity, and 
pain] around positioning, proximity to personal items, pain, and 
positioning, Mr. Speaker. That was included in this budget, and 
we look forward for that to roll out to the regions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking and listening to Peter 
and speaking and listening to the care aids from Santa Maria 
who came forward, Mr. Speaker, they say there are more 
managers. They say there are more people sitting behind desks. 
They say there are more lean consultants with stopwatches, Mr. 
Speaker. But we hear very clearly from those on the front lines 
that there aren’t more people, there aren’t the right resources 
when it comes to providing that right care for a dementia 
resident in the middle of the night. 
 
You know, a quote that Peter said that really stands out to me, 
Mr. Speaker, he says, “When you’re helpless trying to help 
them, that’s when it becomes a nightmare.” That’s the reality 
that front-line workers are experiencing. Peter says many 
seniors stay awake and cry all night because of discomfort 
because they’re left in positions and it becomes painful, because 
they’re left in soaking wet incontinence pads. They’re 



March 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6819 

uncomfortable and they get cold because the care aids are 
simply run off their feet. And that is why Peter wants regulated 
quality of care standards and regulated staffing levels.  
 
We know in child care settings, Mr. Speaker, we have regulated 
staffing ratios, but this government refuses to even consider 
regulated staffing levels for facilities that care for the most 
vulnerable seniors. What will it take for the Premier to admit 
that he made a mistake by getting rid of the regulated quality of 
care standards and by embracing the extremely general 
guidelines. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if the Leader of the Opposition is also wondering why 
the Government of Saskatchewan got rid of the ability for the 
Ministry of Health to actually inspect long-term care facilities 
on behalf of the people that they’re serving, Mr. Speaker. What 
he’ll leave out is the fact that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
stopped doing inspections in 1996 and actually repealed that 
legislation about six years later, Mr. Speaker. That’s the part 
that the Leader of the Opposition leaves out. We do have 
minimum standards that our facilities are obligated to follow, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to staffing, I’ve confirmed to the 
Leader of the Opposition that the position of this side of the 
House — unlike the members opposite that closed beds, that let 
staff go across the province — we have hired 781 full-time 
equivalents to work in long-term and integrated facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. This is based on payroll. This is based on actual 
people, positions that we are paying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can give you an example in Prince Albert Parkland Health 
Region, from the time that they left office to today, Mr. 
Speaker. SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] positions are up 
30 per cent; CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], 
which represents CCA [continuing care assistants] continuing 
care aids, as well LPNs, 13 per cent; and health sciences 
workers in Prince Albert Parkland Health Region up 70 per cent 
under this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government needs to look at 
the number of people working on shifts. This government needs 
to look and listen to people like Peter who are coming forward, 
who say they are run off their feet, Mr. Speaker, and the right 
resources are not there. 
 
It was this government that removed the regulated quality of 
care standards, Mr. Speaker, and instead of getting rid of them 
and scrapping them, they should’ve strengthened them. The 
minister’s own staff has said they’d be replaced by extremely 
vague and general guidelines. We know from the people 
coming forward that it’s clearly not working, and what’s so 
frustrating is this government has heard time and time again 
about short-staffing. 
 
Here’s what the Saskatoon Health Region said when they 
submitted their urgent request to the government: “The highest 
priority for Saskatoon Health Region is to improve staffing and 

provide basic care in a standard way at all 31 long-term care 
homes across the region.” Saskatoon Health Region said they 
needed 450 full-time care aids; they got 19, Mr. Speaker. And 
now this government pretends that it has solved chronic 
short-staffing. 
 
The minister has even said it’s difficult to budget for seniors’ 
care because they don’t have the Ombudsman’s report. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, open your ears and open your eyes is what this 
government needs to do, and they would know that there are 
real concerns there. And that’s why we see this government 
only devoting $1 million for non-capital needs in seniors’ care 
facilities in this budget. 
 
My question is for the Premier. After so much evidence of 
chronic short-staffing, how on earth is that acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, each and every year that 
this government has had the privilege of forming office, we 
have added to seniors’ care in this province, whether it be a 
benefit for those seniors on a low income living in personal care 
homes, Mr. Speaker, because their option, up until when this 
government was elected, was basically to be forced into 
long-term care because they couldn’t afford their personal care 
home, Mr. Speaker. We’ve changed that. We put a subsidy in 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those seniors that are living on their own, 
which they want to live on their own, the seniors’ income plan 
— touched once by the NDP and then never again for 16 years, 
Mr. Speaker — we’ve addressed that a number of times. With 
respect, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon we added 100 beds to 
Samaritan Place, a brand new facility. The members opposite 
opposed those new 100 beds. We added funding for 63 new 
beds at Oliver Lodge. And with respect to that, Mr. Speaker, 
added funding to Oliver Lodge of 134 per cent over the last 
seven years. CCAs, the continuing care aids, are up 104 per 
cent, and LPNs at that facility up 474 per cent under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know there’s more work to be done for seniors in this 
province, but that work’s going to be done by this side of the 
House, not the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Housing of Young Offenders 
 
Ms. Sproule: — On March 17th the Corrections minister told 
the media that her ministry had listened to concerned residents 
of Buena Vista and there would not be a gate in the alley for 
young offenders to leave the Kilburn facility. This is the same 
promise that was made by her official at the March 10th 
community meeting in front of about 100 community members. 
But that turns out not to be true because last week this 
government put a gate in the alley for those young offenders to 
use. So now contrary to what the minister has said and contrary 
to what her officials told the community gathering, there is a 
gate in the alley. 
 



6820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2015 

To the Premier: why did this government pretend that it had 
listened to concerned residents and say there wouldn’t be a gate 
in the alley when that is not true? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are closing an 
underused Yarrow facility and consolidating it with an empty 
wing of Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
responding to the changing realities in our province and our 
justice system. Our youth numbers are down, Mr. Speaker, and 
we should actually be quite happy about that. And we’ve seen 
this decline over the last 20 years. Our youth institutions remain 
at 49 per cent capacity, Mr. Speaker. That is why Yarrow is 
closing and the youth, the five youth that were remaining are 
being moved into Kilburn Hall. 
 
With respect to the gate that the member asks about, the 
commitment stands, as what commitment we made with respect 
to where the youth will enter and exit Kilburn will remain. And 
that promise is steadfast, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the gate was going up last 
weekend, and the minister said there wouldn’t be one. So I’m 
not sure what she’s talking about. 
 
Randall Buhr drove down to Regina today because he’s 
incredibly frustrated by this government’s ham-handed 
approach to shutting down the Yarrow Youth Farm and 
relocating an open custody facility into the Buena Vista 
neighbourhood without proper consultation. But Randall is 
especially frustrated by the inaccurate information this 
government gave to local residents, especially when it said 
there wouldn’t be a gate in the alley and now there’s a gate. 
 
The Corrections minister completely botched the Dale’s House 
situation here in Regina. She didn’t ask the right questions. She 
repeatedly gave wrong information and the government had to 
scrap those plans. We see the exact same situation unfolding in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Will the Premier meet today with Randall to hear first-hand 
what this government’s plan means for Randall’s family and the 
Buena Vista neighbourhood? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the reasons for the gate . . . I 
quite frankly don’t understand the reasons for the gate at this 
point in time. But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the 
commitment that was made when the youth will be exiting and 
going into the facility will remain the front. We said, we 
listened to the members of the community. That was what they 
wanted. They didn’t want the youth being, moving into the 
alley and through Buena Vista area through the alleys. That 
commitment remains steadfast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reasons why we are moving from Yarrow into the Kilburn 

facility, Mr. Speaker, is quite frankly we’ve seen a reduction in 
the numbers of young offenders in our youth system. And I 
don’t understand the members opposite, when we’re operating 
at 49 per cent capacity within our youth facilities, why we 
wouldn’t consolidate it. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan expect us to look at the situation, 
analyze it, and make sure that Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 
are spent wisely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, once again there’s a huge 
disconnect between what this minister says and what her 
officials are doing. Randall’s 13-year-old daughter wrote a 
letter to the government. She says how disappointed she is in 
the Sask Party government for giving inaccurate information. 
And she says, “If this issue’s not resolved, I will no longer feel 
safe playing in my own back yard, going for walks with my 
sister, staying home alone, or babysitting.” She also says, “It’s 
extremely unfair that you did not consult with anyone on this.” 
 
Will the Premier intervene and put a stop to the plan to shut 
down Yarrow and relocate it to the Buena Vista 
neighbourhood? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, of course I will meet with the 
young person and her mother if they are here today, or any time 
I will meet with them. Of course I’ll meet with them. 
 
And with respect to the open custody area of Kilburn facility, 
Mr. Speaker, the young offenders were sentenced to open 
custody, Mr. Speaker. They go to school within the 
communities. That’s exactly what our justice system has been 
mandated to do. The judge makes sure that the young person is 
housed into a proper facility and is participating in areas of our 
community, Mr. Speaker. This will not change, Mr. Speaker. 
Yarrow will be closed as of tomorrow, and the five youths that 
were remaining at Yarrow will be moved into Kilburn. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen the comfortable spaces 
the youth have at Yarrow. I’ve seen the cells that they’re now 
going to be sleeping in. I would challenge this minister to spend 
a night in one of those cells and tell me if she thinks that’s 
where they should be. 
 
Nothing in this government’s plan to shut down Yarrow Youth 
Farm and relocate an open custody corrections facility into the 
Buena Vista neighbourhood makes any sense. The Children’s 
Advocate opposes it. Defence for Children International 
opposes it also, saying that it represents a backwards step. The 
Saskatoon Tribal Council opposes it because they know the 
value of the Yarrow Youth Farm. And Buena Vista residents 
oppose it because they were not consulted and they’ve been 
repeatedly given false information. 
 
Now that the Premier knows how ill informed his Corrections 



March 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6821 

ministry is on this file, how reckless this government’s plan is, 
why won’t he intervene and at least put this plan on hold until 
major concerns are addressed? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite refer to, 
that this is a good idea to consolidate our facilities. The 
programming in these facilities is absolutely imperative, and the 
programming that was at Yarrow will be set up in Kilburn Hall, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP closed three youth facilities while they were in power, 
Mr. Speaker, 11 years ago, a total of 42 beds. Now these were 
open custody youth, and the members opposite when they were 
in government then moved these open custody young offenders 
into a closed custody facility called Paul Dojack here in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t understand what they’re referring to. It’s okay when 
they did it, but when this side of the House decides to do it for 
good reason, Mr. Speaker, 49 per cent occupancy within our 
young offender facilities, all of a sudden it isn’t a good idea, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a good idea for the people of 
Saskatchewan and for the young offenders in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Hyperbaric Chamber and Plans for Moose Jaw Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Since early 2013, the Health minister has 
been saying over and over again that a hyperbaric chamber will 
not be included in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. On March 
11th, just a couple weeks ago, a Ministry of Health official said 
definitively that “It will not be a part of the Moose Jaw 
Hospital.” But on Thursday the Premier said, “Its presence in 
the new Moose Jaw Hospital is potentially an option . . .” And 
then the Health minister went out into the rotunda and told 
reporters, “We will look at what it would cost to add some 
additional space to the Moose Jaw Hospital.”  
 
Was the Health minister accurate when he said this government 
is actually looking at adding additional space to the Moose Jaw 
Hospital for the hyperbaric chamber? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the question from the member opposite. 
Unfortunately she cut off the rest of what I had to say out in the 
rotunda, which happens a lot around here. Mr. Speaker, I said it 
was highly unlikely that that was going to be the case, to add it 
to the new hospital. But what I said was in the analysis that 
we’re doing in terms of building new space in an existing 
facility, looking at adding space to that facility, as well as what 
it would cost to provide the services 100 per cent out of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do an analysis of all of 
what those costs would be — the upfront capital costs as well as 
the ongoing costs, Mr. Speaker — before we make any 

decisions. 
 
So that was my answer then, Mr. Speaker. That’s my answer 
today. And I’d appreciate it if the member opposite could 
maybe quote everything that I said out in the rotunda, not just a 
piece of it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — For several years this government has been 
adamant, adamant, Mr. Speaker, that the hyperbaric chamber 
will not be in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. But now the 
Premier says it’s an option, and the Health minister says the 
government is actually looking at adding additional space to the 
hospital. He said that last week, Mr. Speaker. That is what both 
of them said on Thursday. So to the minister: when did this 
government start looking at adding additional space to the new 
Moose Jaw Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would . . . Not to give 
advice to the member opposite, but maybe just dispense with 
the script and ask a different question because I just said, Mr. 
Speaker, I just said that as we’re doing the analysis, we’re 
looking at all the different costs that it would entail, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as adding space to the facility that is currently 
under construction. Mr. Speaker, we’ll use all that information 
to make our analysis and make our decision. 
 
But I can say that we’re very excited about the new Moose Jaw 
Hospital, Mr. Speaker, the fact that it’ll add an additional MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging] to southern Saskatchewan to 
serve the people of this province. And in fact I think it’s 
important to note, Mr. Speaker, when the foundation 
approached the government to be able to raise money for 
additional space as well as a piece of equipment, it was the 
foundation as well as the region agreeing that the highest 
priority was an MRI, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the foundation 
has raised the money for. That’s the space that they wanted to 
raise money for, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s going to 
be a great addition as well as that entire facility will be to the 
people of this province including southern Saskatchewan and 
Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the minister should 
lean over and talk to his boss about what he said on Thursday. 
 
Just a couple of weeks ago, the Ministry of Health was firm that 
the hyperbaric chamber will not be in the new Moose Jaw 
Hospital. But now the Sask Party government is scrambling, 
and they’re actually looking at adding space to the new hospital 
after letting their high-priced lean consultants shrink the design 
way too far. This is the exact same thing that happened in 
Saskatoon. This government let its lean consultants shrink the 
size of the children’s hospital, then it scrambled to add space 
back into the design. 
 
To the minister: when did his analysis start? How much 



6822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2015 

analysis has been done? And how much will this cost to add 
more space? I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll maybe just correct the member opposite once again 
in this House. Mr. Speaker, the reason why we had to add 
additional space to the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, is 
because of the fact that this province was growing at even a 
faster rate than this side of the House thought possible. 
 
Now the members opposite didn’t think that the province could 
grow. In fact for years, decades, Mr. Speaker they were used to 
seeing the population of this province shrink, Mr. Speaker. But 
in fact we thought that the population of the province could 
grow, unlike the members opposite who said it was statistically 
impossible for the province to grow to the rate of the national 
average rate of growth, Mr. Speaker. In fact what happened, 
from when the projection started on the children’s hospital, the 
province grew even faster than the rate of the national average 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That is great news for the province. 
 
I know the members opposite don’t like that, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re a growing province. We’re a province that people want to 
move to because of jobs and opportunity, and most of all, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s not an NDP government and there’s 
not one anywhere in sight. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Procurement Transformation Action Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday I had the opportunity to address our partners at the North 
Saskatchewan Business Association and announce our 
government’s procurement transformation action plan. That 
plan has three goals. First, to ensure Saskatchewan businesses 
are treated fairly and respectfully when bidding on government 
and Crown contracts, to bring greater simplicity and 
consistency to public procurement, and to take steps to drive 
best value for taxpayers. 
 
Thirteen actions will be undertaken as part of this plan. These 
include, first and foremost, making best value the basis of our 
procurements. Making decisions based on strictly on lowest 
cost is not always the most strategic approach. Rather it will 
consider a wide variety of factors such as lifestyle costs, quality 
of materials, asset performance, and more to ensure taxpayers 
are well served. 
 
Further, as our Premier has clearly stated, we are no longer 
going to be Boy Scouts when it comes to trade. We heard about 
the differences between how we and other provinces approach 
our mutual commitments under the AIT [Agreement on Internal 
Trade]. Moving forward we will steer a course to ensure that we 
take advantage of all available room within our trade 
agreements. Therefore the Crowns will follow the AIT only 
when required to do so — full stop. 
 

We are also taking a number of steps that will improve the 
procurement process such as developing vendor performance 
evaluations, simplifying our documents and making them more 
consistent, and better recognizing businesses who are good 
corporate citizens such as those who engage well with 
Aboriginal workers. 
 
These actions were the result of months of consultation. The 
staff at Priority Saskatchewan undertook over 140 meetings 
with businesses, business associations, and the public sector 
leaders to ensure the needs of all partners could be heard and 
that hasty decisions were not proposed without time to fully 
consider their impact. Importantly, these actions complement 
our efforts to seek freer, more open, and more transparent trade. 
 
We will continue to encourage the federal government to pursue 
international trade agreements to the benefit of Saskatchewan 
producers and consumers. At the same time we will continue to 
play a leadership role in the pursuit of renewed AIT in Canada, 
one which is more like the New West Partnership Agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, feedback from Saskatchewan businesses on our 
action plan has been encouraging and validates our decision to 
consult widely with local industry before rushing to propose 
solutions. The Saskatchewan Manufacturing Council and the 
Canadian Manufacturers and Exporters called it a win for 
Saskatchewan manufacturers. In particular they wrote, and I 
quote: 
 

I commend Minister Wyant and the Government of 
Saskatchewan on their initial steps toward the development 
of a strategic procurement policy that promotes fairness 
and competitive reciprocity for Saskatchewan 
manufacturers as well as best value for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Procurement is both a large and delicate file to navigate. 
While there is much more work to be done, the action plan 
set by Minister Wyant through Priority Saskatchewan 
addresses the core recommendations CME has made to 
government and charts a clear path forward for timely 
implementation. 
 

The Saskatchewan Construction Association said that it 
applauds the Government of Saskatchewan for taking a 
significant step forward on improving access to procurement 
opportunities in Saskatchewan, and that the government is 
demonstrating its commitment to global best practices in 
developing a fair, balanced, and vibrant Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
The president of the NSBA [North Saskatoon Business 
Association] calls it a very positive direction, while Shantel 
Lipp of the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association said 
her organization was very pleased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the actions will require changes to 
legislation as it is currently written. Given the industry 
enthusiasm we are seeing, I look forward to receiving the full 
support of the opposition as we move forward into levelling the 
playing field for Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Before concluding, Mr. Speaker, let me extend my thanks to 



March 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6823 

everyone who contributed to this project: Lionel LaBelle and 
the staff at SaskBuilds who led the consultations; the MLA for 
Saskatoon Meewasin and Legislative Secretary for Priority 
Saskatchewan, for allowing us access to his extensive Rolodex 
and expertise in the sector which enabled fruitful consultations; 
and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, all the businesses who 
contributed their feedback into developing this action plan. It 
was the sincerity and level of detail in their advice that allowed 
us to develop a very successful plan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
join with some comments with the minister here today, and 
certainly I’d just start off by thanking all the Saskatchewan 
businesses, their representation, their associations for speaking 
up on this important issue. And to say the least, working with 
many of these companies, many of these associations, this has 
been a frustrating and delayed process for businesses across 
Saskatchewan. And it’s been a pleasure though to work with the 
many economic leaders in Saskatchewan to bring this issue and 
the importance of it both to this Legislative Assembly to get it 
on to the radar of government and to urge meaningful action. 
 
Now what we see at this point is still a tad vague in detail. 
There are some important pieces that are contained within it. 
But again, this is a plan, and a plan is one thing, Mr. Speaker, 
but certainly when you look at these industries, these industries 
that have certainly pressures on their businesses, these 
businesses that make investment here in Saskatchewan, that 
provide employment in Saskatchewan, those workers who work 
in our province, it’s important that time is of the essence for 
government to act. So a plan is one thing. It’s going to be 
critical to see the next steps in an urgent and in a timely way, in 
a responsible way, towards implementation and towards making 
sure that those meaningful changes can be brought forward. 
 
So we’ll engage in this process. We’ll continue to listen with 
Saskatchewan businesses and make sure that we arrive at 
something that’s meaningful for Saskatchewan companies and 
that provides best value for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
I’d like to thank certainly all those businesses that have engaged 
across Saskatchewan that we’ve met with. I’d like to reference 
certainly the manufacturers of this province and their council, 
the fabricators, the construction association of our province, 
North Sask Business Association, the Heavy Construction 
Association, and so many other partners that have been raising 
this issue for some time and working towards meaningful 
solutions. 
 
But as I would say, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a frustratingly 
delayed process by this government to recognize this issue and 
then to act. We have a few actions laid out, Mr. Speaker, some 
of which certainly look to be important. But implementation is 
going to be key in a timely way, Mr. Speaker. So with that 
being said, we’ll follow this process with interest and add in a 
constructive way where possible. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 802 to 806. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to 802 through 806. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees both this 
afternoon and this evening, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6813 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6813 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6813 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6814 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6814 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6814 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6814 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6814 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6814 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6814 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6815 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6815 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Children’s Wish Foundation Grants Wish 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6815 
 Tribute to Medicare Pioneer 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6815 
 Saskatchewan Health Care Excellence Award 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6816 
 Annual Banquet of Hindu Society of Saskatchewan  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6816 
 Saskatchewan Physician Honoured for 50 Years of Service 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6816 
 Hoopla 2015 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6816 
 Provincial Cheerleading Championships 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6817 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Seniors’ Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6817 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6817 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6818 
 Housing of Young Offenders 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6819 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6820 
 Hyperbaric Chamber and Plans for Moose Jaw Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6821 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6821 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Procurement Transformation Action Plan 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6822 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6823 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6823 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


