
























































Hansard: November 16, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 83A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7681 
 November 16, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Before we commence today, I would ask that 
this Assembly observe a minute of silence in honour of those 
who tragically lost their lives to acts of terrorism in Paris and 
Beirut. If you’d please rise. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. You can be seated now, please. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce some special guests seated in 
your gallery. Joining us today is the University of Regina Press 
and members from their board of directors. We have with us — 
just give us a wave when I say your name — Bruce Walsh, who’s 
the director and the publisher. We’ve got members of his staff: 
Donna Grant, Dave McLennan, Karen Clark, Morgan 
Tunzelmann, Nickita Longman, Diane Perrick, Jeanelle Mandes. 
We also have board members Cara Bradley, Carol McDonald, 
Jo-Ann Episkenew, and David Miller. 
 
The Press has had great success since launching two and a half 
years ago, producing a number of bestsellers. And there is 
going to be a member’s statement coming up, Mr. Speaker, with 
more details on that coming up, but I would ask all members to 
please join me in welcoming these guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister opposite to welcome these individuals to 
their Legislative Assembly. I certainly want to thank you for all 
the work you’ve done at the University of Regina Press, and 
congratulations to the board and staff for the good work and 
keep it up. So on behalf of the official opposition, we’d like to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of my colleague, the member from Moosomin, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, in the west gallery students from the Chief 
Kahkewistahaw Community School in Broadview. We have 
three grade 12 students from their law 30 class, Mr. Speaker: 
Kiauna Cote, Shaelynne George, and Maikayla Brass, and along 
with them is their teacher, Maria Sparvier. And I’ll be meeting 
with them shortly after question period to have a little bit of 
visit downstairs. So I’d ask all members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask leave 
for extended introductions please. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure to introduce many, many guests here who are 
in all of the galleries today. They’ve come to witness the 
delivery of a historic petition, and we’ll hear more about it 
during petition time and member statements. But this is a pretty 
important time as we’re getting closer to the end of this term. 
 
And so I have with us several guests in all of the galleries, like I 
said, who’ve come here to watch this delivery of this petition 
that calls for the end of a privatization agenda that we’ve seen 
creep over  the past four years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start by introducing — and when I 
call your name, if I get it right, wave; and if I get wrong, I guess 
frown, I don’t know — Crystal Bubbly; Bob Bymoen, the 
president of SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union]; Dona Christianson; Muna De Ciman; Bea 
Fecke; Pam Keith; Diane Langlois; Angi McGarry; Curt 
Woytiuk; Bob Stadnichuk; Mary Ann Harrison; Greg Olson; 
Gail Sawatsky; Kent Peterson; and of course Larry Hubich, 
president of the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour]. 
Larry’s up there, and Lori Johb, vice-president of the SFL; 
Debbie Lussier; Paige Kezima; Wendy Daku from CLC 
[Canadian Labour Congress]; and Matthew Lenson; Liz Bonter. 
And in the east gallery — and this is my fault — Monica 
Radwanski, and Wendy Love. And over in the west, we have 
SEIU [Service Employees International Union] members, 
several SEIU members: Dennel Pickering, Shelley Johnson, 
Janice Platzke, Esther Dupperon, Neil Calmin, and Tom Howe, 
Melanie Sadler, and Sharon Cameron. I would ask all members 
to welcome these folks to their Legislative Assembly today. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education and 
Labour Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these members of the 
public sector unions to their legislature today. Mr. Speaker, 
while we may not always agree politically on everything, the 
one thing that I think we can always agree on is the work and 
commitment of the public sector workers and the contributions 
that they make and continue to make to making our province 
the great place that it is. So on behalf of the government, I 
would like to welcome them to their legislature and also to 
thank them for their continuing good work in making our 
province wonderful. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



7682 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the members in welcoming the delegation of individuals from 
labour here at the Assembly today. The member from 
Saskatoon Centre did a thorough introduction so I won’t 
identify every individual, but I want to extend a heartfelt 
welcome to everyone here, in particular noting the attendance of 
President Larry Hubich of the SFL and the secretary treasurer, 
Lori Johb, here as well, and the president of SGEU, Bob 
Bymoen. It’s a pleasure to have all of you here, but every 
individual who plays a leadership role within the labour 
movement here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to pay one particular hello to Mary Ann Harrison, 
who is involved in labour and is also our candidate in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. Welcome Mary Ann here to the 
Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, three representatives from the Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association that are seated in your gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are here as part of the government’s 
announcement regarding the creation of the Saskatchewan 
outfitters commission. We have with us today Harvey Kroll, the 
president of that association; Craig Blackmur, the fisheries 
Chair; and Kevin Rowswell, the game bird Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this commission will be an outfitter-driven and 
outfitter-governed organization that will ensure a healthy and 
sustainable outfitting industry for the future in Saskatchewan. 
It’s going to benefit both the outfitters and the consumers in this 
province. And the Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, they’ve 
been the leading voice in implementing this commission and we 
want to thank them for all of their hard work and I’d like to ask 
everyone to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to rise and with the 
minister welcome these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. We know that the work of outfitters is a big, big 
business for Saskatchewan people and certainly draws a lot of 
people to our province every year. I know that the member for 
Regina Rosemont is very excited because this weekend is the 
opening day for whitetail, so he’s excited to get out there and 
I’m sure many of your clients and customers will as well. 
 
So again on behalf of the official opposition we’d like to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. Congratulations on 
the establishment of the commission and all the best in this 
hunting season. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through I’d like to 
introduce a couple of special guests that we have up in your 
gallery, Jeff Craver and Justin Motika, who are here from 

Advantage Cap looking at potential investment in 
Saskatchewan, and working with Joel Peterson with Hill & 
Knowlton to be able to make sure that they focus their 
investment so we can grow our economy. I want to welcome 
them to our Legislative Assembly today. Thanks very much for 
joining us. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, 34 grade 
10 and grade 12 social studies students from Sheldon-Williams 
Collegiate in Regina Lakeview. They are sitting in the east 
gallery, and they’re accompanied by their teachers, Ms. 
Michelle McKillop and Ms. Donarae Deringer, as well as an 
educational assistant, Ms. Totten Cornish. And so I’d ask all 
members to welcome these neighbours of ours to the 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I’d like to join with the members 
of the Legislative Assembly in welcoming Maria Sparvier and 
her students to the class.  Maria is a past committee person with 
the Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of GSAs [gender and sexuality alliance] in 
Saskatchewan schools. And we know this government is not 
doing enough to create safe spaces in our schools for sexually 
diverse students or students who are bullied because of their 
sexual identity or orientation, and that gender- and sexually 
diverse students are four times more likely than their 
heterosexual peers to attempt suicide. And we know this 
government must act so that students have simple, 
easy-to-understand information about gender and sexual 
alliances in their schools and how to form gender and sexual 
alliances and who they should talk to in order to form GSAs in 
their schools. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Prince 
Albert, La Ronge, and Tisdale. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have done their part to build this province, 
and northern Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 



November 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7683 

2009 Croft report, long-term care status of our health region is 
at a code red level. Seniors from our northern communities need 
immediate attention from this government. Many residents 
cannot afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan senior citizens with respect and dignity and 
immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in 
Creighton and Denare Beach area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton and Denare 
Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. The petitioners point out that we have a seniors’ care crisis 
here in Saskatchewan, in large measure because of 
understaffing across the province, Mr. Speaker, which has led 
to neglect of our most vulnerable individuals in this province. 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 
seniors’ care facilities; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 
a great deal of pride to present a petition that has been signed by 
thousands of citizens from across this province. I’m speaking of 
course of the Own it! petition, wherein the petitioners are 
calling on this government to say yes to public services, their 
importance, and their benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker: 
 
[13:45] 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cease the privatization of Saskatchewan’s public services, 
including Crown corporations, and demonstrate 
transparency and accountability by disclosing all 
unredacted contracts and documentation related to 
public-private partnerships or any other form of 
privatization. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed, as I’ve said earlier, by 
thousands of individuals from right across this province, from 
447 communities including Aberdeen, Air Ronge, Alameda, 
Albertville, Alida, Aneroid, Annaheim, Arborfield, Archerwill, 
Arcola, Arran, Asquith, Assiniboia, Atwater, Avonlea, 
Balcarres, Baldwinton, Balgonie, Bapaume, Barthel, 
Battlefords, Bear Creek, Bear Paw, Beatty, Beauval, Beechy, 
Belle Plaine, Bellevue, Bengough, Bethune, Bienfait, Big 
Beaver, Big River, Big Shell, Biggar, Birch Hills, Birsay, 
Bjorkdale, Black Lake, Blaine Lake, Borden, Bredenbury, 
Briercrest, Brightsand, Broadview, Brock, Brooksby, Brownlee, 
Bruno, Buchanan, Buena Vista. 
 
There we go. Buffalo Narrows, Bulyea, Burstall, Bushell Park, 
Cadillac, Calder, Cabri, Candiac, Candle Lake, Cando, Canoe 
Lake, Canoe Narrows, Canora, Canwood, Carievale, Carlyle, 
Carmel, Carnduff, Caron, Caronport, Carrot River, Central 
Butte, Ceylon, Chaplin, Chitek Lake, Choiceland, Christopher 
Lake, Churchbridge, Clavet, Clearwater, Cochin, Codette, 
Coleville, Colgate, Colonsay, Conquest, Consul, Coppersands, 
Coronach, Cowessess, Craik, Crane Valley, Craven, Creelman, 
Crystal Springs, Cudworth, Cumberland House, Cupar, Cut 
Knife, Dubuc, Dalmeny, Davidson. More to come here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debden, Deschambault Lake, Deer Valley, Deeragun, Delmas, 
Denare Beach, Denholm, Dilke, Dillon, Dinsmore, Domremy, 
Dorintosh, Drake, Dubuc, Duck Lake, Dundurn, Dysart, Eagle 
Ridge, Earl Grey, Eastend, Ebenezer, Edam, Edenwold, Elrose, 
Emerald Park, Emma Lake, Englefeld, Esterhazy, Estevan, 
Eston, Ewen, Eyebrow, Fife Lake, Fillmore, Fish Lake, 
Fond-du-Lac, Forget, Fort Qu’Appelle, Francis, Frenchman 
Butte, Frobisher, Gainsborough, Gallivan, Gerald, Girvin, 
Glaslyn, Glen Ewen, Glenavon, Glenbush, Goodeve, Goodsoil, 
Govan, Grand Coulee, Grandora, Gravelbourg, Grayson, Green 
Lake, Grenfell, Griffin, Gronlid, Gull Lake, Hafford, Hagen, 
Hague, Halbrite, Hall Lake, Hanley, Harris, Hazlet, Hepburn, 
Herbert, Herschel, Heward, Hodgeville, Hoey, Holbein, 
Holdfast, Holt, Hubbard, Hudson Bay, Humboldt, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Indian Head, Insinger, Invermay, Ituna, 
Jedburgh, Kamsack, Kawacatoose, Kelliher, Kelvington, 
Kenaston, Kendal, Kenosee, Kerrobert, Killaly, Kincaid, 
Kindersley, Kinistino, Kipling, Kuroki, Kronau, Krydor, Kyle, 
La Loche, La Ronge, Lafleche, Lake Lenore, Lampman, 
Lancer, Landis, Lang, Langenburg, Langham, Lanigan, 
Lashburn, Leader, Leask, Lebret, Lemberg, Leoville, LeRoy, 
Lestock, Limerick, Lintlaw, Lisieux, Lithan, Livelong, 
Lloydminster, Loon Lake, Lucky Lake, Lumsden, Luseland. 
 
Macdowall, Macklin, Macoun, Maidstone, Makwa, Manitou 
Beach, Manor, Maple Creek, Marcelin, Margo, Marquis, 
Martensville, Mayfair, Maymont, Mayview, McCord, McLean, 
McTaggart, Meacham, Meadow Lake, Meath Park, Medstead, 
Melfort, Melville, Meota, Mervin, Meyronne, Midale, Middle 
Lake, Mikado, Milden, Mildred, Milestone, Mistatim, Mont 
Nebo, Montmartre, Montreal Lake, Moose Jaw, Moosomin, 
Mortlach, Mossbank, Muenster, Mullingar, Muskeg Lake, 
Muskoday, Naicam, Neudorf, Nekaneet, Nipawin, Norquay, 
North Battleford, Northside, Ogema, One Arrow, Onion Lake, 
Osage, Osler, Outlook, Oxbow, Paddockwood, Pakwaw Lake, 
Pambrun, Pangman, Paradise Hill, Parkbeg, Parkside, Pasqua, 
Paynton, Pelican Lake, Pelican Narrows, Pelly, Pense, Perdue, 
Pierceland, Pike Lake, Pilot Butte, Pinehouse, Piapot First 



7684 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2015 

Nation, Pleasantdale, Porcupine, Portreeve, Potato Lake, 
Preeceville, Prince Albert, Punnichy, Qu’Appelle, Quill Lake, 
Quinton, Rabbit Lake, Radisson, Radville, Rama, Rapid View, 
Raymore, Raynine, Red Earth, Redvers, Regina, Regina Beach, 
Rhein, Riceton, Richard, Richmound, Rocanville, Rockglen, 
Rockhaven, Rouleau, Rose Valley, Rosetown, Rosthern, 
Rouleau. 
 
Saltcoats, Sandy Bay, Sandy Beach, Saskatoon, Sedley, 
Semans, Shaunavon, Shell Lake, Shellbrook, Shipman, Sibbald 
Lake, Silton, Simmie, Sintaluta, Snowden, Sonningdale, 
Southend, Southey, Speers, Spiritwood, Spring Valley, 
Springside, Spruce Home, Spruce Lake, Spy Hill, St. Brieux, 
St. Denis, St. Louis, St. Victor, St. Walburg, Stanley Mission, 
Star City, Stenen, Stockholm, Stony Rapids, Stoughton, 
Sturgeon County, Sturgeon Lake, Sturgeon Valley, Sturgis, 
Sunset Cove, Swift Current, Sylvania, Theodore, Timber Bay, 
Tisdale, Togo, Torquay, Tribune, Trossachs, Turnor Lake, 
Turtleford, Tuxford, Tyvan, Unity, Vanguard, Vanscoy, 
Veregin, Verwood, Viceroy, Victoire, Viscount, Vonda, 
Wadena, Wakaw, Waldheim, Waldron, Wapella, Warman, 
Waterhen Lake, Watrous, Watson, Wawota, Webb, Weirdale, 
Weldon, Weyburn, White City, White Fox, White Cap, 
Whitewood, Wilkie, Willow Bunch, Willowbrook, Wiseton, 
Wollaston Lake, Wolseley, Wood Mountain, Woodrow, 
Wroxton, Wymark, Wynyard, Yarbo, Yellow Creek, Yellow 
Grass, Yellow Quill, Yorkton, Young, Zehner, and Zenon Park. 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. And the prayer from these 
petitioners who are located in the city of Saskatoon: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Terrorist Attacks in Paris 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday night the 
world watched in horror as France was targeted by terrorism. 
Paris was racked by a series of shootings and explosions which 
killed at least 129 people and injured hundreds more. Mr. 
Speaker, we pray for those lives lost, for their families who are 
in pain without them, and for all of France as that country tries 
to overcome the horrors of that fateful night. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to say thank you to all the police officers, first responders, 
and citizens who worked to protect and save the lives of others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also mourn for those struck in terrorist attacks 
recently in Beirut, Baghdad, and Egypt. 
 

Just a few days ago we marked Remembrance Day and the 
bravery of men and women who have acted to protect our 
country from the evil ideology of those who oppose our way of 
life. This event recently is a sad reminder that those threats still 
exist. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to keep the families and 
friends of those who have lost loved ones in these horrific 
attacks in our thoughts and prayers. France, all of Canada 
stands beside you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — People around the world were horrified and 
saddened by the terror attacks last week, in Lebanon on 
Thursday and in France on Friday. Both attacks were in public 
areas where ordinary families were just going about their lives. 
 
In Beirut, many months of peace were shattered when at least 
44 people were killed and 240 wounded by two suicide 
bombings in a crowded marketplace. And in the worst violence 
in France since World War II, at least 132 people were killed 
and more than 350 injured in seven attacks at a stadium, concert 
hall, and restaurants and cafes in Paris. ISIS [Islamic State of 
Iraq and Syria] has claimed responsibility for both of these 
appalling attacks. 
 
I know all of us strongly condemn this senseless violence. Our 
heart aches for everyone whose lives have been devastated by 
these heinous acts on democracy and freedom. And our hearts 
ache for all those in Syria and Iraq who live with the tyranny of 
ISIS every day, many of whom have been displaced from their 
homes by the violence. The attacks in Paris and Beirut and the 
ongoing tyranny in Iraq and Syria bring to mind the words of 
Somali-British poet, Warsan Shire: 
 

i held an atlas in my lap 
ran my fingers across the whole world 
and whispered 
where does it hurt? 
 
it answered 
everywhere 
everywhere 
everywhere. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Diwali Supper Gala and Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
along with the member of Regina Coronation Park and the 
member for Rosemont had the pleasure of attending the India 
Canada Association of Saskatchewan’s Diwali supper gala in 
Regina. Thank you to Poonam and Nish for their committee and 
their hard work for organizing this very successful event. It was 
a wonderful evening filled with music and dancing and 
delicious food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Diwali is often referred to as the festival of lights. 



November 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7685 

It is an important Hindu festival celebrated each year by Hindus 
and other people of Indian descent in October or November. 
The Diwali festival is a spiritual festival that signifies the 
victory of light over darkness, good over evil, and hope over 
despair. 
 
Yesterday’s gala was an excellent way to kick off Multicultural 
Week and to celebrate the diversity of cultures here in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the government and the 
Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan have proudly partnered 
to proclaim November 14th to 22nd Saskatchewan 
Multicultural Week. 
 
Multicultural Week is an opportunity to recognize our growing 
diversity and to foster harmonious relations among people with 
unique cultures and ethnic backgrounds. This year’s theme is 
Strength in Diversity. Diversity makes us strong, our society 
stronger, bringing our residents closer together, and strengthens 
our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the first province to enact 
multiculturalism legislation in 1974, recognizing the right of 
every community to retain its identity, its language, and its 
traditional arts for the mutual benefit for all citizens. 
Saskatchewan is proud of our multicultural community which 
reflects our motto “from many peoples, strength.” Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Support for Public Services and Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 
joined here today by a number of hard-working men and 
women from Saskatchewan’s labour movement and the Own it! 
campaign. They’ve collected 17,247 signatures from people in 
447 communities right across this province, plus 2,099 
signatures online in support of strong public services and 
Crown corporations, something for which this official 
opposition has been fighting for for many years. 
 
On this side of the House, we know that strong Crown 
corporations generate billions of dollars of revenue for schools, 
hospitals, and roads, and the revenues from Crown dividends 
help to keep taxes low for Saskatchewan families. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Unfortunately this government refuses to value our public 
servants, instead focusing on their ideological privatization 
agenda. We saw them sell off the Information Services 
Corporation at a discount. We’ve seen it with their P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-school scheme that forces 
school boards to pay more for schools that are too small before 
they even open. We’ve seen it with the privatization and 
outsourcing of laundry and food services in the public sector, 
killing off dozens of jobs that paid a living wage. We’ve seen it 
with the $1.8 billion-and-growing Regina bypass project that 
will see a French corporation handle the snowplowing and 
maintenance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
importance of our strong public services and Crown 

corporations and in thanking those who are here today with 
their important message: Saskatchewan belongs to everyone. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Creative Saskatchewan Funding 
and University of Regina Press 

 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The University of 
Regina Press has had a great deal of success since its launching 
just two and a half years ago. Clearing the Plains, The 
Education of Augie Merasty, and Children of the Broken Treaty 
are examples of national successes. The Press has also had a 
number of local and regional accomplishments. Rogues and 
Rebels: Unforgettable Characters from Canada’s West and 
Sons and Mothers: Stories from Mennonite Men are just two 
examples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Press’s contribution extends beyond telling 
Saskatchewan stories and producing bestselling books. They 
also have published five First Nations language readers, 
including Cree language, Woods Cree, Blackfoot, Saulteaux, 
and Lillooet. 
 
Of course, this would not be possible without the support of 
Creative Saskatchewan. To date, Creative Saskatchewan has 
provided over $12 million in funding to creative producers right 
here in our province. This financial assistance provided by the 
province has allowed the Press to establish itself as a publisher 
that receives national and international media attention, which 
resulted in the winning of the Governor General’s award for 
history 
 
From music, film, and theatre to publishing, fine arts, and 
crafts, the province now provides support to all creative 
producers. Mr. Speaker. We will continue to provide this 
support and encourage our creative producers to continue their 
great work right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Peacock Tornadoes Win Provincial Championship 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today I 
congratulate the Moose Jaw Peacock Tornadoes on their third 
straight provincial 3A provincial championship. This past 
Saturday, the Peacock Tornadoes took on the Bishop Mahoney 
Saints in Saskatchewan high school 3A provincial football 
finals held in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tornadoes pulled off a huge win, defeating the 
Saints 23 to 5. In the second quarter, Peacock’s lead was 6 to 3, 
but midway through the third quarter they made an offensive 
style change which led them to victory over the Saints. 
Peacock’s junior defensive end Griffin Barrett said: 
 

The hard work of all the players and the dedication that all 
the coaches have really shows. A lot of this goes back to 
the senior guys that were on the team that won in 2013. 
They really prepared us for what it takes to be successful.  

 



7686 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, the 2013-2015 Peacock Tornadoes are only the 
third team to win consecutive three-peat 3A provincial titles. 
The only other two times were the 1972 to 1974 Peacock team 
and the 2001 to 2003 Central Cyclones, also of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Peacock Tornadoes have had an extremely 
successful season, with Saturday marking their 29th 
consecutive win for the team. I ask all members of the House to 
join me in congratulating the Peacock Tornadoes, the provincial 
champions. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Junior Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
stand in this Assembly today and acknowledge four incredible 
young people. Megan Allard, Jade Shivak, Isabel Gagne, and 
Alicia Totten were recognized on November 3rd as the 
recipients of the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 
Association’s Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year. 
 
These recipients were chosen based on how they have 
positively influenced others, how they assist those in need, their 
participation in extracurricular activities, the attitude they have 
towards life, and the extraordinary things they’ve done in such a 
short time. Mr. Speaker, these young people represent our 
strong Saskatchewan values. 
 
It was my privilege to attend the awards ceremony on 
November 3rd. This event was hosted by Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan and attended by the 
members from Qu’Appelle Valley, Rosthern-Shellbrook, and 
Lloydminster, as well as dignitaries and guests from across the 
province. It was an amazing event where all those in attendance 
had a special chance to honour these four young people. 
 
It is with pride that I acknowledge two of the recipients who not 
only call Regina, but our constituency, Regina Walsh Acres, 
home: Isabel Gagne and Alicia Totten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the sponsors of this 
event, the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association and 
SaskPower. SaskPower donates $3,000 a year in bursaries to 
each recipient, and they’re well deserved.  
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these amazing 
young ladies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Cardiac Rehabilitation Program Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — People who need cardiac rehab in Regina have 
to pay five times what people in Saskatoon have to pay. It’s $90 
in Saskatoon, but it’s $440 here in Regina. Now the Health 
minister’s excuse for this is that the two health regions are “. . . 
in two different fiscal situations.” Is the Premier actually 
comfortable with that excuse? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for the question. I know this was a matter of some 
focus and debate last week in the legislature, as it quite rightly 
should be. I know that the folks at Paul Schwann have 
indicated, as a result of the issue being raised and likely prior to 
that, that they’re willing to work with anyone who is wanting to 
make use of the facility but is finding it a financial hardship. 
There are some longer term issues around equality and the fees 
that will be the focus of government as we go through a bit of a 
budgeting process now, but in the meantime we welcome the 
fact that Paul Schwann has indicated willingness to work with 
anyone that’s finding it difficult to afford the fees for the 
service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there is a huge discrepancy in this 
province in what cardiac rehab patients are having to pay, Mr. 
Speaker. They shouldn’t rely on one-offs. They should have a 
policy that is fair and equitable for every patient here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
David Wood is here today. He received two heart stents last 
year and his doctor referred him to the cardiac rehabilitation 
program here in Regina. But David didn’t go because he 
couldn’t afford it. The costs were way too high. Mr. Speaker, I 
do not think that is fair. But the worst part is that the Heart and 
Stroke Foundation says David’s experience is not remotely 
isolated. The Heart and Stroke Foundation, Mr. Speaker, says 
that this is common. What does the Premier have to say to 
David Wood and every other person who can’t afford cardiac 
rehab they need here in Regina? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we would 
want for Mr. Wood and all others who need the service that 
they could be able to access the service. And so we’ve 
appreciated that the Paul Schwann Centre has indicated a 
willingness to work with the patients, with those who require 
the service through this particular period of time where there is 
a difference in terms of the cost, Mr. Speaker, and we look 
forward to the longer term solution. In the meantime, we 
encourage the Paul Schwann Centre to work with all of those 
folks, including Mr. Wood, who would like to have access to 
the service, who are, however, finding it difficult to afford the 
current fees. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, where is the leadership on fixing 
this problem? Mr. Speaker, we have an approach here. They 
say, oh, it’s not a big deal, just a one-off talk. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a huge imbalance going on, and we have the Premier, who 
doesn’t seem to care one bit about it, Mr. Speaker, and is happy 
to have patients in Saskatoon paying $90 and patients in Regina 
paying five times. You know, the Premier said he would 
encourage Mr. Wood and others to speak with the Paul 
Schwann Centre, Mr. Speaker. I would encourage the Premier 
and the Health minister to fix this problem because it is 
completely unacceptable for Saskatchewan patients. 



November 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7687 

Mr. Speaker, it is not fair. It is the provincial government’s job 
to make sure that standards are in place and that those standards 
are met so that Saskatchewan patients can count on the health 
care that they need no matter where we live here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Not being able to access proper cardiac rehab 
when you need it is dangerous, Mr. Speaker, and it is appalling 
that a financial barrier would be an impediment to people 
receiving the health care that they need and that they deserve. 
My question to the Premier: how can he possibly, how can he 
possibly justify his government’s lack of concern and lack of 
attention to fix this issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned last week when we had the discussion 
on this topic, certainly the cardiac rehab program is something 
that is run by Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, as it is in other 
locations across this province. 
 
They have decided, based on the fact that only about 30 per cent 
of referred patients were actually attending the exercise 
component of that, that they wanted to ensure that, as a 
minimum, that the educational programming could be 
accessible as much as possible across the city of Regina, 
knowing, Mr. Speaker, that this is a program as not only the 
cardiac rehab program. There’s not only an exercise 
component; there is the educational component. 
 
The same would be true with Live Well with Chronic 
Conditions, another program that is operated by regional health 
authorities that we as a province helped to establish what the 
programs and the policies will be, and then ultimately will be 
up to the regional health authorities to determine how it will be 
best to operate those programs. 
 
I’m pleased to hear that the Paul Schwann is reaching out to 
work with patients that are having difficulties financially. We’d 
certainly encourage the other 70 per cent of patients that have 
not attended the program to consider the program as it has been 
recommended by their physicians. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a pathetic display of 
leadership that we see coming from this government on this 
issue. Absolutely ridiculous to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
patients should go speak to the Paul Schwann and get a one-off. 
 
How about this government wakes up and realizes that there is a 
problem, that the patients in Saskatoon are paying $90; patients 
in Regina are paying five times that. This is the Health minister, 
not the minister of healthy suggestions. This is the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, who should be showing some leadership and 
recognizing that this is not acceptable in today’s Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a $90,000 cut that this government forced 
upon this program. We know people in Regina are paying five 
times what folks in Saskatoon are paying. And the evidence 
shows, Mr. Speaker, the evidence clearly shows that proper 
cardiac rehab saves $28,000 in health costs per person. So the 
Sask Party’s $90,000 cut, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only unfair, but 

it is incredibly irresponsible fiscally. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: if he won’t be 
persuaded by the moral argument, will he at least be persuaded 
by the financial argument? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we understand . . . I understand and the 
ministry understands that this is a program, whether it’s offered 
in Regina or other parts of the province, knowing that’s it’s not 
available in every single community, but where it is provided 
and where it is offered, that we encourage people that have been 
referred to the program — cardiac, post-cardiac patients that are 
referred to the program — take a serious look at investing their 
time in terms of actually going through with the exercise 
component. 
 
We know that people have other options. They decide to 
explore other options in terms of exercise that is perhaps more 
accessible to them. Some people, we know, choose not to take 
part in an exercise component. Certainly the Paul Schwann 
Centre, I believe, would be able to defer the costs even greater 
if more people did take part aside from just the 30 per cent that 
do enter into the program. 
 
But we are working with the Paul Schwann to see if there is a 
way to help to ease the financial costs for people that do choose 
to enrol, the 30 per cent that do choose to enrol over a longer 
period of time, so that it is more financially viable for those 
individuals which may help to increase the numbers and get it 
up over that 30 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, David Wood deserves 
government leadership much better than what we just saw from 
the Premier and the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, and so too 
does every other cardiac patient here in Saskatchewan. The 
minister says he understands. I would suggest he doesn’t 
understand, Mr. Speaker, because he is giving the same 
nonsense lines that we heard last week. And the Premier’s 
making no commitment. They have known about this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, for months and months but they’ve made no 
commitment to fix this so that it is equitable for all 
Saskatchewan patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know because of the Sask Party’s cut and their 
stubbornness to wake up and realize that this is a problem that 
needs to be fixed, we know that patients will end up back in the 
hospital. We know, Mr. Speaker, that it’s going to cost our 
health care system a lot more. And tragically, Mr. Speaker, it 
means that more people will die prematurely because they don’t 
have the proper care that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an incredible lack of leadership that we see 
coming from this government, from the Premier right now, Mr. 
Speaker, to not get up and say that this problem will be fixed 
right away and it will be fair for all Saskatchewan people. He 
needs to do that today, Mr. Speaker. Why won’t he just stand 
today, admit that this government’s approach on this is a 
mistake? Why won’t he fix this now? 



7688 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that there has been for some time discrepancies in 
terms of the programs that have been offered to the people all 
across this province — not just in Regina, not just in Saskatoon. 
For example, Mr. Speaker, Live Well with Chronic Conditions 
wouldn’t have been a program that would have been eligible for 
individuals all across this province in years past. We have 
changed that. We are working with our health regions to deploy 
programs like Live Well with Chronic Conditions all across this 
province so you don’t just have to live in Regina or Saskatoon 
where you may have additional options as opposed to people 
across this province — represented largely on this side of the 
House — that may not have had those options under the 
members opposite. 
 
We are working closely with the University of Regina, with the 
Paul Schwann to determine whether there is a way that the 
university, the Paul Schwann Centre can spread those costs over 
a longer period of time with the support of those people that are 
signing up if they will commit to a longer period of time which 
is in the best interests of their health as well, and we look 
forward to continuing those discussions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s head of 
carbon capture was in Saudi Arabia a couple weeks ago and he 
was in London, England last week. And it appears he still isn’t 
telling the full story about what’s really happening with this 
government’s one and a half billion dollar carbon capture 
project. 
 
So to the SaskPower minister: why is this government still 
touting this project as such a grand success? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is a project that is 
working in Saskatchewan. Now as a result of some recent 
changes that they’ve made in the facility, the project is working 
pretty well, Mr. Speaker, in recent days down there, reaching 
nameplate capacity in the last several days. So we’re very 
pleased about that. 
 
They are going to continue to monitor the project going 
forward. In addition to that, SaskPower is going to continue to 
promote the project around the world because the international 
audience, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is very interested in this 
project and wants to hear about the project from the SaskPower 
representatives that have been sent to those meetings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — There were many, many tweets about the head 
of carbon capture’s presentation in England last week, and 

those tweets were quite interesting. They report that he said the 
Boundary dam project is a huge success and that the project 
captured — captured, past tense — 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 
its first year. But of course we know that’s not even close to 
true. 
 
But it’s understandable why these things were tweeted because 
this government’s fancy promotional video says the project is 
“. . . capturing 1 million tonnes of CO2 a year.” So it’s no 
surprise that people are left with an impression that is very far 
from reality. 
 
So how can the SaskPower minister explain why this 
government is still hyping an inaccurate story about its $1.5 
billion carbon capture project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Some guy wrote a tweet about what was 
said somewhere and somebody has to be responsible for that? 
Oh my Lord, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that 
SaskPower is making steps in the right direction with respect to 
this. They are certainly taking CO2 out of the atmosphere that 
would normally be going into the atmosphere here in 
Saskatchewan — 400 000 tonnes. 
 
They are running at much better capacity than they have been in 
the past several days, Mr. Speaker. We’re very optimistic that 
we’ll continue to see that, Mr. Speaker. The target is about 1 
million tonnes per year, Mr. Speaker. We’re confident that 
SaskPower and the engineering team that they have will reach 
that target in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they’re tweeting about his 
promotional video and they’re tweeting about what his head of 
carbon capture is saying at international conferences. And 
despite this government’s best efforts, the world is taking notice 
and they don’t like what they’re seeing. 
 
Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia is one of the senators 
that the Premier has met with personally, thanks to his $3 
million American lobbyist that we’re all paying for. Well this 
senator is not too happy to find out what’s really going on at 
Boundary dam. Last week he called it “a very troubled project,” 
and he said it was “failing.” Senator Manchin says the US 
[United States] government should not have trusted what this 
government told them. He even references this government’s 
news release from last February which said the project was 
exceeding expectations. 
 
Is the SaskPower minister at all embarrassed by the inaccurate 
stories that this government has been spreading? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, clearly there are people on 
both sides of this issue, without a doubt. The NDP [New 
Democratic Party] want to see the coal industry in 



November 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7689 

Saskatchewan shut down. That’s clear. They want the IBEW 
[International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] workers 
down there to be thrown out of a job. That’s clear, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t like coal. They don’t like oil in this province. They 
don’t like the nuclear industry. They’d like to throw all of those 
people out of work, Mr. Speaker. But the fact of the . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The opposition asked the question; perhaps 
they’d like to have the response. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Virtually all of the energy sources here in 
the province of Saskatchewan that we use in great amounts, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP, and particularly the member from Nutana, 
would like to see shut down — all of those workers thrown out 
of work, Mr. Speaker. But that’s their position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
International Energy Agency though has a very different view, 
Mr. Speaker, when they welcomed the launch of the world’s 
first large-scale power station equipped with carbon capture and 
storage technology, calling it a historical milestone along the 
road of low-carbon energy efficiency. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Senator Manchin is on the 
Energy and Natural Resources Committee in the United States 
Senate, and the Premier got his $3 million American lobbyist to 
arrange a meeting with Senator Manchin in order to hype this 
project. In fact the Premier’s Facebook post about his meeting 
with Senator Manchin said, “. . . told him about our clean coal 
technology at Boundary dam 3.” 
 
Well that same senator isn’t too happy about all the 
misinformation surrounding the Boundary dam project. He says 
that the glowing performance results touted by this government 
are “. . . nothing more than marketing spin and hyperbole, with 
the true results reflecting a very troubled project.” This was last 
week, Mr. Speaker. Nothing more than spin and hyperbole to 
hide the true results of a very troubled project. What does the 
SaskPower minister have to say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have said right from the 
very outset that there have been problems associated with this 
facility. In recent days, in recent days, Mr. Speaker, the facility 
is operating in a much better capacity than it has. And if you 
look at it, if you look at the steps that SaskPower is taking, Mr. 
Speaker, back in 1990 the CO2 emissions intensity in 
Saskatchewan was 789 tonnes per gigawatt hour. Under the 
NDP in 1992, it rose to 950 tonnes per gigawatt hour here, Mr. 
Speaker. In the most recent year — 2014 — that there’s 
information available for it, it has dropped to 660 tonnes per 
gigawatt hour, a 28 per cent reduction under than when the 
NDP were in operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So clearly there’s more work to be done on this facility, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly there’s more opportunity here though for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that’s why I think the people of 
Saskatchewan in large measure are very supportive of this 

project. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s careless and 
wanton recklessness in promoting a project that isn’t even 
working yet is shredding the reputation of Saskatchewan in the 
international community, and we have a Premier who’s heading 
to Paris for international talks soon and we don’t have any sort 
of remorse, no answer from this minister. 
 
So we’re going to try it again. Is the minister not at all 
concerned about the fact that a United States senator is writing 
to the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], telling them 
about hyperbole, marketing spin, and a very troubled project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you look around the world 
you’ll find people from all over the world that are saying that 
this is a good project for the province of Saskatchewan. The 
University of Melbourne: 
 

Through the development of the world’s first and largest 
commercial-scale CCS project of its kind, SaskPower is 
making a . . . [valuable] technical, environmental and 
economic case for the . . . use of coal. 

 
We certainly support that, Mr. Speaker. We made the decision 
around coal, the use of coal, going forward, Mr. Speaker. We 
have some 2 or 300 years supply of coal in our province. We 
have hundreds of workers down in the southeast part of our 
province, that their livelihoods and their jobs depend on the use 
of coal here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to see emissions cleaned up. 
That’s why we’re moving in this direction, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
time the NDP got on board with this project rather than just 
going around and bashing it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government really needs to 
stop trying to argue that this kind of mess is normal. 
SaskPower’s president told a small group of industry insiders 
last April that — this was in April: “We expect to be in full 
capacity by about June this year.” Then he went on to say it 
takes several months to work out issues. But now we know it’s 
going to take several years to get it up and running, and this is 
clearly not normal. This is a mess. No wonder international 
observers like Senator Manchin are saying this is a “very 
troubled project.” 
 
So to the minister: when will this government stop insulting 
people’s intelligence with what Senator Manchin says is 
nothing but marketing spin and hyperbole? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — SaskPower will be responding to the 
senator’s comments with respect to this and correcting the 



7690 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2015 

record in a number of areas, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be doing that 
very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think that . . . The people of Saskatchewan I think are very 
clear on this subject, Mr. Speaker. They want to see, they want 
to see CO2 emissions cleaned up in Saskatchewan. After all, we 
have targets with respect to this, Mr. Speaker. As you look at 
what’s happening in Paris in the . . . Very, very soon, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be a lot of talk about CO2 emissions. At least 
this is a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan want to see 400 000 tonnes, 
rising to 1 million tonnes at some point in the future, Mr. 
Speaker, tonnes of CO2 captured and sequestered in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And at a time when we 
have IBEW’s workers at risk as a result of the NDP’s views on 
this subject, Mr. Speaker, I think that, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are very, very interested in terms of . . . 
particularly when we have the galleries as full of union 
supporters as there are, Mr. Speaker. I’d be interested in 
knowing what their thoughts are on the jobs that the IBEW 
people occupy down at Estevan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members on both sides of the 
House to allow the question to be asked and a response to be 
given without interruption. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Provision of Government Services 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — If there’s anything that undermines good 
jobs in our Crown corporations, it’s mismanagement and 
nonsense like that, Mr. Speaker. On front after front after front, 
this government is selling Saskatchewan people out, leaving 
them to pick up the tab. Hospital laundry has been contracted 
out to an Alberta corporation; food in correctional centres to a 
UK [United Kingdom] catering company; the smart meter 
project to North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Texas; the Sask 
Hospital to a UK corporation; the Regina bypass to a European 
corporation, including snowplowing if you can imagine; and the 
maintenance for P3 schools will be done by a corporation from 
Wisconsin. 
 
To the Education minister: why on earth has a corporation from 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin been given a 30-year contract of 
ratepayers’ money to maintain the schools of our kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is interesting on the day that the opposition 
presents a considerable and impressive petition on the issue of 
privatization. It’s interesting to note that, notwithstanding this 
particular question on schools, I have sat in this Assembly for 
many, many days and not heard a single question from the 
Leader of the Opposition or the NDP on the issue of private 
clinics operating in the public system. That’s, I guess, a bit of a 
privatization. 
 
I haven’t heard a single question in question period, I don’t 
think, on the new initiative on private MRIs [magnetic 
resonance imaging]. I don’t think there’s been a single question 
from members opposite in terms of privatizing correctional 

services, Mr. Speaker, not one. Not one single question. I 
haven’t heard the opposition ask one single question on behalf 
of the SGEU who opposed private sale of liquor in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We haven’t heard them ask anything about 
the new Co-op store selling liquor or Sobeys selling liquor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve answered the questions on P3s. I think 
20-plus local companies are involved in those school builds. 
We’re finally getting schools built in the province unlike what 
was seen under the NDP when they closed 176 schools. How 
was that for public sector unions? 
 
But interestingly, Mr. Speaker, not a word on all of these issues. 
They’re going to have to come clean soon. We’re months away 
from an election. Will they ditch private clinics? Will they 
re-nationalize all the liquor stores? Why won’t the Leader of the 
Opposition stand up and have an honest debate about the issue, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, pretty typical to see that 
kind of grandstanding from that Premier. Not a single answer 
when it came to fair and equitable cardio rehab services, not an 
answer about the statements that he’s made that have been 
found to be false, that have now offended the world, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the expensive carbon capture project, 
Mr. Speaker. And a government that shut down committee, Mr. 
Speaker, that wouldn’t even allow witnesses to come to that . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the Minister of Agriculture 
please rise and withdraw that remark and apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I withdraw and apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And a Premier, Mr. Speaker, whose 
reckless ideological attack on workers was found 
unconstitutional in the Supreme Court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we have a corporation from Milwaukee, Wisconsin 
that’s now getting taxpayers’ money for over 30 years to be 
maintaining the schools for our kids, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that in this contract, Mr. Speaker, that there’s more than $250 
million for non-construction costs. This plan defies common 
sense, and it puts taxpayers on the hook. Will this Premier, will 
that Education minister finally show some transparency, some 
accountability, put that deal on the table so Saskatchewan 
people know what they’re on the hook for? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Will the Deputy Leader of the NDP be 
transparent with respect to who this Wisconsin company is? 
This is Johnson Controls, who’ve done HVAC [heating, 
ventilating, and air conditioning] services in schools right 
across this province, including traditional builds . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the member may want . . . The member 
asked a question; he might want to listen to the answer. 



November 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7691 

This same company has been doing these same services in the 
province of Saskatchewan long before any P3 schools, Mr. 
Speaker, but these facts, these facts get in the way for my 
honourable friend and the Leader of the Opposition. But here 
are some facts . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I want to be able to hear the answer as 
well. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we should have some facts on 
the table about this debate with respect to the involvement of 
the private sector. Mr. Speaker, in this House, we have not seen 
a single question from the Leader of the Opposition or his 
critics with respect to the privatization of food services in 
correctional facilities, not a single question with respect to 
MRIs. 
 
And as to the debate, they had 20 hours to debate the MRI bill, 
20 hours allotted. They could have taken more; they took 13 
hours. They took 13 hours. These are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the issue of private sale of liquor in the province of 
Saskatchewan, how many questions . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — How many questions . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member for Regina Lakeview come 
to order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — How many questions, Mr. Speaker, on the 
issue of the privatization of the sale of liquor in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the use of the Federated Co-op, the use of 
Sobeys, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We do need to have a debate about these things. We want to 
continue to provide the highest quality services at the lowest 
possible cost. We want to continue to ensure there’s a strong 
public sector delivering services in this province. But we will 
look to innovation. We’ll look to improve service, as we will 
with respect to liquor. There may be news on that coming in the 
days and weeks ahead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting to hear what the NDP will 
say. Will the Leader of the NDP be hidebound ideologically to 
only the government selling liquor, only the government 
providing service even when we know better results can be 
delivered for Saskatchewan people? We look forward to that 
debate on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 7681 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7681, 7682 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7681 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7681 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7681 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7682 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7682 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7682 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Terrorist Attacks in Paris 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 
 Diwali Supper Gala and Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 
 Support for Public Services and Crown Corporations 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7685 
 Creative Saskatchewan Funding and University of Regina Press 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7685 
 Peacock Tornadoes Win Provincial Championship 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7685 
 Junior Citizens of the Year 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Cardiac Rehabilitation Program Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7687 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7688 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7688 
 Provision of Government Services 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7690 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7690 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


