




















































Hansard: November 25, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 89A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7825 
 November 25, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
for leave of the Assembly to make an extended series of 
introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
colleagues for the leave. Mr. Speaker, obviously we have a 
number of guests with us today, and I’ll be mindful of that in 
the introductions. But I do have some very special people to 
introduce to you and then through you to all members of the 
Assembly and to the rest of our guests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you, 
sitting in the west gallery, Sharla and Kim Folk of the Chris 
Knox Foundation. We’d just ask them maybe to quickly stand 
so we know where they are. Mr. Speaker, Sharla and Kim of 
course are the parents of the late Chris Knox. And the legacy of 
Chris is the Chris Knox Foundation, where young people in our 
province who are battling cancer have the chance at some very 
exciting, wonderful events, a chance just to enjoy themselves 
and be kids. And, Mr. Speaker, they have this because of the 
vision of Sharla and of Kim and of all of those who have helped 
the foundation in the past. 
 
They have this also because of the generosity of other 
organizations: the Saskatchewan Roughriders, but other 
corporations and interests in the province who make these visits 
possible. It was all inspired of course by Chris and his eventual 
trip to the 2007 Grey Cup where the Riders won, of course, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a wonderful foundation and has given us a lasting 
legacy. And so we want to acknowledge Sharla and Kim and 
welcome them back to their Legislative Assembly today as we 
are on the eve of yet another Grey Cup here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also a pleasure for me to introduce a business 
leader from the city of Prince Albert, somebody who’s involved 
in the Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce. He’s on the P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Board of Police Commissioners, the Prince 
Albert Community Futures, the Victoria Hospital Foundation. 
Mr. Speaker, his name is Joe Hargrave, and I think he is sitting 
in the Speaker’s gallery. There he is, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
hoping one day after the 4th of April he’ll join us down on the 
floor of the Assembly because he is the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate for Prince Albert Carlton in the upcoming election. 
Mr. Speaker, Joe and his wife, Fran, have four kids and five 
grandchildren, so they already have the makings of a great 

campaign team. We want to welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly as well today. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, from time to time we’ll give speeches, 
all of us, on the history of the province and on those who really 
laid out the foundation for the province that we enjoy today. 
Mr. Speaker, and then if we’re really lucky, beyond talking 
about those people, those pioneers, we get to meet them and we 
get to hear first-hand of their experience. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today we’re in luck because one of those 
pioneers and his friends and family have joined us today. And 
so we welcome Mr. Emmanuel Miller, formerly of the Lipton 
area and now of Fort Qu’Appelle. With Emmanuel today is his 
daughter Denise Gadd. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Denise’s 
husband, Ken. Family friends are Reinhard Mohl — Reinhard 
has joined us on the floor of the Assembly as well — and Con 
and Colleen Gherasim. Also Lucy Koolen is a rec director, rec 
worker at the Fort Qu’Appelle Echo Lodge. The staff there do 
an amazing job in terms of long-term care in the province, and I 
want to thank them for that. Mr. Speaker, that’s where 
Emmanuel lives. That’s where Manny lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is a few months into his second century as he 
celebrated his 100th birthday on the 2nd of March earlier this 
year. A few weeks ago, I had the chance along with the Deputy 
Premier to visit him at the lodge, at the Echo Lodge in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. The visit was arranged by Dolly Goebel, a 
caregiver at the lodge, who unfortunately couldn’t make it 
today. I want to thank her though because we just had a 
wonderful time visiting. It was a blessing for me to be able to 
spend quite a bit of time with Manny and hear a little bit about 
his history and his perspective on the province of Saskatchewan 
and farming in the Lipton area, how he started in farming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It would have been a difficult prospect and proposition for him 
to get farming. I think he mentioned to me that he actually was 
involved in some trapping to raise some capital to buy his first 
quarter of land, and he has a great deal of experience and advice 
to offer anyone that would take the time to visit with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer, when he actually had turned 100, he 
was combining, is what I can report to the House. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, obviously the combines would be a little bit different 
than what he would have used all those earlier years in 
agriculture. The cab is a little higher and maybe a bit tougher to 
climb up. So, Mr. Speaker, here’s Saskatchewan innovativeness 
and ingenuity. They used a front-end loader to get Manny up to 
the cab of the combine and put him to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while he served in his community, he served as 
the Chair of the Lipton Housing Authority, Chair of the 
committee that published a book about Lipton’s history. And 
Emmanuel and his wife, Ruth, who recently passed away, 
raised a wonderful family: six kids, three boys and three girls; 
11 grandchildren; 10 great-grandchildren. 
 
He is an avid woodworker and carver, and in my office I’ve got 
some wonderful . . . some of the work that he has done, Mr. 
Speaker, including a beautifully hand-carved model of a grain 
silo. And also I received, Mr. Speaker, a small pill box from 



7826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Manny; it was labelled stool sample. He gave it to me with a 
big grin on his face, and he asked me if I had a sense of 
humour. I said, I hope that I do, and so he handed me this. And 
I opened it up and inside was a small, hand-crafted wood 
three-legged stool, Mr. Speaker. It’s also in the Premier’s 
offices, and I invite anybody to come and have a look at it. 
 
He also shared with the Deputy Premier, before I close, Mr. 
Speaker, of his first visit to this Legislative Assembly. He said 
it was in 1954, I think, and he was here for a meeting because 
he was involved in a farmers’ union, I think. They had meetings 
with the government, and the meetings were going to last all 
day. And he said, at that time smoking was allowed in this 
building and in public buildings, and he said on that day he 
smoked an entire pack. And when he went home that night, he 
shared with his wife and his family that he was done smoking 
— to throw out all of the smoking materials and he was going 
to quit — and he has not smoked since 1954, Mr. Speaker. It is 
our hope that after his current visit, after he sees what, you 
know, democracy is like in action today, that he’s not tempted 
to take up smoking because he obviously made the right 
decision back in 1954. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what an honour and a privilege it is to have 
him here in his Legislative Assembly, to pay tribute to him and 
his family and his friends, and to say thank you to him on 
behalf of a grateful province. I’d ask all members to welcome 
Emmanuel Miller to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming the many guests that we have in 
the Chamber today, Mr. Speaker, to say a particular hello and 
welcome to Mr. Miller. 
 
That pioneering spirit that those who have come before us have 
demonstrated and lived their life out for over a century, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that’s alive and well here in the province. 
And to have Emmanuel here in the Assembly, to hear about his 
story and his work in his community along with his family and 
friends and members of the community, it’s a real inspiration to 
all of us. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure after today, smoking 
won’t be on the to-do list for Mr. Miller. I’m sure he’ll stick to 
the miniature woodworking projects that he’s perhaps more 
fond of now. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members also to join 
me in welcoming Mr. Miller to the Assembly here today. 
 
And I would also like to pass on my condolences on the passing 
of his wife, I understand not too long ago. Ruths are very good 
wives. My wife’s name is Ruth as well. So Mr. Miller, I wish 
you all the best. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also join with the Premier in 
welcoming Sharla and Kim Folk to the Assembly, recognizing 
the important work that they’re carrying on in honouring their 
child and making sure that other children and people in this 
province have amazing opportunities, who are going through 
amazing challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
important guests to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Just real briefly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Premier and welcome Kim and Sharla Folk to the 
Assembly. Our paths have crossed many times over the years at 
Grey Cups, at other events here in Regina. 
 
But also sitting next to them is Kenda Ashton and Jason Huschi 
in the west gallery. They are from Harvard Broadcasting. 
There’s an exciting announcement today about partnership, 
about something that might be happening this weekend with the 
Chris Knox Foundation. I’ll have more to say in a member’s 
statement, but welcome these guests here, please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of introducing 
some very important guests seated in your gallery from Egadz 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Joining us today is Don Meikle, the executive director of 
Egadz, who recently celebrated its 25th anniversary. Don first 
worked with Egadz in 1993 as a volunteer to obtain his 200 
hours required to become a social worker. And Don has since 
turned those 200 hours into a 22-year career with Egadz, 
demonstrating his dedication to helping improve the lives of 
countless young people and their families. 
 
Joining Don is Amanda Griffiths, who is the assistant 
coordinator with Egadz, and four young people who make the 
Action to Employment project very successful and who also 
inspire so much hope for young people in our province. And 
they are Robyn Bigsky, Sally McKenzie, Rushnie Partridge, 
and Stacy King. The strong partnership we have in bringing 
real, lasting benefits to hard-working families and communities 
is truly to be commended with those young people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Don Meikle and Egadz for the 
wonderful work that they do, and I want to ask all members in 
joining me to welcome these dedicated individuals to their 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the Minister of Social Services in welcoming Don 
Meikle and the staff, Amanda and the four young people 
working. The great work that Egadz does in Saskatoon, and of 
course the minister alluded to the 25th anniversary. That was 
just a big crowd that came out to celebrate with Egadz and to 
note the good work they do in Saskatoon. So I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also join the 
minister and the member opposite in welcoming not only Don 
Meikle and Amanda, but the participants from Egadz. I’ve had 
the intense fortune of working with Don for I’d say two decades 
if not more, we’ve known each other. And I’d like to say when I 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7827 

was part of starting Street Culture Kidz, I borrowed some of 
Egadz’s programming and models. I wouldn’t want to call it 
anything else, but I borrowed it. 
 
They do amazing work. I can’t imagine Saskatoon without you. 
You’ve done some amazing work with not only the kids but the 
community, and we’re forever grateful for that. I’m forever 
grateful for having met you and, you know, all your work. With 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly, but a big thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and to all members of the Assembly, I’m pleased to 
introduce Dr. Janessa Grosenick, seated in your gallery. She is a 
new graduate from the University of Saskatchewan’s College of 
Medicine and is one of a growing number of new doctors who 
has decided to stay and call Saskatchewan home, and we’ll hear 
more about that in a member’s statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she was raised in Radville and in fact, as a part of 
her training, had the opportunity to go back and be trained and 
mentored by Dr. Oberholzer and Dr. Helms. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to say that she has decided to begin her practice in 
the great city of Weyburn, Saskatchewan. And so I’d ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming her to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’m very pleased to 
introduce two guests that are seated as well in your gallery. 
First is Dr. Mark Brown. Dr. Brown is a family physician from 
Moose Jaw. He’s been practising there since, I believe, 2001 
and earlier this year, in May, became the new president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
And joining him today, and joining us today, is his son Stephen. 
Stephen is 13 years old. He’s in grade 9 at Cornerstone 
Christian School. He’s interested in science and writing and tae 
kwon do. He’s very involved in drama in his school. He’s a 
downhill skier and, Mr. Speaker, he even has his open water 
diving certification at the age of 13. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as good of a doctor as Mark is — and he’s a very 
good doctor — he hasn’t quite yet cured his son of one bug that 
his son has, and that apparently is of a political bug. So Steve is 
going to be joining us here at the legislature for the day and 
spending some time with me this afternoon and touring the 
building. And, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask that all members 
join me in welcoming not only Dr. Mark Brown, but as well his 
son, Stephen, to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the opposition to welcome Dr. Janessa Grosenick, the 
new grad here. I know we have an opportunity usually once a 
year to meet with young med students, and we hear from them 
their strong desire to be able to stay here in Saskatchewan. So 
it’s a thrill to hear that Dr. Grosenick will be here. 

Also I’d like to welcome Dr. Brown and congratulate him on 
his new role as president of the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association], and of course his son, Stephen. I have young kids 
too who are interested in politics, and this is a great place to be, 
to be at the heart of it. So welcome to your legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say welcome 
to a couple of special guests in the east gallery, or west . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . east gallery. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I see Faith Greva here in the gallery here today. She’s 
at Caswell School in the AcTal program. She is my 
constituency assistant’s daughter and she also is my daughter 
Ophelia’s babysitter. 
 
Ophelia is . . . Well I can tell you lots about Ophelia, but I’d 
like to tell you a little bit about Faith. Faith is quite an 
accomplished young woman. She plays the guitar. She sings. 
She crochets, which she is teaching Ophelia, which is awesome 
because I do not crochet. She enjoys birdwatching. Helping 
with her brothers, her two little brothers Monty and Ben, and 
Monty and Ben . . . Ophelia much prefers when Faith has all the 
time for her. Ophelia much prefers when Faith has all the time 
for her than Monty and Ben. She likes math and concerts, Mr. 
Speaker. Faith is her mother’s daughter, Mr. Speaker, and is a 
pretty amazing young woman. 
 
But I’d also like to introduce Zahin Rahman, who I had an 
opportunity to meet a few months ago at a political rally, Mr. 
Speaker. Zahin is a big fan of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
and was a big fan of Tom Mulcair. And poor Zahin, she was at 
a rally with Faith and her mother and me and there were many 
people there, Mr. Speaker, and poor Zahin . . . Mr. Mulcair was 
very busy at the time and I thrust Zahin in front of Mr. Mulcair 
to say hello, and I think she was probably a little traumatized at 
that and wasn’t expecting that but she also was very . . . 
Afterwards, when she had a chance to collect her thoughts, I 
understand that she was very excited to have that opportunity. 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to 
welcome Zahin and Faith to their Legislative Assembly, and all 
the other students as well. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce 28 public servants in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re here with part of the parliamentary 
program for public service. They represent ministries such as 
Advanced Education, Central Services, Economy, Education, 
Environment, Finance, Health, Intergovernmental Affairs, 
Justice, Municipal Affairs, also from the Provincial Auditor’s 
office, as well as the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an annual program that’s put on. They’ll be 
getting an in-depth tour of the legislature. Of course they’ll be 
meeting with members from the opposition. They’ll be meeting 
with myself as well as you, Mr. Speaker, which I always know 
is heard as the highlight of their trip into the building, Mr. 
Speaker. But I would like all members of this Assembly to 
welcome them to your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 



7828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission and saying that with the parliamentary support 
program, of course, your visit with those public servants is the 
highlight of their day. I wouldn’t want to let any special 
pleading on the other side get ahead of on the balance. But 
certainly through the independent office that is represented, 
throughout the public service, and then indeed Legislative 
Assembly staff that are here to gain a better understanding of 
the political side of what is governance and public policy in 
Saskatchewan. It’s always a great occasion, and I look forward 
to meeting with them later on today. So again I’d join with the 
minister in asking all members to welcome these public 
servants to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got 
two introductions to make. To you and through you and to all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 35 grade 8 
students and their teachers Tanya George, Kayla Fraser, Sarah 
Davies, and chaperone, Stuart Fehr, from Caswell Community 
School seated in your east gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
invite all members to welcome these students to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
Barry Berglund from Saskatoon Meewasin. I’ve knocked on 
Barry’s door many times over the last 10 to 12 years and never 
did find out exactly who he was supporting, other than a smile 
I’d get on his face. 
 
But anyway, Barry is also here with Dr. Scott Francis who is 
from Regina Wascana Plains constituency. They are from the 
Leading Influence Ministries and are here to pray for MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and, God knows, some 
of us need it. With that, Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to 
welcome these two constituents to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
like to join the member from Meewasin in welcoming the 
students from Caswell. Every time kids come from Caswell, I 
have to say that Caswell’s a very, very special school for me. 
It’s one that I taught in in the early ’90s in the AcTal program 
and then went over into politics. I just live around the corner, 
and I hope to be representing Caswell school in the next 
election, as the boundaries will be changed and they’ll be back 
in my riding. So welcome to your legislature, Caswell kids. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the west gallery we’ve got 51 students from Moose Jaw, from 
Palliser Heights School. Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by 
their teachers, Leanne Lariviere and Stephanie Tiernay. 
They’ve also got chaperones: Virginia Wickenheiser, Darin 
Ashby, Brigette Gregoire, Curtis Woloschuk, Kathy Deak, and 
Kathy Robinson. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of being in their classroom 
when the grade 5s and 6s were there. What a great bunch of 
students, and what a great preparation the teachers have done 
for these students. One of the first questions they asked me — 
and they sent me a list of about 102 questions — one of the first 
questions, why don’t people vote? And that’s a hard question to 
answer. But I would ask everyone to welcome them. We had a 
picture taken. We had another question-and-answer period just 
before now, and I’d like everyone to welcome to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may, while I’m on my feet, I want to 
congratulate Emmanuel Miller on his 100th birthday. 
Emmanuel was a neighbour of ours just north of Lipton and 
great neighbours they were. They were also close friends. I can 
remember having meals at their place. I can remember the work 
that they’d done together, Emmanuel and my dad. And whether 
they were butchering cattle or sawing winter wood, it was a bit 
of a social for them, even though there was long hours of hard 
work. We worked back and forth. 
 
His second son, Delmar, was my best friend from my earliest 
age, and he’s here with his daughter, Denise, and her husband, 
Ken. I’d like to welcome them. They were great supporters of 
the community, like the Premier said, great neighbours and 
great friends. It’s nice to see them here. The only down part is 
that Ruth, his wife for 75 years, couldn’t join them. We called 
them Uncle Emmanuel and Auntie Ruth because we knew them 
that well. It’s so nice to have you at the Legislative Assembly, 
so welcome here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge Dr. Brown, who is one of 
my constituents. And he may not know it, but we have an 
appointment on Friday morning. And as much as it’s a pleasure 
to welcome him here, I know it’s not going to be as big a 
pleasure when I see him on Friday morning, but welcome Dr. 
Brown and Stephen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the continuing, 
maybe never-ending list of introductions today, there are a few 
people that had been missed at this point. The Millers seem to 
have a widely expanding list of connections to this legislature. 
Mr. Miller’s son was my lawyer in Medicine Hat at one time, so 
I had that connection. 
 
But more importantly today, Mr. Miller’s nephew and niece by 
marriage are in the east gallery, Don and Marion Miller. Don 
and I go back as friends to when I was about seven years old. 
We met at a church camp at Echo Lake, and our friendship was 
so intense he invited me home to Lipton. We surveyed that 
town. We ran wild in that town for about three days, raiding 
gardens and doing all the things that us young kids do. But the 
one thing, the one thing I never forgot is that Don Miller taught 
me how to braid binder twine. And you know, that was a 
special skill in those days, and it was put to good advantage 
when you wanted to go gopher hunting. And I never did forget 
that skill, and I want to thank Don for introducing me to that. 
 
But more importantly, I met Don and Marion as a couple when 
we attended Bible school together in later years in Medicine 
Hat. Our friendship has continued over the years, and more 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7829 

recently they’ve been very strong prayer warriors on behalf of 
my wife and I as my wife fought her life-and-death struggle 
with cancer. You can’t overestimate the value of prayer, and I 
want to thank them for leading the charge in that regard. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to 
you someone who is no stranger in this Assembly, but to my 
knowledge has never before been introduced, that being 
Darlene Trenholm. She is operating the Hansard panel in the 
gallery above me. 
 
Today is the last day that Darlene will be operating the 
microphones in this Chamber. She has operated the 
microphones here and in the committee rooms for more than 15 
years, and for most of those years she has been the Hansard 
production manager. Now after 25 years of service with the 
Legislative Assembly Service, Darlene will be retiring next 
month. I would like to wish Darlene and ask you to wish her 
well in her retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with you in wishing Darlene a happy retirement. I 
think it’s about a year or two ago we finally figured out that we 
grew up in fairly close proximity. It seems to be Lipton day 
today. Darlene grew up in Lipton. Our families attended many 
social events and that sort of thing. Darlene’s mother grew up 
very close to where my parents grew up. So as I said, I’d like to 
wish Darlene a happy retirement. I know her mother currently 
lives in Regina here in a seniors’ facility, and Darlene will have 
much more time to spend with her mother and enjoy her 
presence here in Regina. 
 
But I would be remiss if I didn’t also extend a welcome to Mr. 
Miller who currently lives in Fort Qu’Appelle but has spent 
most of his life at Lipton. And as other members have said, he 
certainly has a wide range of contacts in the Assembly, and so I 
would welcome him and his family here. 
 
And in particular, there are two of his guests in the west gallery, 
Colleen and Con Gherasim, who again live in Fort Qu’Appelle 
but raised their family and farmed for many years in the Dysart 
area. Their sons played for the Dysart Blues. My sons played 
for the Cupar Canucks and, unfortunately, the Blues prevailed 
most of the time. They had very talented hockey players. So I’d 
like to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
you and with the government side in offering our thanks to 
Darlene for her service. The folks at Hansard do amazing work. 
They allow us to do our jobs and are so instrumental to what we 
do. And from her vantage point, she’s seen us maybe in some of 
our finer moments of giving speeches and remarks, and 
probably some times that we’ve stumbled through remarks as 
well. 
 
So thank you for her keen eye and making sure that the 
microphones are on, that the recordings are going. And I wish 

her a happy retirement keeping busy, I’m sure, with that new 
grandchild as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I was asked to 
present a petition concerning massage therapy in Saskatchewan 
and the fact that it’s not a regulated body for the professionals 
who practise massage therapy. And we all know the benefits of 
a good massage, and we all know that it’s an excellent career 
choice for those who want to enter the health care sector. 
 
I’ll read the information. The citizens of Saskatchewan are 
concerned that massage therapy in Saskatchewan is a 
non-regulated profession in the health care sector. And the 
prayer goes: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and actions to establish a regulatory body to register, 
monitor, and regulate the profession of massage therapy 
for the benefit of patients, massage therapists, and the 
general public. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 
come from across the province, including Vibank, Gray, 
Southey, Moose Jaw, Martensville, Saskatoon, Regina Beach, 
Regina, Prince Albert, and Dalmeny, and right across the 
province. I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for stronger supports for people with disabilities in the 
Creighton-Denare Beach area. Northerners who live with 
physical and intellectual disabilities deserve access to 
high-quality care, and there is a shortage of services in 
Creighton and Denare Beach. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
Government of Saskatchewan to establish and build a 
residential and day program in the Creighton-Denare 
Beach region to support the immediate and ongoing needs 
of the community so that persons with intellectual 
disabilities thrive in their respective communities. 

 
It’s signed by the good people of La Ronge, Air Ronge, 
Creighton, Denare Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again, I stand in my place to present a petition as it relates to 
cellphone coverage in northwestern Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 



7830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake and to provide similar quality of cell coverage as 
southern communities currently enjoy. This would provide 
support to our northern industries as well as mitigate safety 
concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have presented petitions here day after 
day as it relates to cellphone coverage. And the petitions that 
I’m presenting today, the pages rather, are signed from the 
many good people of Beauval, Christopher Lake, Regina, 
Meath Park, Edam, Dore Lake, Big River, North Battleford, 
Meota, Maymont, Bonnyville. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition yet again in support of better 
seniors’ care. Mr. Speaker, this petition grows out of a seniors’ 
care crisis we have here in this province and a government who 
is unwilling to admit there’s a seniors’ crisis and to address that 
crisis, Mr. Speaker. I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ 
care facilities; and restoring regulations that provide 
minimum standards of care; and providing more support to 
help seniors remain independent in their own homes for as 
long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from residents in the province here concerned 
about the high cost of post-secondary education. In the prayer 
that reads as follows, the petitioners respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately increase the funding for post-secondary 
education in this province with the legislated provision 
that this increase in funding be used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools, and these are 
Saskatchewan residents who are concerned that far too many of 
our classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that 

the Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of 
educational assistant positions. So they state: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from Regina 
and Saskatoon and Whitewood. I so submit. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in opposition to P3 [public-private partnership] schools. 
The individuals who have signed this want to bring to your 
attention the following. New schools are needed to be built as 
quickly and as cost effectively as possible to meet the needs of 
the province. The P3 approach to rebuilding schools will drive 
up costs and leave communities out of the design process, and 
that building schools using a P3 method may sacrifice 
transparency, resulting in public money being used for contracts 
or arrangements that are kept secret from the public: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to use a traditional build model rather than a P3 
privatization model to build new schools for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these individuals are from Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

Retention of Medical Graduates  
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
following upon the introduction offered by the Minister of 
Health, it’s important to note that a growing number of family 
medicine graduates are calling Saskatchewan home. Thirty new 
family doctors are now practising in the province. Overall, the 
retention rate of family medicine graduates trained by the 
University of Saskatchewan has jumped over the past two years 
from 58 per cent to 75 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this means three out of every four family medicine 
graduates are now choosing to stay and practise in 
Saskatchewan. These new physicians join a provincial 
workforce that has grown by more than 500 physicians in the 
past eight years — 500 physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, together with health regions, we’ve retained our 
family medicine graduates through a number of initiatives, like 
offering a competitive compensation package for physicians, 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7831 

one of the best in Canada; doubling our postgrad physician 
training seats; expanding our undergraduate education seats 
from 60 to 100; doubling our residency positions from 60 to 
120; training more family medicine residents in communities 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon; offering financial incentives 
to recruit recently graduated family physicians to rural 
communities. We also reward rural physicians who adopt a full 
scope of practice by providing a 10.5 per cent premium on their 
earnings. 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to welcome these new doctors, and 
we thank them for their commitment to high-quality, 
patient-centred care right across Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Northerner Heals With Music 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a 
northern MLA, I often attend funerals and wakes for many 
people in our communities who have gone before their time. 
One person who has helped countless families heal in their time 
of sorrow is Carl Crane. 

Carl comes from a family of 12 and was born and grew up in 
Cumberland House. His parents lived off the land until the 
building of the E.B. Campbell dam forced them to relocate to 
The Pas where Carl’s mother still lives. 

Carl worked for much of his life in construction and in the 
northern mines, but most people in the North have come to 
know him for his music. Carl was introduced to gospel music 
through listening to his father who played the keyboards and 
sang Cree hymns at wakes and funerals in Cumberland House 
and at The Pas. His love for country music came from listening 
to the radio at the trapline. 

Carl often volunteers in musical events in northern 
Saskatchewan, including Voices of the North. Carl’s many 
listeners, including myself, really enjoy his soothing voice and 
strong faith. Carl is now done and travels to perform the music 
he loves at gospel events, funerals, and wakes. Through 
responding to invitations from all over the North, Carl met 
Dean Powder, who plays guitar and who became his musical 
partner. These days Carl lives with his wife, Cathy, and three 
foster children near Prince Albert. 

As well as helping people heal with music, Carl makes time to 
talk to people who are trying to overcome addictions, a 
challenge he experienced in his youth. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in thanking Carl Crane for his kindness and 
his gestures of faith to those families who need this help in 
trying times. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 

Bowling Master Competes at National Level 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand today to honour a master from my constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, Theresa Martin, age 19, from Maidstone joins an elite 

sporting accomplishment that few people ever achieve. That 
accomplishment is making it to the 2015 five-pin masters 
tournament, the Canadian national bowling championship. 

This is the next achievement in what has already become a 
celebrated bowling career. Theresa has been bowling since the 
age of four, first with the Unity youth bowling club, and then 
with the Maidstone group, starting at age nine. At the age of 16, 
she represented her community and age category with 
distinction at the 2012 children’s Winter Olympics in Moose 
Jaw. 

Mr. Speaker, the masters of bowling tournament, is a huge 
accomplishment for any competitive bowler, but even more 
impressive for her age. One has to place in the top five at four 
different competitive ladies’ tournaments to be able to join the 
team from Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the team Theresa was 
on included three ladies from Saskatoon and one from 
Rosetown. 

This tournament was a great opportunity to compete with the 
best. Theresa plans to become a regular competitor at the 
national tournament level. The next one will be in BC [British 
Columbia] this summer. 

Mr. Speaker, Theresa’s success came down to hard work and 
dedication, a lot of effort from her coach, Brian Anderson, and 
support from her family and friends. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
Theresa good luck in her bowling career. And thank you very 
much. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

Abbeyfield House Celebrates Anniversary 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Abbeyfield House 
is a home for independent seniors in Holiday Park and is an 
integral part of our community. On November 9th, I had the 
pleasure to attend Abbeyfield’s 10th anniversary celebration. 
Abbeyfield is home to 11 residents, each with their own 
bedroom and bathroom. The shared spaces include a kitchen, 
living and dining room, games and hobby areas, a laundry 
room, and a large yard with garden spaces. It really is a lovely 
place, Mr. Speaker. 

Residents make their own breakfast in the common kitchen 
when they choose to start their day. The staff prepares daily 
lunch and supper meals for residents to enjoy together. 
Volunteers provide Abbeyfield residents with hours of valuable 
companionship, joining with residents in the home’s activities 
and, Mr. Speaker, the residents gladly open up their home to 
others for these community events. 

Teachers and grade 2 students from nearby St. John’s School 
plant and harvest a vegetable garden on Abbeyfield grounds. 
Residents enjoy watching as the children learn skills planting, 
tending, and harvesting the gardens. Older students prepare a 
harvest meal at school using the produce. Students also share 
poetry, stories, and singing with the residents. 

Abbeyfield House has developed partnerships in the community 
to raise necessary funds. Ten years ago, a grant from the 



7832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

centenary affordable housing program and a mortgage with the 
Saskatoon Credit Union gave the home its early start, but today 
Abbeyfield House organizers work hard to raise funds to 
maintain and expand this valuable option, with so many seniors 
looking for quality housing choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Abbeyfield House on its 10th anniversary providing quality 
affordable living for seniors in Saskatoon. And I encourage all 
members to find ways to better support this kind of housing 
option for our seniors. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Action to Employment Program 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today to tell members about a great 
program called Action to Employment that offers seasonal yard 
care services to people in Saskatoon who require assistance. 
Supervised by Egadz staff, young people receive training and 
experience, gaining employment, safety, life, social, and 
leadership skills while community members gain reliable 
quality and generous support to help them live in their own 
homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, using youth to assist people in need for a little bit 
of help around their homes is a win-win scenario for everyone. I 
am proud that our government, through the Ministry of Social 
Services, supports action for employment initiatives along with 
community partners including Saskatoon Health Region, 
Saskatoon Truck Centre, Saskatoon Community Foundation, 
and Canadian Tire stores. These strong partners are bringing 
real, lasting benefits to hard-working families in our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the overarching vision of Egadz is, “Every child 
grows up to be a contributing citizen.” These strong partners 
bring real, lasting benefits to hard-working families and 
communities. I invite all members to recognize the hard work of 
those involved in this amazing program. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Chris Knox Foundation Makes Dreams Come True  
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the Assembly to recognize the good work of the Chris Knox 
Foundation. Chris Knox was a passionate young Saskatchewan 
Roughriders fan who bravely battled cancer in 2007. 
 
I clearly remember the 2007 Labour Day Classic, Mr. Speaker. 
Kerry Joseph runs 40 yards for the game-winning touchdown, 
last play of the game, euphoria at Mosaic Stadium. Most 
importantly, Mike McCullough heard about Chris prior to the 
game, went up into the stands, brought him down into the 
locker room, high-fives everywhere. It was certainly a very 
special memory, I’m sure for him as well as all of us. 
 
[14:15] 
 
 

But because of this, word of Chris’s story spread and inspired 
Saskatchewan residents, including the Premier, to launch a 
fundraising campaign to send Chris, his mom, and his palliative 
care nurse to Toronto to attend the Grey Cup. Mr. Speaker, the 
campaign was so successful that Chris’s dad and girlfriend as 
well as 10 other sick children and their families were also able 
to travel to Toronto for the game. Watching the Riders win the 
Grey Cup was a great way to give these families a happy 
distraction from their cancer battle. Sadly, a short time after the 
Rider Nation celebrated the big Grey Cup victory, Chris passed 
away. 
 
But in true Saskatchewan fashion, when faced with a loss, 
Chris’s family thought of others. They launched a foundation in 
his memory to help children and young adults with cancer 
attend sporting, fine arts, and cultural events to give them a 
reprieve from their illness. So far 1,461 dreams have been 
distributed by the foundation including every Grey Cup since 
’07. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce today that the 
government caucus is partnering with Harvard Radio and the 
Chris Knox Foundation to help a Saskatchewan family’s dream 
of seeing the Grey Cup come true this weekend in Winnipeg. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Opposition’s Position on Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 
House are in favour of the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, 
an agreement with a market of nearly 800 million people and a 
gross domestic product of twenty-eight and a half trillion 
dollars. These countries represent about 71 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s total exports. To say this trade deal is important 
for Saskatchewan, particularly our farmers, would be an 
understatement. 
 
But the NDP won’t put a position on the record, so much so that 
the member from Lakeview has spent five and a half hours 
filibustering in order not to take a stand. Now that’s nothing 
new. The first thing the Opposition Leader did was put his tree 
book policy paper in witness protection, and he hasn’t taken a 
solid stance on anything since. But this should be pretty cut and 
dried, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the best value in procurement bill, members opposite spoke 
in this Chamber for two and a half hours. On the municipal 
conflict of interest bill, just over two hours. On the essential 
services legislation, members opposite spoke for a whopping 
three hours and 16 minutes. But they will spend five and a half 
hours, with more to go, to ensure a seat on the fence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On this side of the House, we will make our choice clear to 
support free trade for our Saskatchewan producers. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7833 

Quality of Care in Long-Term Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined by 
several family members and former front-line workers who are 
sick and tired of this government’s inaction when it comes to 
the seniors’ care crisis, including Carrie Klassen, who was the 
first person to come to the legislature to raise alarm bells about 
seniors’ care about three years ago. 
 
She’s back today because she is frustrated by this government’s 
inaction, and she’s joined by others, some who have been here 
before and some who are here for the first time, including 
family members and health care workers. They want 
meaningful action now. No more delays, no more excuses. 
What does the Premier have to say to the people who have 
joined us here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. What I have to say to our guests today 
and through you, Mr. Speaker, to members in the House and to 
the people of the province is that this side of the House 
understands that there is much more work to be done in terms 
of improving long-term care for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we understood that that was the 
case in 2007 when we were fortunate enough to get elected and 
inherited a system that had actually been closing long-term care 
beds, Mr. Speaker, and had been underfunding human resources 
to the point where the nursing shortage was fully 1,000 nurses 
that we needed to have in the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have been working to address some of 
those issues. And I can report to the House that as a result of 
those efforts, as a result of more investments made, there are 
now 800 more people working in terms of care, in some 
capacity in long-term care than there was in 2007. Mr. Speaker, 
across the system, there are 40 per cent more licensed practical 
nurses than there were in 2007. There is 6 per cent more 
registered nurses, and care aids are also up 11 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve also understood the importance of home care in 
this, and so we’ve increased home care investments by 40 per 
cent. There’s been a number of capital investments as well to 
improve long-term care facilities themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the NDP 
opposition have brought forward, in an effective way, very 
compelling cases of those who have felt that the system has let 
them down or let their loved ones down, Mr. Speaker. This 
unfortunately has been a fact in the province for some time, 
transcending different governments. It doesn’t make it any more 
acceptable, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want that for anyone in the 
province, and so we’re going to continue to make additional 
investments in long-term care. We’re going to pursue some 
innovations — I’ll talk about it I’m sure in a moment, Mr. 
Speaker — and we understand that there’s much more work to 
be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we hear from the Premier the 
same lines, the same lines that we’ve been hearing for years, 
Mr. Speaker. The same dismissive approach where the 

government is pretending that these are isolated incidents, Mr. 
Speaker, all while we have had family after family come to the 
legislature. 
 
Lynn Emerson is here today. Her mom is 101 years old. She 
lived in a care home in Wolseley and now lives in a care home 
in Indian Head. Lynn says most of the workers are incredibly 
caring and do their absolute best. But the staffing levels are 
horribly inadequate in both homes, and the quality of care for 
seniors — seniors like her 101-year-old mother — is not 
acceptable. What does the Premier have to say to Lynn 
Emerson today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that we 
don’t want that experience for anyone in long-term care, and 
certainly we would want to not have any family members, any 
loved ones going through that on behalf of their loved ones that 
are in care in various institutions, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
point this important fact out. 
 
And you know, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition says these 
are just the same lines. They’re not. They’re the record of the 
government, and we can debate about whether they’re adequate 
or not. We’re saying that more needs to be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s fair for members opposite to 
attribute some sort of lack of compassion or lack of interest in 
the issue when we are highlighting for the members in the 
House and for the public the investments we’ve made to hire 
more front-line workers, to increase facilities, Mr. Speaker, to 
add new long-term care beds in the province, to pilot with more 
dollars new home care initiatives, Mr. Speaker. For this is our 
record. And we understand that more work needs to be done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The specific question that was asked just now by the Leader of 
the Opposition was with respect to the complement of staff. I 
can tell members of the House that there are 800 more staff 
working in long-term care across the province today than there 
were when members opposite had a chance to make decisions 
in long-term care with roughly the same complement of 
patients. So, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t at all take away the 
concerns of the family in this regard or any other family, but it 
is the fact. The fact is that this side of the House, after getting 
elected, has sought to hire 800 more workers in front-line care 
with roughly the same number of patients. So we agree that 
more needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, but this is improvement 
over where we were just eight years ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, families aren’t repeatedly coming 
to the legislature raising concerns and new people coming 
forward as we have today, Mr. Speaker, because they see 
improvement. They are coming forward because they see 
problems and they’re concerned with how they have been 
treated, Mr. Speaker, when they’ve raised these problems. 
 
Lynn was so frustrated by the inadequate care and she knew 
other family members and residents were frustrated as well, so 
she collected three pages, three pages of complaints, and she 



7834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

sent them to the health region. Do you know what she was told? 
She was told that complaining could get her in hot water 
because of The Health Information Protection Act, HIPA. She 
was essentially threatened with a $50,000 fine or a year in jail if 
she spoke out about her own mother’s care and if she helped 
other residents raise concerns that they were seeing. To the 
Premier: how on earth is that acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We take the issue 
that the member has just raised on behalf of the family very, 
very seriously. Mr. Speaker, we actually have implemented on 
this side of the House a survey process where we are actually 
seeking that input, whether it’s good news or bad news, frankly, 
whether the experiences have been positive or negative. Well 
the member for Cumberland is dismissing that. We’re very, 
very serious about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, the Minister of Health has stated very publicly that 
anyone and everyone should feel free to come forward with 
these concerns, and if any such threat of fines have happened, I 
would ask the Leader of the Opposition to please furnish us 
with the specifics because, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
will look into it immediately and if it is happening, he will put a 
stop to it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Lynn is here. The Premier can 
speak with her today, Mr. Speaker, and hear first-hand. And we 
have seen their approach, Mr. Speaker, not with just families 
but also with health care workers. 
 
Gena Ferguson Peters is here today too. She was a front-line 
worker at the Indian Head nursing home. A letter was sent 
directly to the Premier, directly to the Premier, signed by a large 
group of staff and residents from that care home, Mr. Speaker, 
including Gena. That letter raised major concerns about the 
state of senior care, and it was sent directly to the Premier. 
 
But he didn’t take it seriously. In fact, the staff who signed that 
letter were reprimanded for raising concerns. Just like Lynn 
Emerson, those staff were threatened with a $50,000 fine or jail 
time after writing to the Premier, simply for telling the Premier 
the truth, the truth about the state of seniors’ care here in 
Saskatchewan. What does the Premier have to say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that the situation 
as has been characterized by the Leader of the Opposition in 
this regard is unacceptable, and our . . . my office will look into 
it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — The Premier said on previous occasions that, 
when it comes to health care workers, “. . . they need to provide 
very direct and honest input, both to the regions and to the 
elected Government of Saskatchewan, any elected member 
indeed in this House, without any fear at all.” But then when 
workers wrote to him, they were threatened. This is what Gena 

says: “They’re shutting down people who try to stand up and be 
heard. Nobody will talk. They’re threatened by HIPA. HIPA is 
being used as a club to silence people.” 
 
Of course personal health information needs to be protected, but 
threatening a daughter who raises concerns about her own 
mother’s care, or threatening front-line workers who write 
directly to the Premier, raising their concerns about seniors’ 
care? I think that’s absolutely disgusting. How would the 
Premier describe it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the initiation of the 
Minister of Health and the Government of Saskatchewan, we 
have required that every long-term care facility have a 
resident-family council that also involves the staff for precisely 
this purpose, for providing feedback to the government and to 
the health region. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’ll want to look into 
the specifics of the matter, because what the member has just 
described is not acceptable. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — You see, Mr. Speaker, these are the types of 
lines and responses we’ve had for so many years from this 
Premier and from this government as concerns around seniors’ 
care have been brought forward. But then when we see what the 
reality is, when a family member or staff come forward with 
concerns, we have threatening of huge fines and jail time. 
That’s not right. That’s not right, and it shows an inconsistency 
with what is actually happening on the ground compared to the 
lines that we’re getting from this government. 
 
Gena actually met with the Health minister and asked for an 
independent investigation into the problems at the care home. 
Now the Health minister just sent those concerns back to the 
care home manager that was part of the problem. So Gena then 
faced intimidation for speaking to the Health minister. She says, 
“If you bring up an issue, they cover it up; then they get rid of 
you. This intimidation is endemic.” They cover up problems, 
and intimidation is endemic. We have been hearing this for far 
too long. When will the Premier finally start taking this 
seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would presume that the Leader of the Opposition has been able 
to provide the House with a consent form to be able to bring 
this material up, but I can say in a general sense, Mr. Speaker 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well we have rules, Mr. 
Speaker. But I will say that I know that the Deputy Premier is 
the member for Indian Head-Milestone and he has indicated 
that these concerns have not been raised in his office. But we 
will certainly be looking into these types of concerns that the 
Leader of the Opposition has raised. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We have taken these issues very seriously since the time that we 
formed government, not only trying to address the backlog in 
terms of the infrastructure in long-term care, in the staffing 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7835 

issues within long-term care, Mr. Speaker. And we do take it 
very seriously on this side of the House, and that’s why the 
Premier has made a commitment. I will make the commitment 
as well to look into these issues. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the people that are concerned are 
here today in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They’re looking 
down on this debate in disbelief that the Health minister of the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Premier of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, will start talking about consent forms when the family 
and the health care workers are right here in the Assembly. 
 
It speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And the member from Wascana Plains, I think she’s from, she’s 
saying this is theatrics. You’re saying this is theatrics when 
there is a mother here, concerned about her mother? This is 
theatrics? Look at their approach, Mr. Speaker. It is disgusting. 
No wonder, no wonder we see more and more of the same from 
this government when we have people heckling like that, Mr. 
Speaker, on this issue, when we have the Health minister 
ducking accountability and trying to hide behind some talk of 
forms, Mr. Speaker, instead of actually looking at the issue 
when it matters to people here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. When will this government start 
to take this seriously? When will they drop the intimidation, 
stop the excuses, and start listening to people who have the 
first-hand experience about what it is like in long-term care 
facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. We had 
recommendations that were made by the Privacy Commissioner 
that all members agreed to, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
process that everybody in this House agreed to. Mr. Speaker, 
we want to abide by that process and we will be abiding by that 
process. 
 
And I hope that the member opposite, in order for us to look 
into this information in a proper way, will be able to provide 
that information, Mr. Speaker. Because in the past, we have had 
cases — and I don’t think I need to remind the House but I will 
— we’ve had cases where the Leader of the Opposition has 
raised an issue using a family member to back up their case, 
Mr. Speaker, and what had turned out was, in that case, that a 
court had ruled that that family member in fact could not speak 
for that family member that was in long-term care. 
 
So we need to take these issues very seriously, and we do on 
this side of the House, but we also agreed as a House to follow 
the recommendations of the Privacy Commissioner. And I 
believe the members opposite agreed to that as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
changed. Once upon a time, once upon a time, Mr. Speaker, 
when families came to the legislature — and I’m thinking right 
after ’07 — I think maybe they would have listened. You 
wouldn’t have seen these types of excuses being made. You 

wouldn’t have seen, Mr. Speaker, this bureaucratese that’s 
coming out from the minister, Mr. Speaker, about real concerns. 
 
You know, the Premier got a letter about problems. The only 
thing that changed, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that changed 
was that front-line workers who sent that letter were threatened 
with a $50,000 fine or jail time. 
 
You know, the Health minister met with a front-line worker, 
Mr. Speaker. The only thing that changed, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Now we have the Minister of Social 
Services getting in on the heckling after the member from 
Wascana Plains, Mr. Speaker. It’s very sad, Mr. Speaker, that 
it’s come to this. 
 
The only thing that changed after the Health minister met with 
the worker is that that worker was intimidated. She says this: 
“Just like the fellow in Saskatoon, I started to be vilified. 
Instead of investigating themselves, all they’re investigating is 
the people complaining.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government take these concerns 
seriously? When will they stop intimidating people and when 
will they start listening to the folks that bring their concerns 
forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again I will say this as 
clearly as I can. We take these issues very seriously on this side 
of the House. And I think that while there is still more work to 
be done, I think demonstrated by the fact that this government 
on this side of the House is opposed to the members opposite 
that closed 19 long-term care facilities, closed 1,200 long-term 
care beds, Mr. Speaker, and laid off staff across this province, 
Mr. Speaker, we have done a lot of work in terms of adding 
additional staff into long-term care, making improvements in 
equipment and in training for our staff and in the facilities 
themselves, renewing them and maintaining those facilities. So 
that has been the policy on this side of the House and we’ll 
continue to do that work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the specific cases, I will be 
happy to look into those cases and provide to the public the 
information that I can obtain, either from the region or the 
ministry as it pertains to somebody raising that concern. But the 
Leader of the Opposition knows that, based on the 
recommendations of the Privacy Commissioner, we need a 
consent form to be able to do that. I can find the information, 
Mr. Speaker, but I need that form. We need that as a House, and 
the Leader of the Opposition knows that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to talk to the 
people that are here today, Mr. Speaker, and they’ll clearly hear, 
Mr. Speaker, their concerns. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the seniors’ care reports released 
today, both the reviews of the Wolseley facility and the Indian 
Head facility, they are practically glowing. Neither of them 
even mention staffing problems. But the people that are here 
today, Mr. Speaker, know that that’s not even remotely true. So 



7836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

it’s clear once again, yet again, we cannot trust these reports. 
That’s how dismissive and how flippant this government is still 
being with the seniors’ care crisis as we have seen on full 
display here during question period. 
 
My question to the Premier: how can the Premier possibly 
explain this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve gone through a process over the last three years 
where we’ve asked our senior leaders in the health care system 
to actually go to the front lines and speak with residents and 
their family members, and to staff, and to report back on that, 
Mr. Speaker. I do not hold the pen on those reports, Mr. 
Speaker. That is up to the senior leadership to write those 
reports. And in those reports . . . And I think it’s fair to say, and 
I think it’s pretty clear to the public, that those reports I think 
will show that there has been improvement where 
improvements have been made. But they also do indicate where 
there are concerns still within long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s keep in mind, up until this government made those 
changes, there was no accountability to the public in terms of 
what our front-line staff, what our senior leaders were seeing in 
long-term care. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a requirement in 
legislation for the Ministry of Health to inspect long-term care 
facilities that ended in 1996 and they finally repealed the 
regulations in 2002, Mr. Speaker. So even for a period of about 
six years they were required — the government was required — 
to inspect long-term care, and they just stopped doing it, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re trying to add back that transparency and 
accountability, Mr. Speaker. But there is more work to be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — My question to the Premier: why don’t the 
reports that were released today reflect the concerns that 
families have brought forward to the legislature today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look at 
the reports, I think that they do reflect the concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously though, they have to be written by an 
individual or a number of individuals that take part in those 
tours. Mr. Speaker, those senior leaders are there in the facility 
for a day, perhaps for part of a day, perhaps over a number of 
days, but they’re not there every day. So it is basically, Mr. 
Speaker, what they hear on that day that they’re able to talk to 
residents and staff and family members. And those reports I 
think are reflective, if you look at them in detail, Mr. Speaker, 
of not only improvements that have been made, but as well, 
areas that we still have to continue to work on. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, this is a far cry from the days when the 
members opposite never actually did what was required of them 
by law and that was to inspect long-term care facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, because they stopped doing that. We’re now moving 
back towards increasing transparency and accountability in the 
long-term care system. More work does need to be done, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think the people of this province see that the 

work is happening by this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the reports of these facilities don’t 
even talk about short-staffing. What they talk about are cracks 
in sidewalks, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the cracks are there, Mr. 
Speaker, but we have family members and people with 
first-hand experience here today, Mr. Speaker, that know that 
short-staffing is a major problem in these facilities, and no 
explanation about why that is not covered in the reports for 
these facilities at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is it that we have reports not 
reflecting the reality that families who are here in the legislature 
today have brought forward? Why is that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, so what we’ve 
asked our senior leaders, including our CEOs [chief executive 
officer], is to go to our long-term care facilities on an annual 
basis, ask for feedback from residents and families, family 
members, as well as our staff, Mr. Speaker, and to submit a 
report to the Ministry of Health based in a general way on the 
feedback that they received. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite would like me to speak 
with the senior leaders that would have been at this particular 
facility to find out who exactly they spoke to and what time of 
day that they were there at and, Mr. Speaker, report back on 
what exactly they saw, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is already 
indicated; certainly, the feedback is indicated in that report. 
 
Again, this is during a visit to that facility that we are requiring 
now by this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 
reports will clearly show where there have been improvements 
made and they will clearly show where there are concerns that 
still exist within our special care homes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — It’s very concerning, Mr. Speaker, to hear such 
a flippant tone coming from the minister with respect to these 
reports. Mr. Speaker, Linda Wacker is speaking out today. She 
has decades of experience as a social worker in our health care 
system. She says the needs of residents in care facilities have 
totally changed and staffing levels simply have not kept pace. 
She says the government talks about putting more money into 
the system but she doesn’t see it. 
 
Linda wonders why it makes sense to have legislation when it 
comes to child care facilities but not for long-term care 
facilities. Residents in long-term care facilities are vulnerable 
and they deserve so much better. She says that this is simply a 
matter of priorities, and I agree with her. My question to the 
Premier: when will he agree with that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, one of the priorities of this 
government has been to make improvements within long-term 
care. Mr. Speaker, we know that the needs of residents have 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7837 

changed and are changing and that’s why we are making 
changes and making improvements in terms of the training that 
we provide to our staff. 
 
So now we are rolling out across our health regions gentle 
persuasion training to help with those residents that have some 
form of dementia or Alzheimer’s. We are increasing more 
consistent type of rounds that are done in long-term care, so our 
residents know that a staff member will be looking in on them 
at a more consistent basis. And we’ve seen improvements in the 
number of health regions who their residents believe, or we 
know that there are fewer falls and fewer call bells going 
unanswered because of that more consistent rounding that is 
now taking place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost what we’ve done as a 
government is we’ve added to the complement of staff in our 
long-term and integrated facilities. Nearly 800 more full-time 
equivalents than were under the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. More work needs to be done but we are making 
improvements in the system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Linda has years of experience, 
knows the system very, very well. She says, Mr. Speaker, that 
the needs for long-term residents have changed greatly. My 
question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: does he agree with Linda 
that those needs have changed, and why is it that Linda can’t 
see where the money has gone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, you know I can indicate to 
the House that under this government we know that there are 
considerable needs in long-term care and we have worked to 
address those needs over the last number of years including in 
the last year. For example, in the 2014 report, one of the things 
that was pointed out as a concern at Central Haven Special Care 
Home in Saskatoon was, “Many beds are more than 10 years 
old. We need more low beds.” And so in this year, the report 
would reflect that there are now 15 new low beds. Four lifts 
have been purchased. 
 
In LutherCare Communities in Saskatoon, the concern in 2014 
was tubs are old and they require low beds. So in 2015 the new 
report would indicate that there are 15 low beds added to that 
facility, a brand new tub, and five lifts have been purchased. 
 
We’ve had nearly 700 lifts and slings and tubs and beds added, 
new mattresses added to the system, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
work that we’re doing on this side of the House. You know, in 
25 minutes of question period, we haven’t heard one solution 
from the Leader of the Opposition, and we’re three months 
away from the next election. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Extension of Legislative Session 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to 

seek leave under rule 61 to move a motion of urgent and 
pressing necessity. And if there is unanimous consent to do so, I 
would be prepared to move the following brief motion: 
 

That this Assembly extend the fourth session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature to conclude at the daily 
adjournment on Thursday, December 10th, 2015 to allow 
for proper scrutiny of the mid-year financial updates and 
the senior care report, along with the appropriate debate on 
other issues . . . 

 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to move a 
motion under rule 61. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Order . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Same for you. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answer to 
question 1,095. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled a response 
to question 195. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 1,096 through 1,098. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 1,096 through 1,098. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to move 
that a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to order a 
humble address to Her Majesty. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this address will recommend that John Glen Gardner of Regina 
be reappointed as a member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure 



7838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Act. This reappointment would be effective April 15, 2016 for a 
term of five years. 
 
Mr. Gardner was first appointed as a member of the Public and 
Private Rights Board on April 15, 2011. At that time he served 
as a director of the dispute resolution office. Mr. Gardner 
continued to serve as director of that office and in February 
2014 also assumed the role of assistant deputy minister of 
innovation for the Ministry of Justice. 
 
The Public and Private Rights Board is appointed pursuant to 
The Expropriation Procedure Act. Under that Act, the board is 
granted authority to review matters respecting the appropriation 
of land or the intention to acquire land by expropriating 
authorities. The board investigates claims and manages 
negotiations between landowners and expropriating authorities 
to help the parties achieve a resolution. Landowners may 
request the board to review the route, situation, or design of a 
public improvement and/or the amount of compensation offered 
for the expropriated land. 
 
Because the role of the Public and Private Rights Board is 
focused on dispute resolution, Mr. Gardner remains an 
appropriate candidate for reappointment. Mr. Gardner has 
worked with the dispute resolution office since 1988. He has 
significant experience employing dispute resolution techniques 
to help parties achieve fair outcomes and has also spent many 
years teaching dispute resolution methods as a sessional lecturer 
at the University of Saskatchewan College of Law. 
 
In his new role as assistant deputy minister of innovation, Mr. 
Gardner has taken on various initiatives to promote dispute 
resolution and increase access for justice to Saskatchewan 
residents. Mr. Gardner’s experience with dispute resolution 
techniques, combined with his commitment to providing fair 
and accessible justice to all Saskatchewan residents has been 
valuable in his role as a board member. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that John Glen 
Gardner be reappointed as a member of the Public and 
Private Rights Board effective April 15, 2016, for a term of 
five years pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation 
Procedure Act. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The humble address presented by the Minister 
for Justice and Attorney General: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that John Glen 
Gardner be reappointed as a member of the Public and 
Private Rights Board effective April 15, 2016, for a term of 
five years pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation 
Procedure Act. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
trade agreement, the largest and most ambitious free trade 
initiative in history, and calls on the Government of 
Canada to ratify the finalized agreement at the earliest 
possible opportunity.] 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — So thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise again to speak to the motion from the government about the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement. It’s acknowledged 
that this trade agreement . . . And perhaps for those new viewers 
this afternoon, I’ll identify the countries involved. Obviously 
it’s Canada, then Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Japan, 
Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, United 
States, and Vietnam. And, Mr. Speaker, these countries are 
located on four continents around the Pacific Ocean, and they 
have been working for a number of years to develop this trade 
agreement which covers 40 per cent of the world’s trade. 
 
And I think it’s important to once again emphasize the very first 
paragraph of the preamble related to this agreement. There are 
about 6,000 pages in this agreement, but this is on page 1. And 
what it says: 
 

The Parties to this Agreement [these 12 nations are], 
resolving to: 
 
ESTABLISH a comprehensive regional agreement that 
promotes economic integration to liberalise trade and 
investment, bring economic growth and social benefits, 
create new opportunities for workers and businesses, 
contribute to raising living standards, benefit consumers, 
reduce poverty and promote sustainable growth. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have read this paragraph a number of 
times in my discussion of this TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership] 
agreement because what it identifies is the fact that this is much 
more than just a trade agreement. It encompasses many parts of 
the life of Saskatchewan citizens and Canadian citizens. And 
it’s clear from the number of comments, the number of pieces 
of information that I’ve received from people who were 
listening to me speak yesterday and last night, that people are 
interested in this and also concerned what it means for 
Saskatchewan people, for Canadians. 
 
And one of the items that was forwarded to me is something 
which I think is quite appropriate to start off this afternoon’s 
discussion, and this is the editorial from The Globe and Mail 
newspaper dated Thursday, November 12th, 2015. And the title 
on this editorial is, “Read the entire TPP text? No way. That’s 
Parliament’s job.” And here’s what the editorial board at The 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7839 

Globe and Mail says: 
 

U.S. President Barack Obama made a suggestion to the 
American people this week: Go online and read the text of 
the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact before making up 
your mind about it. Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s Minister 
of International Trade, has said the Liberal government is 
“committed to reviewing the agreement . . . and, crucially, 
to giving Canadians a chance to read it and to respond to 
it.” 

 
Okay, listen. Really? Canadian and American citizens are 
going to read a 6,000-page legal document that contains 
two million words and, in paper form, weighs 45 
kilograms? It’s a noble goal — no question of that. But 
come on. 

 
To read the TPP and understand it would require legal 
training and the experience in international trade to place 
the proposed deal in the context of current agreements. 
You’d need to be a student of Canada’s economy, with a 
specialty in its marketing boards, its exports and its tariff 
structure. You’d have to bone up on our laws on 
intellectual property, banks, labour and 
telecommunications. A familiarity with Vietnam’s tariffs 
on “meat of horses, asses, mules or hinnies, fresh, chilled 
or frozen” wouldn’t hurt either, not to mention . . . what a 
hinny is in the first place. 

 
While we have faith in the intellectual capacity of 
Canadians, we doubt they have the time and patience to 
wade through so complex and long a document. But that’s 
what is disingenuously being asked of them in this new era 
of selective governmental “transparency,” to use Mr. 
Obama’s word, in which deals like these are posted on the 
Internet so that politicians can boast that they didn’t hide 
anything from the public, while other critical documents of 
equal public interest are classified or kept out of easy reach 
by bureaucratic firewalls. 

 
It’s all too much to ask of Canadians and Americans. 
Politicians are telling them to read War and Peace four 
times in a row, which they might as well do in the original 
Russian for all the average person will get out of it. And 
they will have to absorb the deal’s implications over the 
din of interest groups and politicians squawking for their 
attention and support. 
 
This isn’t fair or right. The duty to dissect the deal’s 
implications doesn’t fall on average Canadians, even if it 
behooves them to inform themselves. The responsibility 
for analyzing the benefits and downsides falls on their 
elected representatives. In Canada’s case, that is the job of 
Parliament. 
 
For Parliament to fulfill its duty in the best way possible, 
the Liberals need to break the pact down into its various 
parts and send those parts to the relevant Commons or 
Senate committee. 
 
The TPP, it must be admitted by all parties, is a more than 
just a free-trade agreement. It contains many requirements 
on sovereign governments to change their laws in order to 

make them uniform with those of the other countries in the 
deal. This is not just about eliminating tariffs any more. 
 
One of the bigger examples of that is the requirement for 
all signatories to keep copyrighted material out of the 
public domain for 70 years after the death of the author. In 
Canada, the protected period is 50 years. What will the 
implication be if Canadian companies suddenly have to 
pay royalties on works for an additional 20 years? Some 
have argued it will cost our economy hundreds of millions 
of dollars. 
 
The TPP contains similar language in many areas, 
including the Internet, the environment and the protection 
of trade secrets. Canada would be obliged to change its 
laws, including the Criminal Code, or adopt new ones, in 
order to benefit from lower or eliminated tariffs on its 
exports. 
 
Is it worth the tradeoff? Agreements that liberalize trade 
are good for Canada’s economy. For the most part, the TPP 
does just that. 
 
But if Ms. Freeland and her party are serious about making 
sure Canadians understand its implications, they will have 
to give Parliamentary committees the time and resources to 
go over it section by section and hear testimony from 
neutral experts. Parliament will have to report back to 
Canadians in plain language about what they are getting 
and what they are giving up. And then the government will 
have to make an argument for ratification, or demand 
further negotiations to protect Canada’s interests. 
 
There is no rush. The deal needs to be ratified by a 
partisan, electioneering Congress, and Mr. Obama is facing 
an uphill battle on that front. That’s part of the reason he is 
appealing directly to the American people to read the TPP 
in the hope they will see its appeal and pressure their 
representatives to ratify it. 
 
It doesn’t have to work that way in Canada. The defeat of 
the Harper government — a government that reduced 
Parliament to a rubber stamp — is solid evidence that 
Canadians want their representatives to do the job they 
were elected to do. That is, protect Canadians’ interests in 
an informed, non-partisan manner. The TPP debate is the 
place to start. 

 
End of the editorial from The Globe and Mail. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I submit that we, as the legislators in Saskatchewan, 
have a similar responsibility to our citizens to take apart this 
whole massive agreement and look at various aspects of the 
agreement as it relates to what’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I pointed out yesterday and I’ll point out further today, 
there are many clauses that relate directly to our most important 
businesses, our most important industries, whether it’s the 
GMO [genetically modified organism] clauses relating to both 
plants and animals, whether it’s the various types of 
phytosanitary/sanitary certificates needed for the international 
transfer of meat products, whether it’s the issues around how 
we organize some of our state businesses — all of these kinds 
of things and there are many more of them. I guess the ones 



7840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

relating to trademarks, relating to some of these other issues, all 
of those are crucial for what happens in our province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I think it’s important that we as legislators, obviously with 
the leadership of the elected government of the day, that they 
need to take a look at how all of this is going to affect what 
happens here in Saskatchewan. We then would obviously 
prepare our material as it relates to those things that are of 
special concern to us and make sure it goes to the federal 
government. But we know from the things that are happening 
over this next week that the new national government is 
including provinces and premiers and other ministers in trying 
to sort out a number of these kinds of issues. 
 
And I think The Globe and Mail is quite direct in saying that’s 
parliament’s job. That’s part of the heading of that editorial. 
And that’s why coming forward with a two- or three-line 
motion without any kind of discussion or information or chance 
to set up a procedure to review this is maybe moving a little 
faster than we should be. What we know is that the process has 
just started. We have a text and, as I have indicated, the text at 
the top of every page says “Subject to Legal Review in English, 
Spanish and French for Accuracy, Clarity and Consistency 
Subject to Authentication of English, Spanish and French 
Versions.” 
 
And if any of my colleagues here in the legislature has been 
able to get to the very end of the agreement in their reading, the 
very last paragraph . . . I read you the first paragraph of the 
agreement but the very last paragraph, chapter 30.8 says 
“Authentic Texts.” And that last paragraph says “The English, 
Spanish, and French texts of this Agreement are equally 
authentic. In the event of any divergence between those texts, 
the English text shall prevail.” 
 
So you’d look at sort of the economic power of the people who 
have put this agreement together, and obviously the English 
ones have the majority at what’s going on. But practically what 
that means is that this text has still got some movement to it. 
There are still some areas where further clarification needs to be 
made. I identified a few of those areas yesterday but I think, 
using the expertise we have in the province of Saskatchewan, 
there are other areas where we would be able to point out things 
that need to be fixed or new words be used so that it will be 
appropriate for Saskatchewan. 
 
Now last night I was in the middle of chapter 17, dealing with 
the issue of state-owned enterprises and designated monopolies. 
And this particular chapter deals with basically the commercial 
interests of international companies and many of them are based 
in some of these 12 nations that we have, and there is sort of a 
definite suspicion I guess, if I could put it that way, is how I 
read this text of state-owned or state-controlled companies. 
 
So one of the aspects of this chapter relates to transparency, and 
I thought it was interesting to look at the clause around 
transparency. It’s actually quite a few pages long because that 
seems to be the issue that we don’t know which companies in 
some of these countries are state owned or not, and we can’t 
really tell what the ownership rules are because they have 
different ways of providing registrations. 

So what the clause says in 17.10 is: 
 

1. Each Party shall provide to the other Parties [so each 
nation shall provide to the other nations] or otherwise 
make publicly available on an official website a list of its 
state-owned enterprises within 6 months after the date on 
which this Agreement enters into force for the Party [or the 
country], and thereafter shall update the list annually. 

 
So in other words, it must not be totally obvious which 
companies are state-owned companies. And there’s a concern 
that that information be very public, so that I guess some people 
trying to make deals don’t end up being partners in a 
state-owned company, or selling property or assets to a 
state-owned company, and they don’t know that that’s 
happening. 
 
Now that’s an issue that we have in Saskatchewan. We know 
that the Minister of Agriculture dealt with a number of issues 
around farm land in Saskatchewan and who actually can buy 
some of that land. And so it’s related to this issue, in that are 
pension plans included in this kind of a situation or not. Also 
there’s situations where we know, now recently, in northern 
Saskatchewan that one of the companies that has been 
traditionally a Saskatchewan company that is involved in 
staking claims for minerals, has now obtained substantial 
Chinese interests. One of the mining operation companies, 
there’s a substantial, that does a lot of work in Saskatchewan, 
has now got a substantial Chinese interest. And that’s not 
necessarily a bad thing, but it is something that becomes an 
issue for all of us here in this legislature. 
 
And so when we look at the definition of the state-owned 
enterprises, it does look at how independent pension funds are 
treated, and it also looks at how sovereign wealth funds are 
treated. That’s another area of concern to us here because we 
know that one of the goals of our province and our citizens is to 
have a sovereign wealth fund. Unfortunately, all the money has 
been spent in times of boom; there’s been no money that’s been 
set aside like they’ve done in some other jurisdictions, whether 
it’s Alaska or Brunei or Norway. We had a very sort of simple 
look at how we might do this in Saskatchewan but, I think, 
clearly in the long term we need to look at how we can create 
some kind of a wealth fund here which allows us to have a 
cushion to deal with downturns in the price of oil or downturns 
in the agricultural business or other areas like that. 
 
But this agreement relates to some of those kinds of initiatives, 
and how it relates is not entirely obvious on the first glance of 
how that’s done. 
 
Now, as I’ve said before, each chapter has its own annexes, but 
each chapter also seems to have its own committee. And 
this . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m seeking leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7841 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I thank the member for Lakeview for the chance to make 
this introduction today. To you and through you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to introduce someone who is no stranger to the 
Legislative Assembly although when last I saw him he wasn’t 
sitting in that particular part of the Legislative Assembly, in 
your gallery. 
 
It’s Tim McMillan, who is the president, CEO of the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers, of CAPP now, of course 
formerly a member of this House and a member of the cabinet. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be a source of pride for the 
people of the province that CAPP has chosen one of our own to 
lead them through a time of some significant challenge. And so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s good to see Tim back here in his 
Legislative Assembly, and I’d ask all members to welcome him 
today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Premier very briefly and welcome Mr. 
Tim McMillan, president of CAPP, here today to his Assembly. 
Certainly, as was mentioned, he knows this Assembly well. It’s 
a pleasure to have him back in the Assembly here today, and 
also we look forward to the discussion here tonight with him, 
with a bit of a dialogue. We’re thankful for his service that he 
provides, certainly to the economies of Western Canada and 
certainly to this province, in his representation of very 
important members within our economy. So it’s a pleasure to 
welcome Tim McMillan to his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d like to 
join with my colleagues in welcoming Tim McMillan back to 
the legislature here. And I know if he was here, he’d be one of 
the few people that would be listening to my whole speech 

because this is an area that he’s especially concerned, which is 
international trade and all of the issues there. And clearly there 
are issues that affect the oil and petroleum industry that need to 
be identified as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I was just talking about chapter 17 and the 
issues around state-owned enterprises and designated 
monopolies. And clearly this is an area where the oil industry 
has been involved. But Article 17.12, which is in chapter 17, 
says that there’s going to be a committee established, but it’s 
called the committee on state-owned enterprises and designated 
monopolies, and each country will have a representative. And 
this whole committee doesn’t necessarily have a clear mandate 
other than to develop co-operative efforts and do some 
consultation.  
 
And I think what that reflects is that this is a touchy area in this 
whole agreement, the area around state-owned enterprises, and 
different of the countries involved have different histories, 
different perspectives on the role of state-owned enterprises. 
And so, much as the power of the United States in the 
negotiation of this plays through, this is an area where they’ve 
had to be, I think, somewhat careful in how they outline the 
terms that are going to be used. 
 
And so in this area we then get to the appendices and/or the 
annexes. The first annex, annex 17-A, relates to a threshold 
calculation. And effectively what this does, as it says, there’s a 
certain value of companies that are to be caught in this kind of a 
situation, and the value is based on 200 million special drawing 
rights, or SDRs. And that’s not a term we hear very often unless 
you’re very deep into the financial pages, but basically special 
drawing rights were created in 1969 in the International 
Monetary Fund as a basis for having a value which was related 
to the US [United States] dollar but was not totally dependent 
on the US dollar. 
 
And I think at the present time there are four currencies in this 
mix, and it’s the US dollar, the British pound, and Japanese yen. 
And I’m not sure if it’s the Deutschmark or the euro; I think it’s 
the euro that’s involved. And so what it means is that this 
agreement is only going to apply to some of the larger entities 
that are involved. 
 
The second annex, 17-B, relates to the process for developing 
information concerning state-owned enterprises and designated 
monopolies. Once again, Mr. Speaker, this paragraph or this 
page and a half shows how sensitive this topic is within the 
overall agreement. And so it sets out some very careful rules 
about how state-owned enterprises are described, what kind of 
information will need to be provided in the list that each of the 
countries provides or each of the parties provides, and then 
how, if the values or the percentage of ownerships are disputed, 
there is a process to deal with some of those disputes. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now there are also a commitment — I guess, in a way, a sunset 
clause — which is annex 17-C. And it says, let’s see how these 
rules work for five years, and then we commit to actually 
reopening or renegotiating these particular clauses as it relates 
to this area. That’s once again a sign that the whole issue of 
state-owned enterprises is contentious. 



7842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Now the next annex, 17-D, is one that applies directly to 
Saskatchewan, and it’s one where I think the government needs 
to look carefully at how this does apply or doesn’t apply, 
depending how it all plays out. And this is called “Application 
to Sub-Central State-Owned Enterprises and Designated 
Monopolies.” And sub-central states are provinces or territories 
in Canada, as we saw in an earlier chapter, the definition. 
 
And as it relates to Canada there are a number of exemptions 
that Canada seeks to basically have a protection for the 
provinces in Canada. And they relate to issues like 
non-discriminatory treatment, commercial considerations, 
courts and administrative bodies, non-commercial assistance. 
So in other words, does the state or the province provide some 
assistance to a state-owned corporation that it might not provide 
to a private corporation? And also then the transparency 
question, and the transparency question then goes back to that 
point I was talking about, which is the written request, where 
there is a request for information about a policy or program 
adopted or maintained by a sub-central level of government. 
 
What annex 17-D does is that Canada says this agreement’s not 
going to apply at this time to these kinds of documents, or that 
kind of information. But that’s why I mentioned the fact of 
there being a sunset clause. It looks as if there’s pressure on all 
of the countries, because virtually every country has a whole list 
of exemptions as it relates to state-owned enterprises, and so 
practically that request is something that will be reviewed 
within five years if Canada finally ratifies this agreement. And 
so the question then becomes how much more will we know in 
five years about this? Are we prepared now? Do we know if 
there are any things that affect how our provincially owned 
assets are dealt with? 
 
And so then practically this whole chapter, as I said before, 
related to state-owned enterprises is a sensitive one among the 
12 nations. And it’s clear that there’s a request, most likely 
from the United States, to get more information, more 
transparency, so that if there are challenges that can be made. I 
think other exemptions that we would see if we were looking at 
the other 5,000 pages of this agreement would actually go back 
and relate to this area as well because the various countries have 
institutions that they want to protect, state-owned enterprises 
that they want to protect. 
 
And so we need to understand what Saskatchewan’s position is 
here and also how these things affect Saskatchewan, and that’s 
the role of the government members of the executive of our 
province and the civil servants to review that. I think a 
procedure that might facilitate that would be the ability to have 
committees of the legislature have witnesses attend. They’d be 
usually neutral experts who could go through and explain what 
happens. And then I think after a thoughtful review, I think our 
legislative colleagues in this place could provide good advice, 
whether it’s in agriculture or whether it’s in certain businesses, 
state-owned enterprises, health care, social services. There’s a 
whole number of issues that are of concern. 
 
The next chapter, 18, deals with intellectual property. And as 
you know from some of my comments yesterday as we were 
moving towards this chapter, this is one of the hottest issues in 
the whole trade agreement we’re dealing with here because of 
the substantial number of patents around very specific things in 

the whole telecommunications world, in the IT [information 
technology] world, and also, I have to say, on a number of the 
issues around how do you patent life forms. And that relates to 
some of the GMO issues. It relates to some of the sort of 
embryo enhancement that’s done other than through our 
traditional breeding. 
 
And so some of the rules and some of the things that we’re 
agreeing to, if we finally go into this agreement, will directly 
affect our producers that are here at Agribition. It’ll affect 
people that are at the . . . you know, the grain farmers as well. 
And so once again we need to be vigilant. We need to be careful 
so that we understand what it is that our country is pulling our 
very good world traders into and make sure that they are 
protected as we go forward. 
 
But this chapter 18 starts off to basically recognize that there 
are many agreements already in this area, and that they’re 
attempting to build on those agreements and not in any way 
cause a disruption in those other areas. But the objective of the 
chapter, and I’ll read article 18.2: 
 

The protection and enforcement of intellectual property 
rights should contribute to the promotion of technological 
innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of 
technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users 
of . . . [technical] knowledge and in a manner conducive to 
social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and 
obligations. 

 
And so that’s that paragraph, and you see already in the 
wording these . . . protection of privacy, protection of 
individuals, advancement of the social cause of the community. 
And at the same time you want to protect the entrepreneurs who 
risk money building things and people who think up new ideas. 
And how you balance those tasks is quite difficult. 
 
We know that that’s our constant challenge here in 
Saskatchewan as we try to balance the protection of individuals’ 
information over and against improving things in our 
community, and we continually try to do some of the similar 
kinds of issues. But this is dealing with it on an international 
basis. We know this addresses or attempts to address issues like 
piracy, like people abusing the access to things, I suppose, like 
Netflix and other things. It’s got a whole array of direct 
connections to what happens in everyday life. And we know 
that some of the changes that are being proposed here are not 
fully understood and need to be discussed. 
 
Now once again, article 18.8 deals with national treatment. And 
what this says is that of these 12 countries, if you treat your 
Canadian citizens in one way, then you’re going to treat the 
citizens of all these other countries in the same way. And if you 
move away from that equal treatments, then you have to have 
some pretty clear reasons for doing it, and you must do it in a 
way that once again is transparent but also fair. 
 
There are many, I guess, legal issues that are interwoven into 
this whole chapter as well. And I think after I’ve gone through 
in a bit of a summary way, I’ll maybe go back and look at a 
couple of them because they are ones that are concerning to us. 
 
So the first section basically is setting out, once again, an 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7843 

aspirational goal of co-operation of people working together to 
make sure these kinds of things work. And as we know, we’re 
quite used to using a cellphone in our pocket to get access to 
anywhere in the world instantaneously, and that doesn’t happen 
without many, many agreements that are tied together with that. 
And so what we need to understand is how this agreement is 
going to affect that ability in the longer term. Clearly our hope 
would be that it would further enhance our use of that, and also 
protect privacy of people who are using the Internet or other 
data forms. 
 
And what’s interesting is that in this area there is the sense of 
co-operation. It relates to how can small- and medium-sized 
enterprises more easily become involved in world trade. And 
that’s always a goal when the main people at the table are the 
big companies that are going to benefit, and how that can 
happen isn’t always clear. And we have in Saskatchewan some 
of the international large players in certain industries, but we 
also have many of the small- and medium-sized enterprises that 
wish to develop world markets. 
 
And so I think to understand how these intellectual property 
issues that are going to be assisting our smaller businesses 
compete on a worldwide basis, I think it’s important that we 
understand what’s being done here and maybe give some 
examples or ideas about how this kind of an international 
agreement can benefit our local IT businesses or just local 
businesses that use IT in an international way. 
 
There’s another paragraph, which is article 18.15, which is 
called Public Domain. And once again it’s just a straight, in a 
way, a straight statement. And it just says, “The Parties 
recognise the importance of a rich and accessible public 
domain.” And as I talked about yesterday, there’s a public 
Internet or public data system, but also increasingly there are 
very private and very controlled and hidden connections that are 
not public. And how and where those intersect and who controls 
the public domain or these other domains is important in the 
long term for, especially individuals but also for small and 
medium businesses. So there’s an aspirational goal that says . . . 
or something that says here, yes, this is important. 
 
The next paragraph is interesting, and once again I think it 
relates very directly to Saskatchewan. And that’s article 18.16, 
and it’s called “Cooperation in the Area of Traditional 
Knowledge.” And paragraph 1 states: 
 

The Parties recognise the relevance of intellectual property 
systems and traditional knowledge associated with genetic 
resources to each other, when that traditional knowledge is 
related to those intellectual property systems. 

 
Now it’s not quite clear what’s being referenced here, but I 
think it’s a recognition that in some jurisdictions — the United 
States — they have developed patents on genetic resources and 
they are . . . This whole chapter really comes from the 
American negotiators. And there’s a desire that their system, 
which recognizes patents on genetic resources, would also be 
right across the 12 nations. And so how this can take place is 
then what’s set out in this chapter. And this is crucial for 
Saskatchewan. It’s crucial for our farmers and ranchers. 
 
[15:30] 

And so paragraph 2 goes on to say: 
 

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate through their 
respective agencies responsible for intellectual property, or 
other relevant institutions, to enhance the understanding of 
issues connected with traditional knowledge associated 
with genetic resources, and genetic resources. 

 
So it’s traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources 
and the genetic resources themselves. 
 
And then paragraph 3 says: 
 

The Parties shall endeavour to pursue quality patent 
examination, which may include: 
 
(a) that in determining prior art, relevant publicly available 
documented information related to traditional knowledge 
associated with genetic resources may be taken into 
account; 
 
(b) an opportunity for third parties to cite, in writing, to the 
competent examining authority prior art disclosures that 
may have a bearing on patentability, including prior art 
disclosures related to traditional knowledge associated with 
genetic resources; 

 
(c) if applicable and appropriate, the use of databases or 
digital libraries containing traditional knowledge 
associated with genetic resources; and 
 
(d) cooperation in the training of patent examiners in the 
examination of patent applications relating to traditional 
knowledge associated with genetic resources. 

 
So this chapter or . . . Article 18.16 deals with this code word 
which is traditional knowledge associated with genetic 
resources. And this gets to the heart of this question about 
whether somebody can own a gene manipulation thing. We 
know that this one area, which affects us in Saskatchewan — 
that’s on a human side, not on an agriculture side — relates to 
some of the medications for breast cancer that are related to 
who owns some of the genetics around some ways of treating 
breast cancer. 
 
And so I’m not sure what the total result of that kind of 
paragraph will be in the long term, but it’s once again an area 
that we need to understand before we finally ratify this 
agreement — before, hopefully, we even sign the agreement. 
And it is an area where the intellectual property lawyers, the 
patent lawyers, are raising red flags and they’re saying, be 
careful. Make sure you know what’s being done here, and 
recognize the fact that much of this chapter comes from a US 
law base which is different than the other countries that we have 
here. 
 
There also are issues in this area. When they use the word 
traditional knowledge, it goes toward some of the issues around 
First Nations and Métis people in Canada and some of the 
information, the knowledge that they have, and then therefore 
the duty to consult in the patent process before somebody 
appropriates information. 
 



7844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

We know in the pharmaceutical world there are many books 
written about discovery of new drugs, and when you actually 
then go back and really examine what happened, it is an 
appropriation of traditional knowledge associated with genetic 
resources, either human or animal or plant in a community, that 
are then taken to the lab and reproduced. And there is clearly a 
duty there on the companies involved or the people that are 
applying for the patents to consult with First Nations and Métis 
people. 
 
Now the next section in this intellectual property area is 
trademarks. And it starts with article 18.18, and it says the types 
of signs that are registrable as trademarks. And I think 
everybody might like to listen to the discussion about this 
because it raises some really interesting points. And I’ll read it 
sentence by sentence so we can talk about this: 
 

No Party shall require, as a condition of registration, that a 
sign be visually perceptible, nor shall a Party deny 
registration of a trademark only on the ground that the sign 
of which it is composed is a sound. 

 
So in other words, trademark we always think of as something 
you can see. But what this is saying is it’s also possible to 
trademark a sound. 
 
So what kind of sounds would be trademarked? Well a good 
example is the kind of sound that a computer company puts on 
their computer to tell you that a message has arrived. And 
everybody kind of recognizes those sounds, and they don’t want 
anybody else to use that sound on their computer or for any 
other purpose. And so there’s a sound that they want to register. 
 
Maybe in the Saskatchewan legislature we want to put a 
trademark on the sound of the bells calling us all to vote 
because we all know what that sounds like and it probably 
shouldn’t be used anywhere else than here. And you know, is 
that something . . . I’m not sure it has any great value that’s 
worth trademarking, but it is the kind of thing to talk about, 
which is a sound. 
 
Now let’s go to the next sentence that says, “Additionally, each 
Party shall make best efforts to register scent marks.” So scent 
marks, clearly what that is is the perfume industry. The perfume 
industry wants to know that if they develop a very specific 
scent, then they have the scent mark — the ability to have that 
mark be theirs and that they can then sell it. 
 
What we know or what you can see is that when you travel in 
certain countries in the world, they will sell the knock-off scents 
based on all of the most expensive perfumes in the world. And 
you can probably even find some of them in Saskatchewan, 
where there are attempts to imitate these expensive scents. So 
the industry has made the point that this is a type of thing that 
should have a trademark as well. 
 
I know one of my legislative colleagues who used to be a 
member of the state legislature in the state of Maryland left his 
work in the legislature and now works for, you know, I think 
it’s called the American perfume association. And this is the 
kind of work that he is doing, is to help the industry as a whole 
working together to get protection for their scents. 
 

And so when I saw this here, I said, well that’s probably as a 
result of the work of companies right across all 12 countries or 
12 parties to this agreement, but I’m sure a lot it comes out of 
the work that John is doing in Washington, D.C. [District of 
Columbia]. 
 
So the next sentence in this short paragraph is this: “A party 
may require a concise and accurate description or graphical 
representation or both as applicable of the trademark.” So what 
this is saying is, even if you can trademark a sound or you can 
trademark a scent, you have to have a way of describing it that 
makes it clear that that’s the sound or the scent that you’re 
going to get a trademark for, or a mark for, they call it, a sound 
mark or a scent mark. 
 
So that’s kind of interesting and it says that the parties will try 
to develop systems in their countries that will deal with these 
new or old ideas. I guess it kind of depends which jurisdiction 
that you’re in. 
 
And then it goes on to talk about other trademark issues that are 
more general. One of the issues that arises when you have 12 
countries join together is that some marks or some kinds of 
signs or symbols maybe overlap with marks of another country. 
And so there are some rules here to try to deal with that 
particular issue and sort out how a mark will be protected or not 
protected. 
 
Then it goes on to well-known trademarks. In other words, 
these are ones that have an international flavour already, or are 
there. And it says, effectively, in article 18.22: 
 

No Party shall require as a condition for determining that a 
trademark is well-known that the trademark has been 
registered in the Party or in another jurisdiction, included 
on a list of well-known trademarks, or given prior 
recognition as a well-known trademark. 

 
And so effectively what it’s saying is each country might have 
their own well-known trademarks — some might be fully 
registered under the international system; some others won’t — 
but there’s going to be a recognition that these kinds of 
trademarks will be included in whatever protections come under 
this legislation. Then it goes on to say that each country should 
or will . . . I guess it says shall provide so I guess it’s very 
definite, provide an electronic trademark system so these can be 
checked very quickly right across all of the 12 nations. 
 
Now I think we’ll move on from the trademark area and go into 
another area which is of interest to Saskatchewan people and 
probably to all of us, and that’s the issue of domain names. And 
this system has been developed in an ad hoc way, I guess would 
be the best way to put it, and what this is trying to do I think is 
make sure that how they interrelate for these 12 countries, how 
the domain names interrelate for the 12 countries will be 
uniform, they’ll be appropriate, and any disputes will be 
resolved quickly and fairly and equitably. 
 
What this means is that some rules that might be different than 
primarily the American rules will probably have to be brought 
into or introduced into an American-like system, and how that 
happens could affect various operations we have in our 
province. It’s another area where we would need some expert 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7845 

advice or some practical advice from people who are involved 
in that world. 
 
But if this is adding an extra cost or if it’s changing 
dramatically how we do things in Canada, we need to know that 
because it’s part of the cost of doing business. And once again, 
looking at the whole document, it’s all about making sure that 
countries don’t use their own local rules, whether it’s 
certification of employees or others, to restrict trade. And in this 
area we want to make sure that a country doesn’t set up domain 
name systems that make it difficult for international domain 
names to fit into their system and therefore restrict trade. 
 
Now the next section, D, of this agreement is very short. It’s 
called country names. And it doesn’t say the subcentral country 
names but just country names. And I’ll read you the paragraph, 
article 18.29: 
 

Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested 
persons to prevent commercial use of the country name of 
a Party in relation to a good in a manner that misleads . . . 
[customers] as to the origin of that good. 

 
And that’s the end of it. And what does that mean? Well if 
everybody thinks that Canadian maple syrup is the best in the 
world, they don’t want somebody to create a brand in Australia 
that’s called Canada maple syrup. And there’s a way of 
changing that. Now I don’t know if this applies to Canada Dry, 
the pop company that’s in the United States, but I mean it’s that 
kind of an issue. But it sets out the fact that among these 12 
countries, businesses have this clause here that says, be careful 
how you mislead people about where something is from. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now the next section is about geographical indications, and this 
one I think it relates to . . . And once again it’s a short 
paragraph, 18.30: 
 

The Parties recognise that geographical indications may be 
protected through a trademark or sui generis system or 
other legal means. 

 
And once again this is setting out where a product comes from. 
It’s the issue of, I suppose, terroir in production of food and 
wine and things like that, that it’s important where a product 
comes from. And if somebody else is going to use that name, 
then they have to be careful. The most obvious example of that 
presently — it doesn’t relate just within the 12 countries — but 
it’s the question of whether the California wine growers could 
use the name champagne because they grew the same kind of 
grapes that grew in the Champagne area of France and made 
similar wines. And ultimately it was said, no, you can’t do that. 
And so practically it’s an area of concern. 
 
So then we go on into a whole number of different areas. I 
know that the members across the way don’t really want to take 
a good look at this agreement even though it’s pretty clear that 
the public wants us to be careful when we enter these 
agreements, and there is a responsibility on the members of this 
legislature to spend time looking through and being, and 
examining carefully what we are entering into. The good thing 
is that we do have time. There is no pressure on us to move 

forward on this issue until such time as we actually have a final 
text. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask leave to make an 
introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has asked 
for leave to make an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce Islay Ehlert from Watson, a member of my 
executive back home, also a town councillor with the town of 
Watson, a very hard-working community leader, and somebody 
I’m very, very pleased to have in the . . . although it’s so far 
away my eyes didn’t pick her up right away, if the truth was 
known. But very happy to introduce her today and I ask all 
members to help me welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll continue 
to talk about chapter 18 related to intellectual property. And 
there are now some proposed rules that are to be harmonized 
right across the 12 countries related to patents. And I guess that 
we can say quite clearly, in patent law the devil is in the details 
and some of those details can be worth millions of dollars. 
 
And so the wording in this area is important for our industries 
in Canada. This is the particular area where concerns have been 
raised by Mr. Balsillie from Research in Motion, the 
BlackBerry company, because of the fact that many of the 
proprietary interests that they had in certain techniques and 
certain telecommunications issues are what generated the 
millions and millions of dollars which allowed their company to 
do very well. 
 
And some of the rules that are being brought forward here have 
an effect on that business and relate to what happens with 
American law being applied in Canada, and so how that’s done 
is part of the issue. 
 
Now I know that the Deputy Premier’s always interested in 
things that will protect Saskatchewan people, but I’m not sure 
that he’s totally following what’s happening to the whole issue 
of pharmaceuticals in this agreement. And what we know is that 
there is a proposal that adjusts the patent term. And it’s hidden. 
It’s not directly stated in many ways, but the simple wording of 



7846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

the very first paragraph in this article 18.48 is: 
 

Each Party shall make best efforts to process applications 
for marketing approval of pharmaceutical products in an 
efficient and timely manner, with a view to avoiding 
unreasonable or unnecessary delays. 

 
And the second paragraph: 
 

With respect to a pharmaceutical product that is subject to 
a patent, each Party shall make available an adjustment of 
the patent term to compensate the patent owner for 
unreasonable curtailment of the effective patent term as a 
result of the marketing approval process. 

 
And then, paragraph 3: 
 

For greater certainty, in implementing the obligations of 
this Article, each Party may provide for conditions and 
limitations, provided that the Party continues to give effect 
to this Article. 

 
And then 4: 
 

With the objective of avoiding unreasonable curtailment of 
the effective patent term, a Party may adopt or maintain 
procedures that expedite the processing of marketing 
approval applications. 

 
So this paragraph or article 18:48 relates to drug companies 
applying to get approval to market a product in Canada, in 
Vietnam, in Australia. I know in Australia they’re watching and 
are very concerned about this paragraph. 
 
We have the example of drugs where it takes a year or two or 
three to get the approval for the marketing. And what the drug 
company is saying in the country or where it takes a little longer 
to review some of these drugs, they want to have those three 
years added on to the patent protection at the other end. And 
that is often a huge cost to the health system of the province or 
of the country. We don’t actually even know what kind of costs 
this will create. 
 
It also relates to some sad, sad history in our health system in 
Canada and the United States over the last 50, 60 years because 
we know that in Canada we had a fairly quick approval of 
thalidomide for use with pregnant women. In the United States 
they had a woman who just died recently, who happened to be a 
Canadian doctor, who said no, there’s something wrong here, 
and she stopped, wouldn’t let the matter go forward and be 
marketed. 
 
And in the United States they didn’t use the thalidomide. So 
they don’t have the same issue around people who are seeking 
compensation, because they never did approve it for use by 
pregnant women. And in Canada because it moved faster, well 
as a result of that type of an incident, in Canada we got much 
more diligent in dealing with approval of patented medicines, 
and sometimes we take longer than what they take in the United 
States. 
 
This particular clause is a clause that tries to get extra dollars 
out of the patent medicine through changing the rules in various 

countries. And I think it’s one we need to look at very carefully. 
We need to have our health officials, our pharmaceutical review 
team which we have, includes some of the people from the 
University of Saskatchewan, give some example of how this 
would affect what we do in Saskatchewan and what we do in 
Canada. 
 
So now this whole area also deals with the question of how new 
products are brought on to the market and it sets out some fairly 
strict rules about how you do that. And it does it in a way where 
we need to understand how much of a change it’s going to have 
in Canada. It’s not totally obvious from the text, and that’s 
obvious from the various commentators who have looked at the 
text and tried to put examples to it. Now what it does say is that 
there are methods of protecting public health that a nation or a 
country has if they make a declaration under what’s called 
TRIPS, which is the trade-related aspects of intellectual 
property under the World Trade Organization. But that’s a 
fairly heavy hammer and it’s one that has consequences in a 
number of different areas, and so how that’s done is crucial. 
 
Now we move from the pharmaceutical products and a related 
product which is biologics. And biologics are basically some of 
these new, very individual, specific types of drugs. You’ve 
heard about people who get a drug that’s designed just for them. 
And obviously it’s an expensive process to do that, but it’s also 
a whole area of new forms of medication. And so practically 
there’s a clause here that tries to protect. It starts right out with 
regard to protecting new biologics, and then it sets out how the 
rules are to be created in a country. And that relates to the fact 
that when you draft some of these kinds of agreements, you 
don’t always know what’s going to be caught in them three 
years or five years down the road. If this agreement had been 
put together 20 years ago, this wouldn’t have even been in here. 
 
Now I think we basically will then go on in, back into the 
intellectual property issues, away from the pharmaceuticals into 
industrial design. A lot of the clauses and the lengthy area in 
this chapter 18 relate to how do you deal with the knock-offs. 
We know that somebody can produce a very good piece of 
machinery in Saskatchewan, it’s sent to another country and 
they figure out how it’s made, and there’s a copy made and all 
of a sudden that shows up on the world market. How are those 
kinds of things protected? And so once again they’re saying it 
should be protected; it doesn’t necessarily say how. 
 
Then we get into the whole issue of copyright and related 
rights. And as we know, copyright can be written, can be music, 
can be film. It relates to a whole number of different issues and 
the whole mix of all of these things together. And so this is an 
area that once again is about how do you make sure that your 
national artists, your artists in your country are protected on the 
international stage. 
 
And we know that the ability to have pirate copies of movies, 
pirate copies of music, pirate copies even of artwork go around 
the world very quickly ahead of the law is a major problem for 
artists, but also for those companies that work with the artists as 
agents, as they try to obtain enough money to run their business. 
And so this agreement says that we’re going to have similar 
laws across the 12 nations. 
 
So then that raises the question: well whose laws, and how are 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7847 

those laws going to work? And this is where Canada and US 
law is relatively similar. There are some different concepts, and 
the article that I read yesterday from Michael Geist talks about 
how there is a very specific Canadian clause in here that says 
we can use our Canadian law as it relates to protection of 
Canada, but no other country can use some of the concepts that 
Canada has — and effectively, you know, sort of isolating how 
we do things in this international perspective. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And so we need to know over the longer term how that’s going 
to affect the markets for our Canadian writers or Canadian 
musicians or Canadian artists. And that question is one 
obviously that will be discussed at a national level in Canada, 
but I think it’s also one that we as a provincial legislature 
should have the ability to look at and have some of our local 
experts say, okay, for me, my music that I want to sell to New 
Zealand, all of a sudden it’s, you know, into a different world 
and the protections that I thought I had or that I do have under 
Canadian law don’t apply over there. And how is that going to 
work? 
 
So this is obviously a moving target in lots of ways, and it’s an 
area that’s developing very quickly as the technology changes. 
But once again it’s an important area for many people whose 
livelihoods depend upon copyright and how we deal with that. 
 
We heard earlier that one of the more obvious changes is that 
copyrights are to be extended 20 more years past the end of a 
writer’s life, and that’s something that does end up costing 
money in a society. And where does that money go? And that 
becomes once again a question, but that’s the kind of question 
that we can ask in a committee and get some of the experts in 
the publishing fields or others to say, okay, this is what it means 
for what we’re doing in our community. 
 
Now what also happens is that the extended rules that are here 
do end up probably creating some new protections and some 
new opportunities, and that’s another thing that I think that the 
legislature needs to understand and needs to review as we go 
forward with this. 
 
Now the next area relates then to enforcement. How is all this 
going to be enforced? And once again, enforcement is always 
about power, who has the power. And what appears to be clear 
here is that this is the US system writ large over 12 countries 
with a sort of a carve-out for Canada. And so then how is that 
going to affect our businesses here in Canada, but also how is it 
going to affect a number of these other countries? 
 
Now if in fact the net result is a common system where 
everybody benefits and there’s access from Vietnam into New 
Zealand and into United States and to Mexico, to Chile, well I 
think that’s probably a good thing. But if in fact it’s something 
that gives extra power to the dominant copyright place in the 
world, which is the United States, then it’s something that we 
need to look carefully at as we move forward. And this has 
many pages on the crimes that can be committed, the penalties 
that can be brought forward. 
 
Now I’m going to slow down again and talk about article 18.78, 
which is trade secrets. And this section and some of the 

following sections are quite interesting because we in 
Saskatchewan have some very important intellectual industries 
developing — things like, as we’ve known, the satellites that 
are used in telecommunications, a lot of it’s been developed out 
of Saskatoon. We know at the synchrotron there, there’s much 
work that’s being done that enhances businesses around the 
world but especially across Canada. And so how are some of 
the things that are learned protected? Well this clause 18.78 
talks about trade secrets. And basically it says: 
 

For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to a 
Party’s measures protecting good faith lawful disclosures 
to provide evidence of a violation of that Party’s law. 

 
In other words, this clause is on top of whatever laws you 
would have in each country under the other agreements, 
including the Paris Convention and other places, to add a 
further protection around trade secrets or a further enforcement 
method if you have people who are stealing secrets, industrial 
secrets. And that ends up being a recognition that every country 
has to review what kinds of criminal law procedures they have 
that protect secrets that deal with industrial espionage. 
 
Then you go on to article 18.79 which is protection of 
encrypted program-carrying satellite and cable signals. And this 
once again is saying that there are some very sort of 
straightforward concerns about the ability of encrypted signals 
that go right around the world that can have a massive effect on 
an industry if certain kinds of secrets are developed. And so 
what I know is that there’s clearly an attempt here to add a 
further protection of the industrial secrets. 
 
Now if anybody’s looked at the numbers of patents worldwide 
in, I think the year is 2014 — so it’s last year’s information — 
the number one country in the world is United States and 
number two is Japan. And so if you think about this whole area 
and all of the protections that we have in here around patent, 
copyright, and some of the other issues, it is about those two 
countries. Canada is, based on the number of people we have, 
we’re right up there as well. But it is very much a protection of 
the intellectual property, the knowledge that’s been developed 
in our countries over and against, not these 12 countries, but 
other countries around the world. 
 
And so there is a discussion there and, I think, a point of review 
around what does this mean for Saskatchewan. What does this 
mean for Canada? What does this mean for the very smart 
people we have in our province who are inventing things, 
developing things that they want to be properly compensated 
for when they become involved in a commercial operation? 
 
Now the next part of this intellectual property chapter relates to 
Internet service providers. Basically an Internet service provider 
is: 
 

a provider of online services for the transmission, routing, 
or providing of connections for digital online 
communications, between or among points specified by a 
user, of material of the user’s choosing, undertaking the 
function in Article 18.82.2(a) (Legal Remedies and Safe 
Harbours); or 
 
a provider of online services undertaking the functions in 



7848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Article 18.82.2(c) or Article 18.82.2(d) (Legal Remedies 
and Safe Harbours). 

 
And so when you go and look at 18.82, which is the next 
chapter, you can see that the concern here is that the Internet 
service providers will assure the users of the Internet that the 
kinds of information that they’ve put through their systems will 
actually be the same when it gets to the other place where 
they’re sending it. And when you understand or talk about how 
the Internet works, this is quite an interesting question because 
effectively what happens when a message is sent or material is 
sent or data is sent, is that it’s broken down into many pieces 
and not all the pieces go the same way to get to the end place. 
 
And sometimes clauses like this are quite interesting to see 
from a legal standpoint because it clearly talks about what’s 
going to happen at the end: it’s all going to be back together the 
way it was. And that’s what an Internet service provider is; it’s 
somebody who takes this material, sends it through the system 
in sometimes millions of pieces, and then puts it all back 
together again when it gets to the other end. 
 
And so one of the issues here is, how do you deal with 
copyrighted material? How do you deal with, whether it’s, you 
know, created material that’s printed or music or others? And 
you want to make sure that if it’s being sold through an Internet 
service provider or being delivered, that it ends up being the 
same thing as what was sent. And so this is the rules around 
how that should take place and basically says that nations, the 
countries that are involved in this agreement, have a role in 
making sure that the Internet service providers in their 
jurisdiction have enough capacity, are capable enough of 
making sure that material will go where it’s supposed to go. 
 
I don’t think we have a concern about that in Canada at the 
present time. But if we get in a position where we’re behind in 
our technology or behind in the kinds of equipment that we 
have, this can be a very expensive issue to remedy for a nation 
or for a province. So once again it’s something that needs to be 
monitored by the province. We need to get advice from people 
who are involved in this business. We’re fortunate enough in 
Saskatchewan to have SaskTel as an agency which would be 
involved as an Internet service provider and would understand 
some of the international agreements that are presently in place. 
And so clearly advice from them would be of assistance as we 
move forward with this. 
 
So we end up then with that chapter 18, which is the intellectual 
property area. And we’ve looked at quite a number of different 
issues, and we know that ultimately the purpose of the TPP is to 
protect and enforce intellectual property rights in a way that 
contributes to the promotion of technological innovation and to 
the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual 
advantage of the producers and the users. So co-operation is the 
theme, but also the whole idea of eliminating barriers, of 
smoothing out procedures, of doing things in a common way 
means that some countries will have to change how they do 
things. And Canada has negotiated a bit of a carve-out on some 
of these issues, and how that’s going to work in the long term 
for our people who are trying to protect their rights under our 
laws is something that we all need to understand. 
 
And so this chapter is one where many of our intellectual 

property lawyers in Canada have been attempting to take it 
apart I guess and see, well how is this going to affect the clients 
that they’re dealing with? And some of the first articles about it 
are saying we need to be careful because there are certain things 
that we do in Canada that are probably smarter than what 
happens in the United States, and so will those continue to be 
here or will they be in some way changed? 
 
[16:15] 
 
So the next chapter is chapter 19 on labour. And once again this 
is directly related to this session of our legislature because it 
goes right to say that the International Labour Organization, 
which is basically . . . And their declaration of fundamental 
principles and rights at work and its follow-up in 1998 is part of 
this TPP agreement. And so I think it’s quite telling when you 
look at it. We can look at the definitions. 
 
Why don’t we go right to the labour rights section, which is . . . 
Well first the statement of shared commitment in 19.2, and this 
is one I think that the members of our government here in 
Saskatchewan should listen to. It says: 
 

1. The Parties affirm their obligations as members of the 
ILO, including those stated in the ILO Declaration, 
regarding labour rights within their territories. 
 
2. The Parties recognise that, as stated in paragraph 5 of 
the ILO Declaration, labour standards should not be used 
for protectionist trade purposes. 

 
And then we go into article 19.3, labour rights: 
 

1. Each Party shall adopt and maintain in its statutes and 
regulations, and practices thereunder, the following rights 
as stated in the ILO Declaration: 

 
(a) freedom of association and the effective recognition 
of the right to collective bargaining; 
(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory 
labour; 
(c) the effective abolition of child labour and, for the 
purposes of this Agreement, a prohibition on the worst 
forms of child labour; and 
(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of 
employment and occupation. 

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

2. Each Party shall adopt and maintain statutes and 
regulations, and practices thereunder, governing acceptable 
conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours 
of work, and occupational safety and health. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this session one of the major pieces of 
legislation that was passed was legislation that corrected a 
situation where our present provincial government enacted 
legislation which was contrary to our commitments under the 
International Labour Organization declaration and contrary to 
the labour rights stated here around the effective recognition of 
the right to collective bargaining. 
 
Now the positive thing after all these years of rancour and 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7849 

litigation and applications to the ILO [International Labour 
Organization], but more importantly the Supreme Court of 
Canada, is that our Premier and this government have 
singlehandedly put right into the Constitution of Canada 
recognition of the right to strike. And labour and management 
for, you know, centuries to come but for sure the next 40, 50 
years will thank our Premier and the cabinet for that particular 
provision that is now very clearly ensconced in the Canadian 
Constitution. So that, in a way, makes it easier for our country 
to say that yes, we are committed to the rights that are set out in 
this TPP trade agreement. 
 
Now practically the other rules that are here are a recognition of 
ILO provisions. And it’s not entirely clear whether there are 
issues that will affect how we proceed, but one of the clauses 
though, the very next one after the labour rights one, is the 
non-derogation clause. And this clause says: 
 

The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage 
trade or investment by weakening or reducing the 
protections afforded in each Party’s labour laws. 
Accordingly, no Party shall waive or otherwise derogate 
from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from, its 
statutes or regulations: 
 

(a) implementing Article 19.3.1 (Labour Rights), if the 
waiver or derogation would be inconsistent with a right 
set out in that paragraph; or 
 
(b) implementing Article 19.3.1 (Labour Rights), or 
Article 19.3.2 (Labour Rights), if the waiver or 
derogation would weaken or reduce adherence to a right 
set out in Article 19.3.1, or to a condition of work 
referred to in Article 19.3.2 (Labour Rights), in a special 
trade or customs area, such as an export processing zone 
or foreign trade zone, in the Party’s territory, 

 
in a manner affecting trade or investment between the 
Parties. 

 
Now this, this is very interesting. I’m not sure how many people 
in the legislature have travelled to countries where you will see 
enclaves very close to the airport, whether it’s in Colombo in 
Sri Lanka or I think in parts of other countries around the world. 
They do create these special zones, and the question is whether 
those zones are kind of taxation havens or whether they’re 
actually havens from the labour laws. And what this clause says 
is that that type of creation of a special area is against this 
agreement. And in a way, it’s not really strong language 
because it just says it’s inappropriate. Now whether . . . how 
that’s going to be enforced is another question. 
 
But it also raises the question of whether the Saskatchewan 
government or any government in Canada is in a situation 
where they’re offending these agreement rules when they 
effectively privatize jobs, say from the correctional centre to an 
operation which maybe doesn’t have unionized workers. And is 
that the type of thing that would offend the rules that are here? I 
think it’s probably something that should be looked at. 
 
I think there’s strong opinions on both sides around that, but the 
goal clearly is to have a level playing field. I know that in 
Australia they are very concerned around the labour rules in the 

TPP and they are attempting to figure out for them how it 
affects the rights that they have in their constitution and in the 
things that they do. There is a clear reference here to the ILO 
and declaration, but how does that affect some of these things 
that seem to be able to go ahead without much opposition or 
without much sense of the fact that we’re doing things against 
the international rules? 
 
Now we know that the legislation that this government 
introduced in 2007-2008 was ultimately declared 
unconstitutional by the Canadian courts and it was also declared 
as being against the ILO rules. And so how that would then fit 
into this agreement is an interesting question. 
 
And when the member opposite brings forward a motion just to 
approve this without even taking a look at some of those kinds 
of issues, it’s an example of, well we’re not too concerned 
about the details; we’re just going to do whatever we feel like 
doing. And I think that’s a dangerous way to operate a 
government. It’s a dangerous way to make public policy. It’s a 
dangerous way to enter into an international trade agreement 
without actually doing the work of understanding what it’s all 
about. 
 
Now one of the parts of this whole area on labour is once again 
the question of co-operation, and I think that’s important to 
state that. And it sets out pages of issues that need to be dealt 
with in a co-operative fashion. And I think it’s . . . Actually it’s 
probably a bit of a checklist for us in looking at our 
Saskatchewan legislation to see whether we have dealt with 
these issues in a reasonable fashion. 
 
And I’m looking at article 19.10.6, and it says: 
 

Areas of cooperation may include: 
 
(a) job creation and the promotion of productive, quality 
employment, including policies to generate job-rich 
growth and promote sustainable enterprises and 
entrepreneurship. 

 
So that’s a question of full-time jobs or not full-time jobs and 
how does that all work. Well I think we’re doing things to 
create jobs. We need to be very vigilant about what kinds of 
jobs we create. 
 
“(b) creation of productive, quality employment linked to 
sustainable growth and skills development for jobs in 
emerging industries, including environmental industries.” 
Well that’s clearly one that’s been a hot topic this week, and 
finally after eight years we have a bit of words, not really any 
action yet, but some words around what it would mean for 
Saskatchewan to have environmentally . . . industries, green 
industries that are leaders in the country. We can do it. 
There’s no question about that. But we do need an 
atmosphere and a place that is supportive of that, and so 
hopefully that will come. 
 
“(c) innovative workplace practices to enhance workers’ 
well-being and business and economic competitiveness.” I 
think we have a number of businesses that do that, and we 
applaud them for that kind of work. But that’s an area where 
we all need to continue to work. 



7850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Then we go into (d), “human capital development and the 
enhancement of employability, including through lifelong 
learning, continuous education, training and the development 
and upgrading of skills.” And we have institutions in the 
province to do that. We have businesses that do that. I think 
it’s something that we all need to continue to work on, but 
clearly we have some good examples in our province of how 
this is being done. 
 
“(e) work-life balance.” And that’s always a challenge, but it’s 
important to keep it always on the checklist as to what you’re 
doing. 
 
“(f) promotion of improvements in business and labour 
productivity, particularly in respect of small and medium 
enterprises.” And that’s once again an area where 
government can be of assistance because some of the small 
businesses can’t always do all of the things that the larger 
businesses are able to afford. And so how that works is 
important. 
 
“(g) remuneration systems.” I think that’s something that we 
have pretty good operations here. 
 
“(h) promotion of the awareness of and respect for the 
principles and rights as stated in the ILO Declaration and for 
the concept of Decent Work as defined by the ILO.” I think 
this is an area where we have some work to do. And once 
again it’s about education, but it’s also about the ultimate 
commitment to these rights which are known worldwide. And 
Canada is part of that and Saskatchewan is, and that’s been 
shown by some of the cases that we’ve taken . . . have been 
taken. They are from Saskatchewan. 
 
“(i) labour laws and practices, including the effective 
implementation of the principles and rights as stated in the 
ILO Declaration.” Well this is one where we fixed a few 
things, but there’s more that we need to fix to have an 
effective implementation of the principles. And it might take 
a change of government to get that one right, but we’ll see 
how that goes. 
 
Then we go to occupational safety and health, and we know that 
this is an area where we have been falling down and we have a 
lot of work to do. And so the question becomes, at what point 
will we go back and review the really important work that was 
done in the early ’70s and say, how do we prepare our 
occupational safety and health rules for the next 40 or 50 years? 
There’s a lot of work to do in this area, and we need to have 
some clear leadership on this one. And that’s another one where 
it may take a change in government to get that right. 
 
Now then (k) is “labour administration and adjudication, for 
example, strengthening capacity, efficiency and effectiveness.” 
We have I think some pretty good work in Labour Relations 
Board and arbitrations, and so we have the processes. Whether 
they all are operating at full capacity and full efficiency, that’s 
another question. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Then we go to the issue of collection and use of labour 
statistics. I think we have some statistics, but they’re not always 

as transparent, if I can use a TPP word, as we would like. These 
are things that should be available for everybody to allow us to 
develop proper policy for our workers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Next one is “labour inspection, for example, improving 
compliance and enforcement mechanisms.” Now this is an area 
where we know we have problems in Saskatchewan. We don’t 
have sufficient people that are doing this work. And it’s not 
dissimilar to what’s happening in health care with seniors’ care, 
that you’ve got very good people doing what they can, but they 
need more people doing that work. So the checklist there shows 
that we’ve got some work to do. 
 
And then we go to (n), which is: 
 

addressing the challenges and opportunities of a diverse, 
multigenerational workforce including: 

 
promotion of equality and elimination of discrimination 
in respect of employment and occupation for migrant 
workers, or in the areas of age, disability or other 
characteristics not related to merit or the requirements of 
employment; [and] 
 
promotion of equality of, elimination of discrimination 
against, and the employment interests of women; and 
 
protection of vulnerable workers, including migrant 
workers, and low-waged, casual or contingent workers. 

 
And basically there are many, many issues and questions. And 
when the economy flattens out or when there’s some challenges 
within the economy, it’s often the people who are migrant 
workers or people who are new people in the community, 
they’re the ones that end up having difficulty with their jobs and 
then some of the discrimination issues arise very directly. 
 
And so we also have the issue now . . . Well it’s not a new issue 
but it’s an issue that’s more on the top of the agenda which 
relates to integrating refugees into Canada in a more public and 
a more direct way. And so it’s interesting that it shows up on 
this list in the TPP. 
 
And then we have (o), which is “addressing the labour and 
employment challenges of economic crises, such as through 
areas of common interest in the ILO Global Jobs Pact.” And 
this is a really interesting one because, depending on which part 
of the world you’re in, you may need a lot more workers in one 
area opposed to another. And how do you make your rules work 
so that people are able to move to where the jobs are, or 
sometimes where you can move the work to where the people 
are? And that becomes a major trade issue and also an issue for 
this agreement. 
 
Then we go to (p), which is “social protection issues, including 
workers’ compensation in case of occupational injury or illness, 
pension systems and employment assistance schemes.” We 
have quite a number of good schemes in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan but they’re continually being pushed with 
various issues. And so once again it’s on the checklist for 
review. 
 
Then we go to (q), which is “best practice for labour relations, 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7851 

for example, improved labour relations, including promotion of 
best practice in alternative dispute resolution.” We have some 
of those options. And I think, every time we develop new 
legislation, we’ve got more learning, if I can put it that way, 
that’s incorporated in the legislation. But you can never get it 
100 per cent right so you need to always be listening and 
understanding how your processes work. 
 
Then we go (r), which is “social dialogue, including tripartite 
consultation and partnership.” And clearly, that’s a discussion 
about how unions or labour organizations and businesses and 
government work together. And there are many things that can 
be resolved if there’s a co-operative discussion and that’s what 
this whole checklist is about, is about co-operation. 
 
And then (s) is “with respect to labour relations in 
multi-national enterprises, promoting information sharing and 
dialogue related to conditions of employment by enterprises 
operating in two or more Parties with representative worker 
organizations in each party.” 
 
So in other words, two or more countries with unions in each of 
those countries, how does that all work together? And 
understand that there may be some differences in the contracts 
and labour rules. This is one between Canada and US we’re 
seeing some fairly direct issues around in the automobile 
industry. But it also relates to workers that may be in Japanese 
companies that are in Canada or US, and how are the 
employees of different branches treated? 
 
And then we have (t) which is “corporate social responsibility,” 
which is straightforward. And then (u), such “other areas as the 
Parties may decide.” And so what we do have then, here in this 
section around labour, is a checklist of the many issues that 
need to be discussed and dealt with. And once again this TPP 
creates a labour council which is composed of representatives 
from every country, and they have the task of doing some of the 
co-operative work and also deal with some of the tough issues 
that arise. 
 
So I think it’s important that labour issues are directly dealt 
with in this agreement. I think it’s also important that 
government, like the Government of Saskatchewan, is part of 
the conversation as to what Canada’s position is on this as we 
move forward . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Who takes a leadership role in that?  
 
Mr. Nilson: — Yes. And in other decades, we’ve taken 
leadership roles, but it’s not so obvious that that would happen 
in this decade. But that may change soon. So we’ll see how that 
works. 
 
Now as you could’ve probably figured, if you’ve been listening 
through the many hours of discussion, there are some issues 
where this TPP has basically tried to deal with some very 
difficult issues where there’s not total agreement among the 12 
countries. 
 
The next area is chapter 20, the environment. And this one I 
think there is consensus that we want to promote, and it states 
here: 
 

. . . promote mutually supportive trade and environmental 
policies; promote high levels of environmental protection 
and effective enforcement of environmental laws; and 
enhance the capacities of the Parties to address 
trade-related environmental issues, including through 
cooperation.  

 
But the key point here is very directly 20.2.3, and what it says 
here . . . and this is I think one we need to look at, and maybe 
talk about a bit: 
 

3. The Parties further recognise that it is inappropriate to 
establish or use their environmental laws or other measures 
in a manner which would constitute a disguised restriction 
on trade or investment between the Parties. 

 
And so what does that mean? Well it basically is saying trade 
trumps the environment. And if that is how that is ultimately 
interpreted, I think we all have difficulty with that. Because 
there will be environmental issues in every party, you know, 
every nation that’s part of this agreement where the local people 
will have one perspective and sort of the international economic 
interests will have another. And there’s no way that we as 
Saskatchewan people, as Canadian people, should sign on to 
something like this which gives extra power to those 
international interests that would override environmental 
concerns. And so I think that in this area, we need to listen very 
carefully to the strong leaders that we have coming from the 
environmental movement. 
 
I know that once again in Australia and New Zealand there are 
major concerns around this trade override of environmental 
issues, and I think the commitments and the statements 
throughout this article 20 do always talk about mutually 
supportive trade and environmental policies. But that one clause 
in 20.2.3 effectively says that the trade policies will trump the 
environmental concerns. 
 
Now it may be that this point will be a sticking point as the 
process moves forward as to a signatory, as to getting signatures 
to the agreement, and then ultimately the ratification. And I 
think as Canadians, as Saskatchewan people, we may want to 
add our voices to that discussion, to say, no, the overriding of 
trade over environment is no longer something that we would 
do in the 21st century. We see the consequences of man-made 
influences on climate change. And perhaps out of the Paris 
discussions next week and the things that follow that, there may 
actually be a stronger way to state this, which will actually 
come back and override clauses like this which are in various 
trade agreements around the world. 
 
But we have an opportunity here as Saskatchewan legislators, 
as Saskatchewan people, and as Canadians to say, no, let’s 
make this a stronger statement about protection of the 
environment, and have it recognized by business that it’s good 
for their business for them to recognize those issues where 
environment trumps trade. And we’re hoping that — and we 
actually know, I think — that good environmental stewardship 
goes hand in hand with good business, and many of the best 
countries in the world have shown us that for the last 30, 40 
years. But there still are many who don’t understand that, and 
part of this clause then is about that issue. 
 



7852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

Now what kinds of issues show up in this environment chapter 
are interesting, but if you think about it, what they are is 
existing issues that have been part of international agreements. 
So they go to protection of the ozone layer. Well, that’s 
something that, I think, there’s agreement around the world that 
there’s a problem there, so that’s included. 
 
It goes to protection of the marine environment from ship 
pollution, and this relates to the use of the cheapest kinds of 
fuels that actually are very polluting. They use them out on the 
ocean but not on land or close to the land. It’s about the 
dumping of garbage from ships. It’s all of the different kinds of 
things. We’ve finally realized that even the Pacific Ocean, our 
largest ocean on the earth, is not able to handle all of the 
garbage that is thrown into it. And when you read about some 
of these massive plastic artificial islands in the middle of the 
Pacific, it makes you realize that practices over the past 
hundreds of years are now finally catching up to us. 
 
So those are the two direct things that are in here because, I 
think, they’ve been part of other agreements. But the other 
environmental issues, they are not necessarily spelled out in a 
very direct way. And so then we go on to . . . And so the issue 
of climate change is downplayed or put to the side in a way 
that’s kind of unbelievable in 2015. 
 
Now we then move on to some other chapters, and I’ll just hit a 
few of them here because it looks like nobody wanted me to 
keep speaking on Monday, given their reaction to our motion. 
But practically . . . I might not even get to finish the whole 
agreement. 
 
But we get into article 20.13 which is trade and biodiversity, 
and that relates to, you know, the practices of protecting the 
biodiversity of the Earth but also of, specifically of these 12 
countries. And you know, that’s a good goal, but let’s have 
some clear rules about how to do it. 
 
It has, 20.14 is invasive alien species. And then we go into the 
transition to a low emissions and resilient economy. I think this 
might be the code word for the climate change issue, but it’s 
also a very short area. But it’s a recognition that the issue is 
there. 
 
Then we go to the marine capture fisheries — in other words, 
the wild capture of fish as opposed to the farmed capture — and 
there are a number of rules about that as there’s a clear 
recognition that the ability to just do that without controls is not 
going to work. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So then we end up going on to another topic that’s got more 
detail, is around conservation and trade, and that relates to the 
trade of things like ivory or other body parts or plant parts that 
are endangered. 
 
And there’s a very short section on environmental goods and 
services. That’s an interesting one for Saskatchewan, because 
there is a fair debate about whether Saskatchewan, as a green 
haven on Earth, will eventually be a place where people . . . or 
the Earth will have to pay us to keep parts of our province green 
as, well, kind of the lungs for the Earth is one way I put it. And 

so this talks about environmental goods and services. 
 
We know that ranchers who we deal with, we know that 
farmers understand this concept about preserving the prairie for 
the next generations. But the question becomes, well how does 
trade and investment . . . or how does a trade agreement include 
that kind of a term in its context? Well it’s because there may 
be a situation where there’s value; there’s money that would 
flow to make sure that the prairie remains. 
 
We know that in England many of the large landowners are 
being paid out of a common fund to keep the rolling green hills 
and little, you know, stone fences and things like that as 
agricultural land, but also as a green space for people to use, 
and there’s direct compensation around that. So how that 
happens is part of some of this as well. 
 
And then we, I think, once again have an environmental 
committee set up. So we’ve got a lot of committees, lots of 
work for many people, and it will deal with these co-operation 
issues but also some of the very tough issues that are there. 
Now I think the fact that some of the issues we’re concerned 
about are mentioned is good. But once again it’s these types of 
issues where we want the Canadian government, the 
Saskatchewan government to be part of the conversation so that 
our Saskatchewan perspective can be part of the final wording 
of this agreement, or if it’s not in this original agreement, in the 
agreement as it evolves over the years. 
 
The next chapter is 21, co-operation and capacity building. And 
once again this is just on the straight co-operation of all the 
countries as it relates to a whole number of issues. And 
basically it says we’re going to set up another committee, and 
their job is to think about areas where we can co-operate. Well 
that’s not a bad thing to do. And so it’s probably a clause that 
was put in the final negotiations to say, okay, that very specific 
topic you have doesn’t deserve its own chapter, its own page, 
but we’re going to put this here and this will be a grab bag to 
put all those issues which are important to one of the 12 parties, 
or two or three, and there’ll be a place where you can put your 
person that’s going to come and discuss that. So that’s a 
traditional mediator solution, and I’m quite used to 
understanding how that works. So I think that was probably a 
smart thing to do. 
 
Then we get to chapter 22 which is competitiveness and 
business facilitation. And the one word they define in this 
chapter is supply chain. And supply chain means “a 
cross-border network of enterprises operating together as an 
integrated system to design, develop, produce, market, 
distribute, transport, and deliver products and services to 
customers.” And then basically it doesn’t say anything other 
than it sets up a committee on competitiveness and business 
facilitation. 
 
And so once again I say this is kind of a grab bag clause for all 
of those issues that different nations or different countries 
brought forward that didn’t fit into one of the other chapters, 
and that’s where it will go. And I think that’s not necessarily a 
bad thing, plus it also deals with this very interesting issue 
which we understand in Canada around the building of 
automobiles is that different parts are made in different places 
and assembled and basically the supply chains work, provided 



November 25, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7853 

that the border barriers are dealt with in an appropriate fashion. 
 
Now the next chapter 23, development, is an interesting one 
because it deals with an issue that in Canada we have had some 
very heated discussions over the last 10 years. Our previous 
prime minister had a very strong view about development as 
only being based as something to support business. And he 
effectively changed CIDA, the Canadian International 
Development Agency, rolled it into sort of a business support 
kind of area, and changed very much how most of us ended up 
describing what development is. And so in this agreement the 
development provision is this. It says in 23.1: 
 

1. The Parties affirm their commitment to promote and 
strengthen an open trade and investment environment that 
seeks to improve welfare, reduce poverty, raise living 
standards, and create new employment opportunities in 
support of development. 

 
And so here the paragraph which is number 1 on the list which 
talked about reducing poverty, here is the one place where those 
words are actually used. Obviously creating jobs is a way to 
reduce poverty, but it’s interesting how this here is placed in 
this clause. But it does, I think, recognize that the policies 
around development are important and that they need to be 
discussed in a trade agreement and there needs to be a 
recognition of where and how these things are done. 
 
And so then when you look at the topics, well it’s broad-based 
economic growth; it’s the role of women in economic growth; 
it’s education, science and technology, research and innovation; 
and how these things can be part of this. And then how there 
could be joint development opportunities across the 12 nations 
that are part of this TPP. 
 
And once again we have another committee set up which is the 
committee on development and its job will be to facilitate the 
discussions and able to, you know, basically to provide further 
work in this area. And I suspect once again there might have 
been a few countries that were really supportive of this, and 
others that were less supportive, and so therefore it’s a little 
farther back into the list. 
 
The next chapter relates to small and medium businesses, and 
it’s one of the shortest chapters. But I think the importance of 
this is that small- and medium-sized businesses are not left out 
of the picture. But this is I think just in a physical way a 
recognition that who’s negotiating this agreement on behalf of 
these countries are the large, international financial interests and 
corporations, and so that anything that affects some of their 
work gets a detailed list of what should be done. Here the goal 
is to make sure that they have the ability to trade among the 
countries. And obviously there’s further work to do. But once 
again, there’s a committee on small and medium enterprises and 
they will have people available to do that kind of work. 
 
Then we go into the regulatory conference, which is chapter 25 
. . . or regulatory coherence. But it’s basically the whole issue 
of reducing the regulatory dissonance between different 
jurisdictions so that it makes business better and, you know, 
you end up having less jobs involved in trying to sort out all the 
rules . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s right. 
 

And so I think here, once again though, one of the results is a 
committee on regulatory coherence, article 25.6. And it’s giving 
some issues, but it’s kind of like a provincial government 
setting up a red tape committee. And you know, there’s good 
work that can be done, but it also has a strong sort of flavour of 
politics, if I can put it that way, in there. 
 
The next chapter, 26, deals with transparency and 
anti-corruption. And this is a little longer paragraph, or longer, 
you know, chapter. But what it deals with really is something 
that we’ve noticed as we’ve been going through the whole 
agreement, is that the issue of transparency, the fact that all of 
these 12 countries and their business people, the people 
involved in the various aspects in each of the countries — one 
of the key things for them is to be able to understand and see 
and have in a place where they can look at the rules that operate 
in various countries. 
 
And this chapter deals with that, but it also deals with the issues 
of complaints where there’s corruption. And corruption is 
undue influence, or it’s people getting some kind of special leg 
up because of how they’ve treated a business. And it really is a 
dispute resolution area. 
 
And it’s interesting, the main annex to this chapter is called 
annex 26, chapter 26-A, “Transparency and Procedural Fairness 
for Pharmaceutical Products and Medical Devices.” So we 
know this comes from the US negotiators. We know that under 
George Bush’s laws related to Medicare and Medicaid, they put 
a whole cloud over access to information around the pricing of 
pharmaceuticals in the United States, which has affected 
markets all over the world. But what appears to be here is a 
method whereby large international companies can complain 
about the fairness of the rules, the speed of the rules, and what 
happens when their products are brought into a country and 
then are to be reviewed. 
 
Now some of the challenges do relate to how much information 
the various companies will provide to the jurisdiction. And here 
it’s interesting to note that for Canada, the agency that is part of 
this annex is the federal drug benefits committee. And then it 
says, “For greater certainty, Canada does not currently operate a 
national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.” 
And that’s basically, you know, the previous government’s 
perspective of Canada just lets the provinces do their stuff. Now 
I think this kind of a clause may get changed as we move 
forward into the new government because there will be a return 
to a more co-operative presence in how things are dealt with. 
 
And so then we get to the last chapters. I think 27 is 
administrative and institutional provisions, and for those who 
like commissions and committees, well this is the big one. This 
is the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission that runs the 
whole thing. And it sets out the rules of how that goes, and all 
of the various committees will report to the commission. So you 
know, that’s how these things work, and that’s not bad. 
 
And then 28 is the dispute settlement section, and there’s lots of 
pages here. And I think it’s based on some of the more recent 
disputes that have happened and how they’re resolved. So I 
think that’s appropriate and it does include methods to use 
alternate disputes systems. 
 



7854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2015 

So I think that the last section that we have here is exceptions 
and general provisions, and then I guess the final one is the final 
provisions. But anyway chapter 29 is the exceptions and general 
provisions, and effectively it’s security issues. And I think each 
country is going to protect their genetic interests as that goes 
back to some of the other ones. 
 
But clearly I needed more time to work on this. We still have, I 
think, 5,000 pages related to all of the country annexes to this 
agreement, and there are issues there that are important for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I thank the members of the legislature for giving me this 
time to present information about this very important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7825, 7841 
  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7826, 7829 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7826 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7826 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7826, 7828 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7826 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7827 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7827 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7827 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7828 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7828 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7828 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7828 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7829 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7829 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7841 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7845 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7829 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7829 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7829 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7830 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7830 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7830 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7830 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Retention of Medical Graduates  
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7830 
 Northerner Heals With Music 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7831 
 Bowling Master Competes at National Level 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7831 
 Abbeyfield House Celebrates Anniversary  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7831 
 Action to Employment Program 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7832 
 Chris Knox Foundation Makes Dreams Come True  
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7832 
 Opposition’s Position on Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7832 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Quality of Care in Long-Term Care Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7833 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7833 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7834 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Extension of Legislative Session 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7837 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7837 
MOTIONS 
 Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7837 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7838 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




