






















































Hansard: November 03, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 78A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7583 
 November 3, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce a number of guests that are 
seated scattered all throughout the west gallery — I believe, if I 
have my directions correct — and they are here from the 
Canadian Diabetes Association. I think members will know that 
we have an opportunity later today to spend time with 
representatives of the Canadian Diabetes Association as well as 
those that have been diagnosed with diabetes in our province 
and their family members. 
 
So we have a large group. I’ll quickly introduce them in the 
House. Warren Wagner, who is our regional director here for 
Saskatchewan, is joining us as well as Brie Hnetka, the manager 
of programs and partnerships. As well, Debra Jakubec, the 
regional director from Alberta, has also joined us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from the Canadian Diabetes advocacy 
volunteers and their guests, we have a number of guests and I 
will just briefly introduce them: Tristan Banyay, Peter 
Dickinson, Lynne Eikel, Bob and Evelyn Gawley, Bill Gowen, 
Melissa and Tim Johnson and their two children Emma and 
Salem who have been our guests here at the legislature in the 
past, Georgia Joorisity, Robert Lydiate, Renee Mochnacz, 
Annie Quesnel, Peter Quesnel, Dagan Viala, Ken Zech, Don 
Henricksen, and Ashley Stone. And I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, we do have guests 
that are joining us seated in your gallery. Members from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association have been to the 
legislature today to meet with members of the government side 
of the House and the Human Services Committee. And I don’t 
believe that all of them perhaps are still here, but I know that 
Shirley McKay, Linda Wasko-Lacey, who is seated in the 
gallery; Joanne Petersen; Joanna Alexander; Lynne Eikel — 
either there are two Lynne Eikels here at the legislature on the 
exact same day, but I believe actually it is the same individual 
who is wearing two different hats today; Noreen Reed; and 
Warren Koch. And I would ask members to join with me in 
welcoming members of the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association] and thanking them for the important work 
that they do each and every day in our province for patient 
safety. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming these two large groups that 
are here at the Assembly today. It’s always a privilege for us as 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] when people 
come to the Assembly to share their experiences, to share their 

insight, to provide good advice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to welcome all the folks from the Canadian 
Diabetes Association and the advocates. I see a few folks who 
have spoken to us at receptions in years past and spoken about 
their personal situations. So thank you so much for sharing and 
thank you for the advocacy that you do around the year for your 
own families, but of course for all Saskatchewan families that 
are touched and living with diabetes, Mr. Speaker. So thank you 
very much to the Canadian Diabetes Association for joining us 
today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome the individuals 
here from the SRNA, Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association. I thank them for their presence here today and we 
look forward to the meeting tomorrow to hear issues of concern 
and to have a good discussion, Mr. Speaker. So thank you so 
much for joining us also. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, 
I’d like to join with the Minister of Health and the Leader of the 
Official Opposition to welcome those members from the SRNA 
here today. 
 
I’d like to make special mention of Noreen Reed from the 
community of Shell Lake. Noreen has had a multiple, a number 
of positions, if you will, at a number of different of the facilities 
within the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region in a number of 
different communities. And she’s always been a great advocate 
not only for her designation but also for the access to quality 
health care in the region, but also in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I know she continues this work as she’s now working with 
the University of Saskatchewan at the Prince Albert campus in 
training new registered nurses for the province of 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, to all members of this 
Assembly, I would like you to join me in welcoming Noreen to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, 13 grade 
6 and 7 students who are sitting up in the east gallery. They’re 
from Prairie Sky School in Regina Lakeview and they’re 
accompanied by Ms. Nicola D’Agnone and Ms. Carla Wilson. 
So I ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce a fine young man seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Brady Peter. He spent the last six, eight weeks out in Moose 
Jaw going to school for his welding, his journeyman welding 
ticket, and has a keen interest in provincial and federal politics, 



7584 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

decided to take one of his days off and come and watch the 
proceedings at the House. So I’d like to ask all members to 
welcome him to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a good friend of mine, Mr. Jerry Sherman, who is 
visiting our legislature and our city from the capital of Ottawa. 
Jerry and I go back a long time. I think we were friends as a 
result of close inter-family connections. I think our friendship 
dates back more than 60 years, when we got calculating it. 
 
You know, the sign of a good friendship, Mr. Speaker, is if 
you’ve been separated over a long period of time and then come 
together suddenly, it’s just like time hasn’t passed at all; you 
pick up right where you left off. And that’s the kind of 
relationship that Jerry and I have experienced. Our paths have 
crossed intermittently over those 60 years and many times more 
recently. 
 
It’s because of his role in Ottawa. Since 1996, Jerry has worked 
among the diplomatic community in our nation’s capital, first 
with Christian Embassy and more recently with Embassy 
Connections. In 1998 Jerry started arranging tours for 
ambassadors primarily to Western Canada to showcase our 
great part of the nation, introducing his distinguished guests to 
local businesses, to manufacturers, and political leaders. And to 
date, Mr. Speaker, Jerry has hosted more than 200 ambassadors 
from 91 nations to various parts of our country. 
 
Jerry also oversees trips for MPs [Member of Parliament] and 
MLAs to foreign nations on reciprocal visits, and he has met 
just about every ambassador that’s been in the nation’s capital 
over these last 20 years. He’s got a lot of interesting stories to 
tell and he’d introduce any one of those ambassadors to us on a 
first-name basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all of our colleagues to welcome Jerry to 
our legislature and to offer him good wishes in his work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to everyone in the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a very special friend of mine. I want you to listen 
carefully. Her name is June Draude — the other June Draude. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve known this lady for over 40 years. Our 
visiting patterns have changed with families over the last 20 
years. We don’t play as much kaiser and canasta. Hopefully 
we’ll be able to do that again in the near future. 
 
Between the two of us, we have enough children to have a ball 
team. I know you often say that you can’t choose your relatives; 
you can choose your friends. But I have both in this friend of 
mine. So I ask everyone to welcome the other June Draude to 
the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce, sitting in the west gallery, 16 grade 8 
students from Mother Teresa Middle School, a school in my 
constituency. Mother Teresa Middle School . . . Yes, go ahead 
and wave. They’re awesome. Mother Teresa Middle School is 
an outstanding school and it’s doing outstanding work. It truly 
is a game-changer for future leaders, and they’re developing a 
number of future leaders. And I’m so proud of them. They’re 
amazing. 
 
Accompanying the students today, Mr. Speaker, are teacher 
Jane Brundige; Cindy Kobayashi, who is the director of 
development; and we’ve got two student nurses with them, 
Rebecca Balan and Molly Findlay. They’re a few years . . . 
maybe a year left before their RN [registered nurse], so proud of 
them for doing their student internship with Mother Teresa. I’m 
at the school quite a bit, it seems all the time, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hope they’re not getting sick of me, but it’s certainly a 
possibility. But I’m certainly happy to be a part of it, looking 
forward to meeting the students and the staff coming up here 
and getting stumped, as per usual, with their questions, but 
that’s okay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
students, future leaders to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present petitions calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 
we know this government’s not doing enough to create safe 
spaces in our schools for sexually diverse students or students 
bullied because of their sexual identity or sexual orientation. 
And we know that GSAs offer opportunities to improve 
attendance, retention rates, and generate meaningful 
relationships at schools, and reduce homophobic and 
transphobic bullying. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 
action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 
Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right of 
Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 
in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 
and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 
their full potential. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition are from 
Moose Jaw. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. And, Mr. Speaker, 
seniors have done their part to build this province, and northern 
Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 Croft 
report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a code red 
level. Seniors from northern Saskatchewan need immediate 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7585 

attention from this government, and many residents cannot 
afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility for 
Creighton and Denare Beach and area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by many good people of Creighton, Denare Beach. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
rise to present a petition on cellphone coverage. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as enjoyed by southern communities. And this 
would provide support to our northern industries as well as 
mitigate safety concerns for those people living in the 
remote North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed from people 
from all throughout Saskatchewan, and on this particular page 
they are primarily from Meadow Lake and Hague. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens in the province of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the high cost of post-secondary 
education. In the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Provision of Medical Coverage 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Kot family came 
to the legislature to get coverage for the treatment their son 
desperately needs. It’s sad that their family is still waiting for an 
answer and that their son Kayden is still caught up in this 
government’s red tape. The Kot family was told by the Health 

minister that the denial of desperately needed therapy for 
Kayden would be reviewed, but they still haven’t heard back 
from the government, even though the Saskatoon Health Region 
agrees that Kayden’s needs cannot be met here in our province. 
The Kot family deserve so much better and little Kayden needs 
so much more. 
 
[13:45] 
 
After years of record revenues, it’s shocking that this 
government can’t find the money to meet the health care needs 
of vulnerable children. We’ve heard the Premier and the Health 
minister offer their concern and their sympathy, and I’m sure 
that it was sincerely offered, but what the Kot family needs is 
action. 
 
We heard earlier today that the government will be providing 
the treatment that the Akhter family so desperately needs, and 
that’s a good thing. We’re hoping to hear the same good news is 
in store for the Kot family as well. Every day spent waiting is 
another day that Kayden goes without treatment, and it’s our 
hope that he won’t have to wait any longer for the care that he 
needs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 
Diabetes Awareness Month 

 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the House today to announce that November is Diabetes 
Awareness Month. Today 93,000 people in Saskatchewan are 
living with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. The number is expected to 
increase to 129,000 by 2025. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the risks associated with diabetes can be very 
serious. Today diabetes is the cause of 40 per cent of heart 
attacks, 50 per cent of kidney failure requiring dialysis, 70 per 
cent of non-traumatic limb amputations, and a leading cause of 
blindness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is helping those living with 
diabetes by working with groups such the Canadian Diabetes 
Association. As an advocate for those living with diabetes, the 
Canadian Diabetes Association is “leading the fight against 
diabetes, while we wait for a cure.” 
 
I would ask all members to join me in commemorating National 
Diabetes Awareness Month and World Diabetes Day on 
November 14th by joining the Canadian Diabetes Association’s 
online awareness campaign, Take 2 Minutes, and taking the 
online diabetes risk test at take2minutes.ca. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 
House also to recognize Diabetes Awareness Month. Nearly 
100 years ago, two remarkable Canadian doctors developed 
insulin, the first effective treatment for diabetes. 
 
The work of Dr. Frederick Banting and Dr. Charles Best has 
helped millions of diabetics around the world live longer and 



7586 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

healthier lives. Unfortunately, even after a century of progress 
from their Nobel Prize winning discovery, there is still no cure 
for diabetes. Ninety thousand people in Saskatchewan are 
currently living with diabetes, and the number of new cases is 
growing each year. The problem is growing fastest in our most 
vulnerable communities — people living in poverty, Aboriginal 
communities, and those with limited access to healthy food 
options. And we all know that a healthy diet and exercise are 
critical for reducing the risk of diabetes, but we also know that 
for many people who work multiple jobs and struggle to put 
whatever food they can get on the table, that just isn’t feasible. 
 
The explosion of type 2 diabetes in our province is a symptom 
of the greater problems of inequality and poverty, and the only 
way that we can truly make progress in affecting the growth of 
diabetes in Saskatchewan is to address these underlying issues, 
these social determinants of health. 
 
I myself was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes four years ago, and 
so I ask all members to join me in recognizing this November 
as Diabetes Month. And I hope that we can all be mindful of the 
need to address this public health crisis through meaningful 
action. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Dresses for Haiti 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to tell the story of a special group of women from 
the Candle Lake Community Church. Ann Graff and a group of 
15 dedicated volunteers have spearheaded a project to send 
homemade dresses and shorts to Haiti. Mr. Speaker, as the 
Haitian community continues to rebuild after a powerful 
earthquake four years ago, they are still in desperate need of 
relief efforts. 
 
Ann and her group are contributing by providing clothes which 
will be delivered to Les Cayes, Haiti by a Canadian missionary 
from Kamloops. Mr. Speaker, this group has experienced strong 
support for the project from the Candle Lake community. Not 
only are people stepping up to volunteer in any way they can. 
The materials needed to make the dresses, such as fabric, 
sewing machines, and thread have all been donated. At present, 
700 dresses have been made. These dresses are scheduled to be 
delivered next November, leaving the group more time to 
continue making dresses and raising funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this 
amazing group of women from Candle Lake. Their dedication 
to humanitarian efforts in Haiti is a beautiful representation of 
the community spirit we all share in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Bursary Honours the Memory of Three Young Sons 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Out of two great 
tragedies in the Ravenscrag community, the Arnal Boys 
Memorial Bursary for Young Farmers was created to honour 
the memory of three young sons. 
 

In 2008, 14-year-old Blake Arnal died in a farm-related ATV 
[all-terrain vehicle] accident. In July 2014, 16-year-old Sean 
and 10-year-old Lyndon Arnal lost their lives in a tractor 
accident near the family farm. 
 
In reference to the bursary, Olivia Arnal, a sister of the three 
brothers, said, “If we could do something in memory of them 
that would be of help to anybody at all, then it would be of 
greater good than just sulking about it.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the original plan for the bursary was to award 
$3,000 to a student of the Chinook School Division, aged 8 to 
18, that had an agricultural project in which they would like to 
invest. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the bursary funding 
has grown to an amazing $120,000 and, because of this growth, 
15 out of the 29 applicants were awarded funds totalling over 
$45,000 this past June. 
 
Friends, family, and members of the community have rallied to 
raise these funds, and this collective effort helps honour the 
lives of the Arnal brothers. This bursary helps recognize young 
leaders in the community who are passionate about agriculture, 
just as were Blake, Sean, and Lyndon. I ask all members to join 
me in recognizing the effort of many southwest communities in 
honouring the Arnal brothers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Community Living Association of Saskatoon 
60th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 28th, the 
Community Living Association of Saskatoon Inc., otherwise 
known as CLASI, celebrated their 60th anniversary. CLASI is a 
non-profit charitable organization operated by a volunteer board 
of directors. Founded in 1955 by parents and professionals who 
were concerned by the lack of services for children and adults 
with special needs, this organization has continued to grow and 
now provides a number of services for those who need them. 
 
Two services in particular include assistance for families in 
educational, residential, and employment placements, and 
helping with transition planning for family members with 
special needs. From September to June, they also provide 
recreational clubs for kids, teens, young adults living with 
special needs. Of course, Mr. Speaker, these are only two of the 
many great services that CLASI provides. I would like to 
congratulate CLASI on their 60 years, and I wish them best of 
luck in the years ahead. 
 
We are proud to help support both CLASI and 15 other 
agencies in Saskatoon that provide services for those with 
special needs. It is the hard work and dedication of the many 
volunteers that make these organizations successful. 
 
I’d like to thank the Community Living Association of 
Saskatoon for all of their hard work and many years of service 
that they have given to those with special needs in Saskatoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7587 

National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House today to proclaim National Down Syndrome 
Awareness Week here in Saskatchewan, in recognition of the 
contributions that people with Down syndrome provide to our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s disability strategy will make 
Saskatchewan more welcoming, responsive, innovative, and 
inclusive for people with different abilities. 
 
Along with developing a disability strategy, our government has 
funded $2.7 billion since 2007 to help those with different 
abilities. Recognizing this week is just one of the ways we can 
all work together to make inclusion and acceptance a reality in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, Ability in Me, or AIM, is just one of 
those great programs that is working towards the full and equal 
inclusion of people with Down syndrome in this province. 
 
Their goal is for all individuals with Down syndrome to have 
the opportunity to reach their full potential and have a true 
sense of belonging and becoming contributing members of our 
society. Through AIM, several families are being provided with 
the support and services they need, including teachers for 
speech-language services within classrooms. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I want to thank 
AIM for all the work they do to help make Saskatchewan the 
best place in Canada for people with different abilities. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — An international energy expert who has visited 
Boundary dam says the project is clearly plagued by 
“fundamental, operationally crippling problems.” Fundamental, 
operationally crippling problems, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
mouthful, but it’s exactly how industry insiders are describing 
this government’s $1.5 billion carbon capture project now that 
the truth has finally leaked out. What does the Premier have to 
say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many, 
many more quotes advocating for the technology, supporting 
Saskatchewan’s leadership position with respect to carbon 
capture and sequestration, Mr. Speaker. Though I’d like to 
return to yesterday on the same issue, if I can, when the Leader 
of the Opposition was holding out a chart he said was a secret 
chart that actually had been on the Internet for a couple of 
months, misinterpreted the information on the chart, as we later 
learned from officials in the rotunda, and then worse, went out 
to the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, and insulted the integrity of 
SaskPower’s CEO [chief executive officer] who was that day 
celebrating his 24th year with the company, spanning two 
different governments. He wrote off his explanation by saying it 
was “explanation by SaskPower at Mr. Wall’s request just to 

save his bacon.” Then he went on to say, the Leader of the 
Opposition went on to say that this was really disgusting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already mentioned, Mr. Marsh has been 
with the Crown corporation for 24 years. The executive team at 
SaskPower deserves more respect from this Assembly, from 
that member than they were accorded. 
 
Now I get it; I know he’s at 32 per cent in the polls, same level 
as Mr. Lingenfelter. I get that there must be a level of 
desperation. But what there ought not to be, Mr. Speaker, is a 
fundamental disregard and disrespect for the integrity of 
long-serving Crown corporation executives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if there is one thing, if there is 
one thing, Mr. Speaker, that undermines our Crown 
corporations, if there is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that is offensive 
to the hard-working Crown employees in this province, if there 
is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that’s offensive to the hard-working 
people of Saskatchewan who have built our Crowns over 
generations, it is the actions of a government, Mr. Speaker, that 
is not coming clean with what it knows, Mr. Speaker. The 
actions of a government, Mr. Speaker, that are not providing 
answers about what they knew and how they knew it, Mr. 
Speaker, the actions of a government, Mr. Speaker, that refuses 
to be open and transparent with the people of this province on a 
$1.5 billion project — that is what is offensive to the people of 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier does not want to pay any 
attention to what international experts are saying about the 
recent leaks of information that we’ve seen come out slowly, 
Mr. Speaker, from this government. Dr. Gail Reitenbach is the 
editor of world’s leading publication about electricity 
generation. And this is what she says: 
 

Although some fine-tuning is to be expected with any 
first-of-a-kind technology, the problems at the Boundary 
Dam site appear to be more substantial than anyone 
outside the company was aware of. 

 
So industry insiders are clear, and they contradict what the 
Premier, what the minister, what they’ve been saying, Mr. 
Speaker. This is not just some fine tuning. Industry insiders say 
this $1.5 billion project is clearly plagued, Mr. Speaker, by 
problems that are operationally crippling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier going to dispute industry insiders 
and stick with his story that this is just some fine tuning, or will 
he finally admit that there are huge problems with this $1.5 
billion project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we gave the Leader of the 
Opposition the opportunity to take to his feet and perhaps 
retract what he had to say about officials at SaskPower. 
 
He can say whatever he wants about the government. He just 
has. That’s fair game. That’s part of political debate. I get that; 
that’s fine. To target members on this side of the House and ask 



7588 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

them pointed questions is his job. 
 
[14:00] 
 
What is not his job though, Mr. Speaker, is then to go out to the 
rotunda and call it disgusting, call the answers from the CEO of 
SaskPower disgusting, to allege that the CEO and people at 
SaskPower would change their stories because the government 
told them to. That was what he alleged. Mr. Speaker, that is 
actually what is disgusting in all of this. 
 
And there is an opportunity now, desperate as he is politically, 
there is an opportunity now for him to finally do the right thing. 
We’ve never heard him say once that he’s wrong about 
anything. Mr. Speaker, we’re not saying he’s wrong about 
pointed questions about the project. I’m not saying that. But I 
think all would agree that what he has done now in this regard 
frankly is beyond the pale, and he has the chance to walk that 
back. 
 
We’ll have the debate about the project. We’ve got plenty of 
quotes from insiders in the sector that are lauding what’s going 
on at Boundary dam 3, Mr. Speaker. But what we need to make 
sure we’re doing in this argument is keeping it in this room 
here, in this Legislative Chamber, and being respectful to 
long-serving Crown corporation executives and the members of 
IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] who 
have worked hard to deliver on this international leading 
technology. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what is disgusting are zero 
answers from this Premier, Mr. Speaker, and a story, a story 
that changes from day to day, from person to person to person, 
over and over again, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record we see 
from this government. 
 
They’re on the strong offence, Mr. Speaker, because they know, 
they know they have been caught, Mr. Speaker, telling a story 
that is not backed up by the facts. And they don’t like it one bit, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, but they have a duty. 
 
You know, I asked the Premier, I asked him how he felt about 
the fact that international insiders who looked at this project, 
Mr. Speaker, have some pretty concerning things to say. Not the 
things that they’re saying after the spin tour cycle that they get, 
Mr. Speaker, from the Premier or an official, but once they 
know the facts, they have some concerning things to say. 
 
The editor of the world’s leading publication about electricity 
generation visited Boundary dam last May. This is what she 
said: 
 

SaskPower representatives made it clear that there were 
some issues to be resolved with the contractor, and that 
some systems and individual components (such as valves 
leaking far earlier than expected) were not yet operating as 
they should. However, the impression was that the issues 
to be resolved were more along the lines of a “punch list” 
rather than fundamental operationally crippling problems, 
which is clearly the case if the capture facility’s 
availability is only around 40 per cent. 

Once insiders know the real facts, Mr. Speaker, about what’s 
happening, there’s some concern, Mr. Speaker, about what’s 
going on. This is a damning assessment, Mr. Speaker, not only 
of this government’s $1.5 billion carbon capture project, but 
especially about the tales that the Premier has been spinning. I 
think it’s completely unacceptable that the Premier hasn’t been 
upfront with Saskatchewan people. But, Mr. Speaker, I frankly 
find it embarrassing that this government hasn’t been truthful 
with international visitors about this project. Will the Premier at 
least admit that was a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to support for 
the project, the support for the project comes from around the 
world, Mr. Speaker. If you look at Professor Stuart Haszeldine, 
the director of Scottish CCS [Scottish Carbon Capture & 
Storage], said: 
 

Boundary Dam is working proof for naysayers, including 
the . . . [international] Panel on Climate Change, that 
full-scale CCS on power generation now exists and works 
commercially to deliver electricity, with no subsidy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was in October of 2014. 
 
If you look at the International Energy Agency, the IEA, 
referring to Boundary dam: “Carbon capture and storage is the 
only known technology that will enable us to continue to use 
fossil fuels and decarbonize the energy sector.” 
 
The only people that we don’t know where they stand, Mr. 
Speaker, are the members opposite. On a number of occasions, 
the Leader of the Opposition said that he was supportive of it, 
but yet his critic, the member from Nutana, says something 
entirely different. At one point the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] supported carbon capture, but has since moved away 
from it while the Sask Party still supports the concept. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s giving answers 
from last October, back when the Premier said everything was 
great. Then you know, they’re cranking out news releases 
saying it’s exceeding expectations. Once you know the facts, 
Mr. Speaker, once you know the truth about what is happening, 
then people are taking another look and are revising, Mr. 
Speaker, what they’re saying.  
 
Let’s look at Dr. Reitenbach. Her publication gave the 
Boundary dam project an award, Mr. Speaker, a few months 
ago, gave them an award based on what they had been told by 
the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But her most recent column is clear. The information given did 
not paint an accurate picture of what was really going on with 
this $1.5 billion project. Government claimed they were on 
track. Government claimed they were just doing a little bit of 
fine tuning. Everything was fine. Nothing to look at here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7589 

But now we know the truth. The plant’s performance this year 
is worse than it was last year, and it hasn’t even come close to 
reaching full capacity. Industry insiders like Dr. Reitenbach are 
saying that it’s clear that there are fundamental, operationally 
crippling problems with this $1.5 billion project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so if the Premier won’t apologize to the 
international visitors who were clearly given the wrong 
impression about the $1.5 billion project, will he at least 
apologize to Saskatchewan people for not giving us the facts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the industry insider that the 
member opposite quotes from is indeed a professor at McGill. 
Her Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] is in English, Mr. Speaker, 
we understand. So I’m not sure, I’m not sure about her 
credentials. I’m not sure about . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Both sides seem to want to blow off a little 
steam. I’ve allowed that to happen. Now it’s time to answer the 
questions and ask them. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, she does indeed write for 
Power magazine, but her credentials are around the area of 
English, not anything to do with electrical generation, Mr. 
Speaker. If you look down from there, if you actually look at 
other industry experts, Mr. Speaker, from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: “How many technologies do we have 
that can vanish gigatonnes of CO2 each year? . . . CCS stands 
alone,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you look at it a little bit more local, Mr. Speaker, the 
mayor of Estevan, I think commenting on the project said, 
“SaskPower is a key economic driver for Estevan. This project 
breathes new life into Boundary dam power station . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve been telling one story to 
the world, Mr. Speaker, a story that is not backed up by the 
facts. When the truth gets out, Mr. Speaker, when the real facts 
get out, Mr. Speaker, there’s a very different interpretation 
about the success of this project. 
 
You know, the Premier and the minister, they keep claiming 
that these problems are just to be expected. You know, and the 
Premier’s heckling, Mr. Speaker, but he’s not fielding the 
answers. He’s not fielding the questions. He’s not providing 
answers. He’ll talk from his seat, but he won’t take questions, 
Mr. Speaker, about being open and transparent for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the government claims that the 
problems that they’re experiencing were to be expected. Even if 
we take the Premier at his word on that, then he needs to 
explain — and he has an opportunity to do so now — he needs 
to explain why he entered into an agreement with an Alberta oil 
company that forces us, the people of Saskatchewan, to cut 
massive cheques to that oil company, especially when a 

confidential briefing note written for the Premier’s eyes in 2012 
says Cenovus didn’t even need the CO2 until 2016. 
 
So a simple question to the Premier that he’s refused to answer 
over the last week: if the government actually expected these 
problems with the $1.5 billion carbon capture project, then why 
did the Sask Party sign a sweetheart contract with Cenovus that 
has us paying massive penalties to them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have said on a number of 
occasions that in 2014 indeed there was a cheque cut to 
Cenovus around CCS [carbon capture and storage], 
SaskPower’s inability to send the CO2 to them. But in 2015, we 
now see that the project will make about $6 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, there’s another important thing that I think is 
missing in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and it’s whether the Leader 
of the Opposition supports CCS production or not. And I just 
received a copy of a letter that has been sent to the hon. member 
opposite from Neil Collins, the business manager for the IBEW, 
the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Mr. 
Speaker. And he says: 
 

I am very concerned about your recent comments you 
have made regarding the Boundary dam 3 carbon capture 
and sequestration project. Our union members work very 
hard on this project and fully support this important 
initiative. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and in the next subsequent question, I’ll be happy 
to go on, Mr. Speaker, but I think the important question that he 
is asking the Leader of the Opposition is, do you support carbon 
capture and storage? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Yet again, yet again, Mr. Speaker, we have no 
answers from either the minister or from the Premier on this 
issue. Just like we saw with the smart meter debacle, the 
Premier and the SaskPower minister have been struggling day 
after day to keep their stories straight, and their stories still 
don’t match what the internal documents reveal. 
 
So will the SaskPower minister at least tell us just how much of 
our money has been spent for this government in travelling the 
world promoting this $1.5 billion project that still isn’t 
working? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll be happy to provide the 
information. I don’t have that exact figure in front of me, but 
I’ll be happy to provide that. I just want to go on to add some 
more things that Neil Collins, the business manager for the 
IBEW, asked the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

While I recognize the role of the opposition is to ask 
questions about the government’s actions, your comments 
and that of your critic, Cathy Sproule, call into question 



7590 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

your position on this [important] matter.  
 
Do you support the CCS project as a means to reduce 
carbon emissions at our coal-fired plants, or do you intend 
to eliminate coal-fired electrical facilities in 
Saskatchewan, thereby eliminating hundreds of union 
jobs? 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the position of the Leader of the Opposition. 
We know the member from Nutana’s position is far different 
than the Leader of the Opposition’s position, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’d like them to articulate directly what it is. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this is what we know. Since the 
start of this government’s carbon capture project, the official in 
charge of this experiment has spent over $476,000 in travel — 
$476,000 just for travel expenses. That doesn’t even include his 
travel expenses for 2015. We are told that he is currently in 
Saudi Arabia right now and Saskatchewan families are footing 
the bill for that trip too. 
 
With such major problems with the $1.5 billion carbon capture 
project, and with Saskatchewan families already paying much 
higher power bills under the Sask Party, how can the Sask Party 
minister possibly justify such a massive expenditure on travel 
around the world? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is still receiving, 
in spite of any difficulties that they may be having with BD3 
[Boundary dam 3], they are still receiving invitation after 
invitation from around the world to come and talk to various 
groups about the operations of the facility, to talk about the 
start-up of the facility, to talk about the goals of the facility, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think that that’s very important that we continue to 
promote the project, Mr. Speaker, continue to have officials 
travel at the request of other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, to talk 
about the important developments here. And I think it’s 
something that Neil Collins, the IBEW business manager, 
certainly supports as well because the last sentence of his letter 
to us, to the Leader of the Opposition actually, is: 
 

The CCS project is . . . [critical] to both Saskatchewan’s 
economy and our environment. This is an important public 
policy question and our members are interested in your 
immediate response. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are interested 
in your immediate response as well. Do you support carbon 
capture and storage in Saskatchewan or do you not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, if all these international folks are 
so interested in the project, you’d think they would be footing 
the travel bill. But no, on some of his high-priced, 

out-of-province trips, this government’s head of carbon capture 
actually travelled with the Premier to several other countries. 
His itinerary says, “accompany Premier Brad Wall, promote 
awareness of CCS.” So we know that just this one official has 
spent well over $476,000 on travel, most of which was 
supposedly to promote awareness of the $1.5 billion carbon 
capture experiment. 
 
But the question for the minister, we’ll try this one: how much 
has this government spent in total for travel related to the 
carbon capture experiment, including the Premier, the Premier’s 
travel scouts, the minister, and staff? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think all that information is 
of public record, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the travel of the 
Premier or myself or our officials with SaskPower. I think it’s 
all a matter of public record when it comes to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, there are some folks opposite though that probably 
should spend a little bit of money on travel, and that’s the 
Leader of the Opposition. I think if he spent a little bit of time 
and got in his vehicle and drove down to Boundary dam 3 and 
talked to IBEW members down there, talked to the people who 
are operating the facility, talked to the people who are building 
the facility, talked to the people who are attempting to correct 
the problems with the facility, I think he would find something 
far different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think he would find that they are working on a project that’s 
groundbreaking, that is leading, cutting edge, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of carbon capture and storage around the world, Mr. 
Speaker. I think he would find that there is tremendous support 
among the people who are building the project down there, who 
are operating the project down there, and will continue to 
operate the project in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This is somewhat ironic, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier and the SaskPower minister claim it’s very important to 
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars travelling the world to 
promote the government’s $1.5 billion carbon capture project. 
Meanwhile this Premier and this minister have struggled to 
answer the most basic questions about this project, and they 
refuse to be upfront with Saskatchewan people about what’s 
really going on with this project. Well here’s an idea: stop 
wasting so much of our money on international travel 
promoting a project that still isn’t working today, and start 
being transparent with Saskatchewan people. 
 
To the minister: what will it take for this government to finally 
agree that the Crown and Central Agencies Committee needs to 
be reconvened immediately to look into this fiasco? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the travel 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7591 

budgets of the government today and you look at the travel 
budgets of the NDP the last few years when they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker, the travel budget in the last year of 
the NDP was $975,000, Mr. Speaker. This past year for the 
Saskatchewan government, for the Saskatchewan Party 
government, it’s $355,000, or approximately one-third, 
one-third of the money that you folks opposite used to spend in 
terms of promoting projects, in terms of all of the government 
business that you used to conduct, Mr. Speaker. We are 
spending one-third of the amount and getting far more done 
than the members opposite ever got done in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s clear that the people of Saskatchewan support the fact that 
we are working hard on an environmentally sound project, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly they agree with it. Clearly they agree with 
taking the CO2 off the scale, Mr. Speaker, taking 400 000 
tonnes of emissions out of the atmosphere for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll never hesitate to ask questions 
when it comes to transparency, when it comes to openness, 
when it comes to ensuring the Saskatchewan ratepayers get the 
best possible value for the investments that their Crowns are 
making. 
 
What we see though, Mr. Speaker, from this government are a 
host of questions that remain unanswered — questions, Mr. 
Speaker, that undermine our Crown, and questions that 
undermine the good jobs that are at Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t know how serious the problems are. We 
don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what it’s going to cost. We don’t 
know when we might see the proper outcome coming from this 
plant. We see deflection. We see bluster, Mr. Speaker, but we 
fail to see the answers. 
 
My question to the Premier: when he’s sending officials off 
around the world, off around the world promoting this project 
as is happening right now, are they telling the accurate story 
about the problems, or are they telling the story that’s simply 
the picture that the Premier wants to paint? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, indeed there have been a 
number of questions that have been posed with respect to 
carbon capture and storage. And the most recent ones have been 
posed by none other than the IBEW business manager, Neil 
Collins, Mr. Speaker, when he asks whether the NDP — and 
particularly the member from Saskatoon Nutana, Mr. Speaker 
— support the project because this is a very important project 
for the members that he represents and clearly is a concern, 
given the public statements of the Leader of the Opposition and 
the member from Nutana when it comes to this project, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He is wondering whether or not if they are supportive of the 
project. He’s wondering whether or not they’re supportive of 
the jobs that are associated with the project, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think it’s an important question. And he concludes by saying, 

the CCS project is critical to both Saskatchewan’s economy and 
to our environment, something that the member from Nutana 
claims to be very concerned about as well. 
 
This is an important public policy question and our members 
are interested in your immediate response. And I, Mr. Speaker, 
submit that I think the people of Saskatchewan are also 
interested in that support. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I will never hesitate to ask tough 
questions about projects, Mr. Speaker, that deserve scrutiny, 
projects that deserve transparency, projects, Mr. Speaker, that 
need to have the truth exposed about what is really happening. 
I’m not afraid of that scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. But we have a 
government, we have a Premier that is afraid of that scrutiny, 
afraid, Mr. Speaker, to have open and honest assessment of 
what is going on and the true state of affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has refused to convene the Crown 
and Central Agencies Committee to get to the bottom of this 
mess. My question to the Premier: why won’t he agree to 
convene this committee today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no one is disagreeing that the 
hon. member is not afraid to ask tough questions. He is 
apparently very afraid of answering any questions about what 
he might do with this particular project. 
 
For example, he wants transparency. Why didn’t he disclose to 
members of the House that the industry insider expert he was 
quoting has a Ph.D. in English, that she taught American 
literature and composition at the University of Colorado at 
Boulder? But yet she was in charge of power production, the 
production of the magazine called Power. 
 
Maybe he wants to disclose that information, and moreover 
maybe once and for all he wants to disclose to the IBEW and 
the hard-working unionized members down at Boundary dam 3, 
maybe he wants to disclose to the senior team at SaskPower and 
the people of the province what’s his position, because you 
either have to clean up coal or you shut it down. 
 
And I’ve heard nothing from him, Mr. Speaker, that would say 
anything, but if you elect an NDP government they will shut 
down coal like they’re doing in Alberta. We’ll lose those 
mining jobs. We’ll lose jobs at Boundary dam 3, 4, and 5, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll lose the chance to keep our rates competitive 
and market this technology around the world. 
 
[Applause] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you for the applause. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 



7592 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1,001 through 1,003. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 101 to 103. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 1,004 through 1,017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to 104 through 117. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1,018 through 1,024. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to 1,018 to 1,024 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is somewhat ironic 
that we enter into this debate after question period, and these 
folks in government so wrapped up in the union flag here and 
all of a sudden trying to protect jobs. We see the last eight years 
of where they’ve actually cut jobs. And I just think about the 
laundry workers in P.A. [Prince Albert] who say, remember 
April 4th. And I think the member who is from P.A. should 
remember April 4th when these folks are talking about jobs and 
union jobs. I mean I can’t believe the irony of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — To request leave for introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, seated in the west gallery, a very good friend of 
mine, Mr. Alexander White. He’s here today with the 
Association of Saskatchewan Realtors. He has been a past 
president of that association and a very active member and a 
colleague of mine formerly in the real estate business. He sells 

real estate in The Battlefords, and a long-time member of the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and a great citizen of 
North Battleford. Just ask all members to welcome him to his 
Assembly please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to enter into this debate on Bill No. 
183, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act and 
The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2014. And it 
has been quite a journey for this government on this legislation. 
 
And I want to start by thanking some folks who were really 
involved, and I want to thank the committee members. I know 
that the minister listed them off, and I won’t at this time. But I 
do know that the folks responsible for this bill, who gave a lot 
of insight through committee work, did a great job. I also want 
to thank my colleagues here for some great speeches, who’ve 
done a good job presenting the case and really talking about the 
history of this bill since 2007 and how we’ve come to this point 
in time. And so my colleagues here have really put together 
some very thoughtful comments and I want to thank them for 
that. 
 
I want to thank my past colleagues from previous years who’ve 
worked so hard in pointing out the errors of the way of this 
government and what we’ve done to get to this point. And I 
want to thank my colleagues: Andy Iwanchuk, Deb Higgins 
from Moose Jaw, Sandra Morin, and Kevin Yates, and many 
others who aren’t here today but who were in this House, spent 
a lot of time making the case that this was absolutely the wrong 
thing to do, the wrong thing to do, and that in fact this 
government at some point will end up having to do the right 
thing. Somebody will make them do the right thing. And of 
course that somebody was the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
And I think all through this we should remember, we should 
remember that this committee and this work here was court 
ordered. It was not a consultation piece. We did not go to the 
Supreme Court for guidance. This government was forced to go 
to the Supreme Court because of how wrong they were 
proceeding in legislation when it came to essential services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is so meaningful. I think that it’s so 
important. And it is ironic that today we start out with the 
Premier defending the executives from SaskPower. But clearly 
if there’s apology needed, if there is an apology needed, it’s for 
the thousands of workers here in Saskatchewan that this 
government trampled their rights until they got to the Supreme 
Court of Canada, for eight years. Eight years, acted so 
improperly in terms of respecting their rights. 
 
And we have not heard a single word from this government — 
not from the Minister of Labour, not from the Premier, not from 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7593 

the Minister of Justice — at all about admitting that they were 
wrong and that they apologize to the people of Saskatchewan 
for this ideological adventure that they took starting back in 
2007. And I know some members over there said they would 
never do it, and here we are eight years later. And here we are 
with a bill that could have happened eight years ago if this 
government had taken advice from the people involved. 
 
I mean, it’s so ironic today that we have a letter that one 
minister will hold up from the IBEW, but eight years ago they 
had many, many, many letters about how wrong they were on 
Bill 5. But they disregarded them. They disregarded them and 
went bullheaded into this Bill 5, and here we are. Here we are. 
And they continued that attitude for eight long years, eight long 
years where we could have done so many others things. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And yet I find it’s ironic. I find it ironic that the Minister of 
Energy and the Premier will hold up a letter from IBEW and 
talk about it as if all of a sudden they found the road to 
Damascus. Here they have been saved, and all of a sudden they 
are paying attention to labour, where for eight long years we’ve 
seen such a disregard for anything that came from labour. And 
whether that was, of course, Bills 5 and 6, and then we had so 
many bills in between. And then we had the employment Act, 
where they disregarded the words from labour. And finally they 
were forced to, forced to. 
 
Now, I don’t know. It’ll be interesting to see . . . The question I 
have really is, because there’s been no apology, no remorse, 
they can pass this legislation. But because they are the 
employers, how will they approach this legislation when it 
comes to bargaining? Will they actually work in the spirit of 
how the committee laid it out or will they act as they have 
seemed to have acted before? 
 
And really, what’s interesting is that the Premier has said, and 
many times he’s said, the best indicator of future performance is 
past performance. How people act in the past will be how they 
will act in the future. And I think this will be the question for us 
to see, whether or not this government will continue to act in a 
bullheaded ideological fashion when it comes to unions. They 
hold up IBEW from down in Estevan, and fair enough. They’ve 
got concerns. That’s fair enough, and they’re very free to write 
a letter, and we’ll be responding. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just find it passing strange that all of a 
sudden, on the road to Damascus, they have now been holding 
up labour letters. They didn’t do it when CUPE [Canadian 
Union of Public Employees] was concerned about the laundry 
facilities in P.A. They sure didn’t do it. They dismissed the 
concerns and they closed that down, and now we have K-Bro 
and the loss of many, many, tens if not hundreds of union jobs 
there in that industry of laundry. So, Mr. Speaker, I find this 
very, very odd indeed. 
 
And so we look at this bill, and we will have questions in 
committee. 
 
But I really want to talk about the issues that we have today 
because of what has happened with this legislation in Bill 183. 
And we know that the minister . . . You know, it’s interesting. 

The minister involved today as Minister of Labour of course 
was involved right from the very beginning and has been 
intimately involved with this essential services legislation on 
the path from day one, from day one, because he was the 
Minister of Justice at the time. And while we’ve had a change 
in labour and change in ministers of Justice, we have someone 
who’s been there right from the very beginning. 
 
And he has yet to say anything at all that comes close to being a 
bit of an apology. I mean, he’s been soft spoken about it. He’s 
been very measured in his language. But really, seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, when we see what has happened over the past eight 
years, thousands of workers who deserve recognition for what 
has happened over the past eight years in terms of their loss of 
rights and no recognition, we should give them some respect. 
Respect how they work. Respect what they do and how they get 
their work done, because it’s so important that we do that as the 
House. 
 
And I expect the government will step up at some point, at 
some point and say something like this: we’ve been on a grand 
ideological adventure for the past eight years that didn’t need to 
happen, didn’t need to happen at all and, Mr. Speaker, this has 
been a real, you know, real waste of time and we didn’t have to 
go there. But really, Mr. Speaker, it’s been about a government 
who’s been out of touch, been out of touch, who was elected 
and really went right away to that ideological place when 
people were telling them, don’t do that. 
 
We can get a solution to essential services. We can work out the 
differences. We can make the system better, but we need to 
work on this together. 
 
So unfortunately though, the government decided not to go 
down that road, but in fact they would keep on this ideological 
route. And really because of this, we have found ourselves in 
not a great place, in fact a place that we wish we could’ve been 
in so much different eight years later. 
 
You know, we’ve been through three bills now. We’ve been 
through Bill 5, Bill 128, now Bill 183. We’ve been through 
three court appearances, right up to the Supreme Court of 
Canada, and we’ve also had an appearance with the ILO 
[International Labour Organization] when the SFL, 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, brought this forward to the 
International Labour Organization in 2009 and ’10. And I 
understand that the government made at least two 
representations to the ILO. The government was resoundingly 
called out on how they approached Bills 5 and 6. They said, you 
need to consult. You need to consult. You cannot unilaterally 
act in this way, and you need to respect the right to strike. 
 
Ironically, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think the Premier in his 
plan, his vision, maybe not even in his wildest dreams . . . that 
he would be the one in Canada to enshrine the right to strike. 
And in fact it is such irony and, you know, today has been a day 
of ironies, but here we are again talking about the irony that the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, has been the one who has brought this forward to the 
Supreme Court and forced the Supreme Court to make a ruling 
on this issue. And here we have the case before us, and in fact 
now unions enjoy the fact that the right to strike is now 
enshrined in Canada. And so this is an odd thing. 



7594 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

But, Mr. Speaker, really when this government came to power 
in 2007, it really had choices about what it could do in the 
labour world. It chose to go down this ideological path and he 
chose, the Premier and the government and the cabinet 
knowingly chose that route knowing that there would be battles; 
there would be fights. The labour movement clearly would not 
be happy with this, and rightfully so, and rightfully they took it 
all the way to the Supreme Court. 
 
But we had opportunities, and I think we’ve had a missed 
opportunity for eight years. Eight years we’ve had and we 
continue to have the second-worst record in Canada when it 
comes to injury rates, the second-worst record. And we might 
as well say the worst. I don’t know if it’s better to be the second 
worst or the first worst. To me it’s just darned close to being the 
worst, and it continues to be that way. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s funny, the minister will quote me saying that 
we have to do more because I was a minister prior. Clearly we 
had to do more, and it wasn’t . . . We were trying to do our best 
when we were in government. But this was a missed 
opportunity, eight years. 
 
You know, last year, and it was interesting because I did get 
some flak from the Workers’ Comp. I did talk about how I 
really felt it was time for us to do a refresh. 
 
This government had the opportunity to make some choices in 
2007, and I wish we could go back and rewind the film and say, 
listen, we should make safety in the workplace the number one 
issue. We hear the Minister of Labour often say and he will say 
that this is something we need to do more about. And we agree 
on that. But we got to do more than just agree on it, and we’ve 
really got to get down to the nuts and bolts in that. 
 
And I know this government really hung its hat on Mission: 
Zero. And I said last year, you know, I really feel that we need 
to take a look at that. We need to take a refresh. And I think 
we’ve missed an opportunity. We’ve missed eight years where, 
instead of fighting the battle of essential services, where we 
could have had a committee work that out and be where we are 
now several years ago. We could have done that. That 
opportunity was always there. We didn’t need to go down the 
path of fighting it out in the courts. But this government chose 
to do that and here we are. 
 
But instead, they chose a program in occupational health and 
safety where we have something that we could really work on, 
that there needed to be attention, that there needed to be 
something done about it. It is a crisis. It is a crisis. We have the 
second-worst record in Canada. And the government will say, 
well yes, we want to do something about it. But really we have 
had opportunities to do something about it. 
 
And you know last year, as I said, I called, in the media, for a 
refresh. And I still feel that way. I feel like we’ve got to do 
something. We’ve got to take a look. Is Mission: Zero actually 
working? Or did it pick the low-hanging fruit and that’s what 
we’ve got ourselves in a place where low-hanging fruit has 
been picked but really the hard parts aren’t happening? 
 
We’ve seen a government that has cut inspections, random 
inspections and planned inspections, and we called them out on 
that last fall. We don’t know what the results of that have been. 

Or in the spring we had questions on that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re losing opportunities. And what worries 
me, worries me deeply is here we have a situation at this very 
time where we have the committee of review going around 
looking at Workers’ Comp. What can we do better in Workers’ 
Comp? Well there’s several things we could do better for 
Workers’ Comp, and we can give a long list of that, a long list. 
But the question really remains, what can we do before people 
get to Workers’ Comp? What can we do there? 
 
We’ve seen the Workers’ Comp, WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board], issue a major refund this summer, some 
$80 million from their excess surplus account where they’ve 
had very good returns on their investments and they’ve been 
doing well financially. But they’ve refunded $80 million. In fact 
the pool of money’s 140 so it might actually be more than 80, 
but the press release that I’ve seen cites $80 million. 
 
So we’re at $80 million. What could we have done with some 
of that money? The government often pleads poverty, and now 
they’re saying, and we hear this, that our budgets aren’t as 
strong as they were a year or two years ago because of the price 
of oil and different commodity prices and the state of the 
economy. So we have to tighten our belts. That’s fair enough. 
We are aware of the price of oil. 
 
But the one thing that’s interesting, and people may not know 
this: the occupational health and safety funding that goes into 
the Ministry of Labour is paid for by WCB. So whatever that 
amount is, WCB will put money into the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] and then it will get paid to the occupational 
health and safety. So this year the budget for occupational 
health and safety is $8.3 million — $8.3 million. And how 
much are we paying Cenovus? And that’s a big question. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had two pools of money that we could 
have used: the first, which is interesting, the money that this 
government chose instead to put into the battle for essential 
services for eight years. Now this government has said that it’s 
$160,000. We have yet to see those numbers. I think we may 
have got some answers today. I’ll look and see what they are, 
but this government has said it’s about $160,000. I think it’s got 
to be much more than that, particularly when you take into 
account that they’re including in their numbers how much the 
penalty is for paying for the labour side of the bill for going to 
the Supreme Court. I can’t see how you can go to three court 
appearances, produce three bills and . . . So there’s six 
occasions right there, and we’re talking about $160,000. 
 
I know the minister has been upset when I said that if that’s the 
case, then clearly it wasn’t a priority for the Ministry of Justice 
and Labour. In fact they may have been doing it off the side of 
the desk because I don’t know how else you can do it so 
cheaply. But we’ll wait and see what the numbers are because 
we haven’t seen the numbers. We haven’t seen the numbers. 
They may be available today. We’ll see. I did ask for some 
answers, and we’ll see what kind of answers I’ve got. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s one pool of money, but the 
government chose to say, I’m not investing that money in 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7595 

occupational health and safety. I’m investing it in the battle for 
essential services and the legal costs that are involved with that. 
 
The other pool of money that we have found is the excess 
surplus earnings from Workers’ Comp, some $140 million. 
Here’s a budget of occupational health and safety of $8.3 
million. If they were to just increase it by 25 per cent, that’s $2 
million. That’s hardly anything. That’s the interest off the $140 
million. That’s the interest off that, and that would be 25 per 
cent more. That could mean 25 per cent more . . . Well we could 
take a look at what that, you know, whether that would be . . . 
How many more inspectors would that be? How many more 
people involved in education would that be? What could you do 
with 25 per cent? What could you do with 50 per cent? What 
happens if we were to double it and say, you know what we’re 
going to do, is we’re going to have the best safety record in 
Canada, make that the goal and make it happen through 
occupational health and safety. 
 
Instead this government has invested . . . And I call it a kitschy 
little, a kitschy Mission: Zero. Now I know that I’ve got in 
trouble for saying that because people say it’s much deeper than 
that, but nobody has really shown me that it’s deeper than that. 
And I haven’t gone anywhere. This is where I work, in the 
legislature. So if there is more to Mission: Zero than their 
television ads and their meetings with folks, I’d like to know 
about it. 
 
But you know, if we were really truly committed to safety, I 
don’t think we would be refunding $80 million. We would be 
keeping that back and saying to different safety associations and 
to occupational health and safety, we are going to really invest 
in people in Saskatchewan. We’re not going to every April 28th 
read off the list of names of who’ve died. And we get pretty 
choked up about that. That is a tough day. I get how tough that 
day is for everybody involved. But I think we really have to 
take the resolve of that day . . . When we say we’re going to do 
something about it, we really do something about it. We really 
do something about it. But instead this summer we saw a refund 
of $80 million. 
 
Now this is so odd though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because while 
they’re emptying out the piggy bank, they have a committee of 
review going around finding out what they can do to improve 
workers’ comp. But Workers’ Comp is emptying out their 
piggy bank right away. So these folks will come back with 
recommendations about what they can do. And I’m deeply, 
deeply worried that Worker’s Comp will say, we have no 
money. We have no money. But a few short months ago they 
were pretty flush. They had some $80 million that they could 
give away. So, Mr. Speaker, I am deeply concerned about that. I 
am deeply concerned about that, that we aren’t using the 
opportunities presented to ourselves. 
 
And here we are some eight years later and we’re having this 
discussion about essential services. And I think that, I hope the 
government has learned something here. And of course I want 
to get back to what the Premier said. This does concern me 
because he says what the best indicator for future actions is past 
actions. And we’ve seen this government, when it comes to 
labour, become very ideologically bound in their decision 
making. They don’t use consultations in a really productive 
way. These consultations are different because they were 

Supreme Court ordered. They were court ordered, so they had 
to do something by January 30th. The clock is ticking. I mean 
we’ll pass . . . It’ll probably be passed some two months before 
the deadline. Fair enough. But even so, you know, I mean it’s 
interesting how they are really cutting it close. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to just review what I’ve said. 
Because I first want to thank all those who’ve worked before on 
this issue, who’ve really forced the hand of this government and 
made them get to the place where they are today; made them get 
to the place where they used the common sense of working 
people who are in these positions, who do play important roles 
in our lives, who do clean . . . make the highways safe when 
there’s storms, who do provide essential services in the 
hospitals. So it’s just a common sense thing that at the end of 
the day we would use their expertise. And so here we are, but 
it’s so ironic that it’s because of the courts that we are here, and 
we cannot lose track of that. 
 
And it was so rich in irony that the Premier would stand up 
today and talk about apologies when he’s got a couple of 
apologies that he’s got to make, he’s got to make to the people, 
the working people of Saskatchewan about the fiasco of 
essential services here in Saskatchewan. This is going to be 
quite a chapter somebody’s going to write in a few years about 
what happened from 2007 to 2015 in labour history in 
Saskatchewan when this government decided to go through this 
ideological battle and really ended up, really ended up in a place 
that we could have gone right away with some common sense 
consultations if they were really interested. But when they were 
elected, they decided to go down that road of an ideological 
venture that involved three courts, involved three bills. I mean it 
will be quite the chapter. 
 
But I don’t think it’s the end of the book because the next 
chapter is how this government will act, how this government 
will act. How will it act when it comes to bargaining? Will it 
respect the people that it’s bargaining with? Will it do what’s in 
the Act, in the spirit of the Act, in the spirit of what that 
committee saw? I mean there’s some loose ends maybe that we 
have questions about, and we’ll have questions in committee, 
and that involves the definitions and timelines and that type of 
thing. But they can be answered in committee. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are deeply concerned. We are deeply 
concerned about the next chapter in essential services. Will this 
government act in the way, in the spirit of this legislation? 
That’s the challenge for this government. We can all pass 
legislation. But will they actually act in good faith? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I say, it’s about choices. It’s about 
priorities and what really matters. And today we’ve seen the 
government talk about apologies and commitments to IBEW. 
And I talked about, in April we’ll hear about how we need to do 
so much more for working people who’ve died on the job. And 
we’ll hear the minister say in a very meaningful way that he 
really feels for these folks and these families and that we’ve got 
to do better. We’ve got to do better. 
 
But we see that we’ve got inspectors doing less inspections. We 
don’t know if there’s all the positions filled in the department of 
occupational health and safety. We know that — and this is the 
irony again, you know, Mr. Speaker, this is the irony that we’ve 



7596 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

seen over the past 10 years — the workforce that the WCB 
covers has grown from 300,000 to some 400,000. That’s 33 per 
cent. It’s grown by 33 per cent. You would think that that alone 
would demand a bigger occupational health and safety budget. 
You’d think that by itself would be a reason for this government 
to say, we can’t operate occupational health and safety on $8 
million. We’ve got to have 10. We’ve got to have 12 million. 
And we know WCB’s got it. We know they’ve got it, and we 
can just take a look at their excess earning surplus, which 
they’re giving back to the employers. And it wouldn’t . . . It 
would hardly put a dent in it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking at this bill. We’ll have 
questions. But I hope my message to the minister: take a look at 
Mission: Zero. Is it actually working? Take a look at 
occupational health and safety. Put a real investment into it. I 
know that they’re probably putting together their budgets as we 
speak, or should be, because I know that the election is coming 
up, but government must continue on, must continue on. 
 
But we can’t operate when we know the working force here in 
Saskatchewan is growing so significantly and particularly by 
those who are covered by WCB. So we really need to make 
some different choices. And the real choice we’ve got to make 
here in Saskatchewan is really to invest in eliminating 
workplace injuries and deaths, and we’ve got to make that 
commitment. And we can’t have a kitschy saying anymore, 
Mission: Zero. You’ve got to take a look at that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I hope the minister will take some time and 
reflect on the past eight years, where they’ve gone, how they’ve 
acted, and what are they going to do. I hope that there’s a real 
change, a real change in their attitude, that they will bargain in 
good faith with those who are involved in essential services, 
using this legislation. That’s the key. They’ve got to bargain in 
good faith. And will they do that? Will they do that? That’s the 
next chapter. 
 
And will they make a commitment, a real commitment to make 
sure we eliminate workplace injuries and deaths and use the 
resources this government has? Because they do have resources, 
and they can’t plead poverty in that because there are resources 
for that. They have the money. They can do it. They can get the 
inspectors. They can do the education. And we know that’s the 
thing to do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are many other 
bills that we want to get to today. These are my thoughts on Bill 
183. We will have lots of questions in committee, and we’re 
looking forward to having that. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m willing to see this bill go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 183, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this bill be referred to the Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 187 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 
stand today, take my place, and join debate on Bill No. 187, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
Just a few comments off the top by way of declaring my interest 
in the subject, Mr. Speaker, and then we’ll get into the 
substance of the bill itself. But certainly farm land and the 
importance of that, not just to the present day in Saskatchewan 
but certainly to the history of the province and where we come 
from, how we regard ourselves as people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s certainly a real touchstone as regards the 
Saskatchewan identity. 
 
For the McCall family, they’d first proved up a quarter out in 
Montmartre country in 1883, and the quarter section that my 
father was raised on was first proved up in 1907. And in point 
of fact, Mr. Speaker, that quarter section of land is still in the 
McCall family and the old neighbours, the Procyks, they’ve 
continued to make a good go of life on the farm and they do a 
fine job bringing in the crop off of that quarter section of land. 
 
So you know, when different items come before us in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all of us have different sort of 
things that come to mind or different experiences that we draw 
upon. And certainly for me standing in a debate such as this, I 
am very much thinking about that quarter section of land, that 
three-room farm house that my father was raised in, had his bed 
right by the stove, and just the way that the years have come 
and gone and all the different — some of them wrenching, 
some of them beneficial — all the different changes that have 
been undergone in the last 100 years-plus on that quarter 
section of farm land, Mr. Speaker. I think about the way that it’s 
impacted by the different things around climate change. I think 
about the flood that drove my grandma and my dad in off the 
farm in the ’50s to the city to come make a new life there. And I 
think about our cousins that have still persisted and made a 
living off of the land, and the way that again so many others 
have come in off the farm and moved on to different things, or 
the way that the size of a farm has grown ever larger. 
 
[15:00] 
 
When my dad was a teenager, his father, my grandfather, 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7597 

grandmother, they farmed their home quarter and they rented 
out a quarter from one of the neighbours. And that half section 
of land provided a living. And if you think about it, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of a half section of land, it’s a fraction of 
some of the holdings that are out there these days and what 
constitutes a viable, economic farm operation in these modern 
times. 
 
And certainly land is, land is not just valuable to the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of their heritage, in terms of, you know, 
how we define ourselves, but that land is also seeing a real 
dollar value increase. And we’ve seen different passes at that, 
Mr. Speaker, where the values have gone up, gone down, but 
certainly farm land in my adult life is on a fair upswing. 
 
And the questions around how the global economy impacts who 
has control of Saskatchewan farm land and balancing that off 
with investments and the ability for different dollars to come in 
from out of province and be put to use is a question that has 
grown in complexity as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the way that translates into the question of farm land 
ownership and who has control of Saskatchewan farm land has 
been an interesting one. And certainly the way that we’ve seen 
that addressed by this government of the last number of years as 
well has been interesting. The talk that you hear on coffee row 
and out in the different farm gates in terms of what’s happening 
with farm ownership and who owns those farms, Mr. Speaker, 
rose to such a point where the government a couple years back 
appointed a special investigator to look into it, into the 
situation, and we’ve yet to see the final report come forward 
from that investigator. But the fact that that did not put the 
matter to bed but instead necessitated another review, another 
consultation with the public more broadly, and that alongside 
the situation we had an entity such as the Canadian Pension 
Plan Investment Board buying up 40 000 hectares, 100,000 
acres of land, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And certainly I’d know that Mr. Deputy Speaker is quite 
familiar not just with the theory of all of this but certainly from 
the business end of it and what this means for neighbours and 
the towns and communities of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
So I know that this is something that has had an increasing 
interest throughout the province and increasing activity perhaps 
coming in ways that had not been previously anticipated, that 
again brings forward the need for a response in terms of the 
regulator, which is of course the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the legislation itself, so again, Mr. Speaker, I’m interested 
to see this legislation come forward. And again I represent a 
constituency, have the privilege of representing a constituency 
in the inner city of Regina. But again in Saskatchewan you’re 
never too far away from the farm gate. You’re never too far out 
of the countryside, Mr. Speaker. So we all have an interest in 
what this particular piece of legislation is bringing forward. 
 
In terms of the changes itself, in terms of again trying to 
balance off investment dollars flowing into the province but 
keeping farm land accessible to Saskatchewan farmers, 
ranchers, producers, we’ll be interested to see the changes and 
how they impact that situation. 
 

In terms of giving the Farm Land Security Board greater teeth 
and more authority, in terms of the work that it has set out 
before it to carry out in policing the farm land ownership 
regime in Saskatchewan, we’ll be interested to see how that 
goes. 
 
We’ll be interested to see the fealty between those 3,000-plus 
Saskatchewan people that responded to consultations in terms 
of what they had to say about foreign investment, foreign 
involvement in the province of Saskatchewan, or institutional 
buyers such as pension plans and how that impacts the situation 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of the amendments in the legislation around pension 
plans and administrators of pension fund assets and trusts 
ineligible to buy farm land, in terms of the more closely 
defining “having an interest in farm land” to include any type of 
interest or benefit that’s normally associated with the ownership 
of land, and in terms of the purchase of farm land requiring 
financing to be through a financial institution registered to do 
business in Canada, or with a Canadian resident, we’re glad to 
see the different clarifications that have been made there and 
we’ll be interested to see whether or not that is in fact how it 
plays out. 
 
So it’s an interesting process, Mr. Speaker, and it’s particularly 
interesting for a government that has a self-perception of it as, 
you know, bullishly free enterprise and interested in market 
approaches to just about everything. But interesting to note, Mr. 
Speaker, that on a matter as fundamental, of fundamental 
importance to the province of Saskatchewan, that this 
government of course is quite happy to intervene in the market, 
that this government is quite happy to move to regulation and 
using that collective wherewithal that we have, that we vest in 
the Government of Saskatchewan, to stand in the way of what 
would be a classic free-market approach to a matter such as this. 
 
And it’s not the first time we’ve seen that kind of inconsistency, 
Mr. Speaker. And I guess if it actually makes sense, then fair 
enough. We just hope that that gets referenced when we hear 
the lathered speeches about the virtues of free enterprise later on 
down the agenda, that kind of more accurate, fuller recognition 
of just the complexity of life as it is. And you know, just 
because you’re a hammer doesn’t mean everything’s a nail. And 
in terms of having a right wing response to everything, well 
how that plays out on the ground is sometimes a bit more 
complicated, a bit more complex. And we see that in the 
situation that has brought this legislation forward here today. 
 
So I know that I’ve got other colleagues that have got some 
interventions they’d like to make in this debate, that would like 
to get some remarks on the record before it moves on to the 
committee stage, but at this stage of the game, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 187, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 2015. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



7598 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 188 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 188 — The Best 
Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and as always it’s my honour to be able to rise in this Assembly 
to provide a few thoughts on the bill in question. In this case, 
it’s Bill No. 188 which is entitled An Act to amend certain Acts 
respecting Awarding of Contracts. And just off the top, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean this is a very short bill. There’s basically two 
sections and all they do is amend part of the highways Act and 
then they amend a section of The Public Works and Services 
Act. So very clearly an amending bill. 
 
And what tells me that this has been rather hastily thrown 
together is the fact that there are no explanatory notes for this 
bill, and the explanation for why there are no explanatory notes 
was that they’re only provided when bills amend existing 
legislation. The people that prepared this note basically said 
there are no explanatory notes because it’s a new bill. But very 
clearly it’s not a new bill and even in the title itself it says it’s 
An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Awarding of 
Contracts. 
 
So I think hopefully the Ministry of Justice will remedy that 
because I know that people rely on explanatory notes. I know I 
certainly do when I take a look at bills that the government is 
proposing. I look at the explanatory notes to help give context 
to what is being attempted in the bill itself or certainly in the 
amendments. 
 
And I think that it really would be important to have 
explanatory notes on this particular bill because I think it’s a 
little misleading even in terms of its title when it’s called The 
Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015. I sort of take issue with 
the title itself because what I understand, and I’ll go through 
this in my comments today, is that there’s really nothing that’s 
changing here in these two sections except that the minister no 
longer has to go to the Lieutenant Governor in Council when he 
decides not to accept the lowest bidder. And that’s really what 
this bill is accomplishing, is it’s just taking away the 
intervention of the Lieutenant Governor in Council when the 
minister decides not to accept the lowest bid. 
 
And we can look at that very carefully here because I think it’s 
important for people to realize. I think this really is a political 
response to some of the concerns of organizations like the 
North Saskatoon Business Association. And this is something 
that we know. We know that the north Saskatchewan business 
association has been very concerned about the awarding of 
contracts and the lowest tender as being the sole benchmark for 
the Department of Highways or the Department of Public 
Works. 
 
So they’ve brought those concerns to our attention. They’ve 
brought them to the attention of the public, and certainly 

they’ve brought them to the minister’s attention, the Minister 
Responsible for SaskBuilds who is the minister that’s 
introducing this particular bill. I guess he’s doing it maybe as a 
Justice bill. I’m not sure because Highways and public works 
are the bills that are affected by this change, you know. 
Obviously the Minister of Highways and the minister 
responsible for public works would be also very closely 
involved with this. But it was brought forward by the Minister 
of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
So we’re assuming that he’s taking responsibility for these 
changes as a result of his responsibilities with SaskBuilds. The 
connection there, of course, being the approach this government 
has taken to public infrastructure and that being the 
wholehearted, whole-scale adoption of the P3 [public-private 
partnership] model which we’ve had lots to say about on this 
side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and certainly our concern 
about the ideological leap this government has taken into that 
particular pool, the P3 pool, without sort of taking a close look 
at each project and then determining whether that is in fact the 
best model. 
 
Certainly we know for a lot of these projects . . . And our 
former prime minister was happy to provide federal dollars but 
only when a P3 model was adopted. So it’s certainly a 
compromising situation for federal dollars to be forwarded for 
projects, and certainly I think provinces have been forced to 
adopt that model simply to access the federal dollars that they 
need to carry out those projects. So SaskBuilds is certainly 
following along with the lead of the former prime minister. 
We’ll see what happens with the new government and their 
approach to infrastructure dollars, but I certainly hope it’s not 
. . . We see infrastructure dollars being tied and married to the 
P3 approach which is obviously why this minister who is 
responsible for SaskBuilds is the one making these changes. 
 
Public tendering, lowest bidder, is presented in the existing 
clauses. And what I want to do right now is take a look closely 
at the clauses that exist currently, before these amendments. 
And I’ll talk about highways and transportation first. 
 
So the two important clauses we’re talking about there is 
section 53 and section 55. Now the Act only amends section 55, 
but it’s tied closely to section 53, so I’ll just talk a little bit 
about the existing section 53 of The Highways and 
Transportation Act. The name of this section is called “Tenders 
required for public improvements.” So there we go. Right away 
we know this is talking about the requirement for a tender for 
public improvements. And 53(1), this is not being changed, 
53(1) says: 
 

. . . the minister shall call for tenders by public 
advertisement or other public notice for the construction of 
all public improvements to be undertaken by the minister. 

 
[15:15] 
 
This is for highways. Secondly in subsection (2) it says: 
 

The minister is not required to call for public tenders 
where, having regard to the nature of the work, the size of 
the undertaking, the urgency with which the work is 
required or any other prescribed circumstance, [so there’s 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7599 

our secret language for regulations; so there might be 
some other reason] the minister is of the opinion that the 
work can be carried out more expeditiously or 
economically: 
 

(a) by contract without tender; or 
 

(b) by employees of the department. 
 
And there is an important distinction between this clause and 
the one for public works, which I will talk about when I get to 
the public works part. So this isn’t being changed. 
 
Section 53 says, the minister shall call for tenders by public 
advertisement in all cases except for the situations where there 
are good reasons not to go with a public tender. So that’s not 
being changed. 
 
Now section 55, which is being changed, reads as follows, and 
the marginal note or the headline for this particular clause says, 
“Authority for awarding contract to other than lowest bidder.” 
So this is what is right now. It says: 
 

Where, in the minister’s opinion, it is not expedient or in 
the public interest to award the contract for construction of 
a public improvement to the lowest bidder, [this is the 
Minister of Highways] the minister shall report the matter 
to and obtain the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council before awarding the contract to any person other 
than the lowest bidder. 

 
So current in the law the minister can choose not to go with the 
lowest bidder. That already exists in the current law, and that’s 
a very important point that needs to be made. What this section 
says is, in order for the minister to not award it to the lowest 
bidder, outside of those expeditious circumstances we talked 
about, the minister would have to go to the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council. That’s the current state of the law. 
 
So now let’s take a look at what this bill is attempting to do. 
This is an amendment of section 55 of The Highways and 
Transportation Act. It’s taking out that section where you have 
to go to the Lieutenant Governor in Council if you don’t want 
to give it to the lowest bidder. It is saying, in those cases, here is 
what the minister shall do. I’ll read the section. The proposed 
section reads: 
 

55(1) Subject to subsection (2), the minister shall: 
 

(a) obtain competitive prices for the construction of all 
public improvements through the public tender process 
mentioned in section 53. 

 
The minister still needs to go through the public process. 
Nothing’s changing there: 
 

(b) award the contract to the bidder whose bid, in the 
opinion of the minister, offers the best value taking into 
consideration all or any of the factors described in the 
tender documents. 

 
And then subsection (2) of the clause says: 
 

The minister is not required to accept any tender. 
 
So what we see is a slight shift here. I don’t think this is 
earth-shattering or groundbreaking. What we see is the minister, 
rather than if they don’t want to take the lowest bid — and in 
the current section it’s just, it reads, it’s not expedient or in the 
public interest, she can go the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
— right now this change says if it’s the opinion of the minister. 
So no longer does the minister need to go to Lieutenant 
Governor in Council of executive government. In the minister’s 
own opinion, she can take into account what is considered to be 
the best value. 
 
Now what I really have a problem with is nothing in this bill 
tells us what best value is. There’s a reference here that says 
best value is described in the tender documents. So each tender 
that goes out now has to describe what best value would be and 
what would be considered. To me, this creates a whole lot of 
uncertainty. If I’m somebody trying to bid on those contracts, 
I’m in shaky ground now because there’ll be something about 
best value described in the tender document itself. 
 
So first of all, the people drafting the tender documents have to 
be very clear in their own mind what best value will be. There’s 
no guidelines in the legislation at all. There’s no requirement 
for regulations to provide for the definition of best value. So to 
me, this is a crap shoot, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have no idea 
how this best value’s going to be established. It’s going to be on 
an ad hoc basis. It’s certainly going to be at the discretion of the 
ministry. It may be within discretion of particular public 
officials who may differ from one desk to the next in terms of 
what they feel best value will be. 
 
I’m just going to quickly go into The Public Works and Services 
Act amendment as well because it’s very, very similar. These 
clauses that exist in The Public Works and Services Act are 
very, very similar to the ones that are in The Highways and 
Transportation Act. So the point there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that it’s exactly the same changes that are being considered for 
public works. And I think . . . Well it’s obvious. We also have 
the same concerns in terms of who decides what best value is. 
That’s a large gap. 
 
The only changes that are really being made here is that no 
longer is the minister required to go to Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. That itself is somewhat concerning because it provides 
a lot more discretion within the minister’s office without the 
scrutiny of executive government. And we’re talking about 
perhaps a more subjective awarding of contracts. 
 
So yes again . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 
Moose Jaw wants to know what we’re talking about. I love it 
when he hollers that out because it gives us an opportunity to 
have him stop and listen and perhaps maybe understand exactly 
what we’re talking about. If he’s always asking the question, 
you’ve got to wonder what the problem is. But in the case of 
these changes here, I think the member from Moose Jaw needs 
to understand that we are opening up a lot of discretion within 
the ministry itself and certainly within individual interpretations 
of public servants who are drafting the tender documents. We 
are also creating an uncertainty with the people that are 
responding to these calls for tender. They’re not going to know 
what best value means, or they’re going to have to interpret 



7600 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2015 

what a particular person has inserted in the tender document as 
to what best value is. 
 
We know that there are different ways to sort of establish a 
certainty. There are grids. We’ve even proposed a grid 
ourselves in the bill that my colleague from Regina Rosemont 
introduced into the Legislative Assembly asking for 
transparency and accountability and asking for fairness in 
procurement. Actually there’s two bills I’m talking about, not 
just one. It’s two. But the one on fairness is one that everybody 
needs to know what the playing field is. And I’m concerned that 
this was a bill that was very hastily put together at the last 
minute, that the government felt it needed a political response to 
concerns being raised by, valid concerns being raised by the 
North Saskatoon Business Association. That’s important as 
well. 
 
But you can tell that this was a very hastily put together 
concept. There hasn’t been a lot of thought put into it. And 
we’re certainly going to have a number of questions in 
committee about how this is exactly going to work because it 
seems like there’s a lot of uncertainty that’s being created by 
this change. 
 
So first of all, I question the fact why there are no explanatory 
notes. There should be explanatory notes. I also question why 
this bill wasn’t introduced by the Minister of Highways or the 
Minister of Public Works. It certainly affects their bailiwick. 
And why the Minister for SaskBuilds was the one anointed to 
introduce this bill provides some questions for us to think about 
in terms of where Highways is going and where Public Works 
is going. 
 
Certainly the Minister of Highways and the Minister of Public 
Works are the ones responsible for the implementation of these 
clauses, and they’re being given much more discretion and 
much more power under these clauses than they currently have 
because they no longer have to go to executive government. 
That’s a big shift in authority. It’s a big shift in discretion. And 
plus there’s no definition of best value in this bill, none 
whatsoever. 
 
I just wanted to make a couple comments about the Minister of 
Justice’s introduction to this bill. And again I’m not sure why 
the Minister for SaskBuilds is introducing this, but he’s saying 
this is a significant change, that somehow inserting that term 
best value is a significant change. Really? The minister already 
had the ability to do that in the previous Act, but they would 
have to go through Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
So the change he’s talking about is not the insertion of best 
value. That was already within the bailiwick of the minister. It’s 
whether or not they accept the lowest tender and would have to 
go to Lieutenant Governor in Council. So I think the 
examination of the minister’s comments will reveal that. And 
certainly I believe in committee, we’re going to have to take a 
very close look at exactly what the changes are. 
 
The minister goes on in his third paragraph of his introductory 
comments, and I think this also raises cause for alarm. What he 
says there is “. . . the problem with looking at only the price is 
that it overlooks a number of other important factors . . .” 
Absolutely, and that’s what we’ve been saying all along. And I 

know that that’s what the North Saskatoon Business 
Association was saying. 
 
But he goes on to describe best value, and there’s one word he 
uses to describe it that’s very concerning. He says it might 
include . . . There is nothing definitive at all in this bill about 
what best value is, and I think that’s what’s really concerning. 
He says it might include price. It might include product quality. 
It might include vendor experience. It might include their 
performance history and their demonstrated ability to deliver 
what’s being promised. It might include a vendor’s safety 
practices. It might include the potential for innovation. And this 
is all about how best value is going to be determined. But of 
course it’s going to be determined by the person who’s drafting 
the tender documents. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is going to 
create all kinds of confusion. It’s going to create all kinds of 
concern within the construction industry. And it’s going to 
create concerns within the ministries because whoever’s 
crafting the tender documents are going to have to take this long 
list of what might be determined as best value, and it’s going to 
be I think a very vague and uncontrolled maybe . . . There’ll be 
a lack of control on how best value is really determined. I think 
that’s going to cause a lot of concerns for contractors. 
 
And certainly we’ll be keeping a very close eye on this as we 
move forward to the election itself. We’ll see what happens 
after the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But you know, for the 
brief period of time this law will be in effect before the election, 
we’re certainly going to have to keep a close eye on how these 
tender documents are being prepared, how best value is going to 
be defined by the two ministries, what the role of SaskBuilds is 
in terms of those contracts. 
 
The minister went on to say that “Criteria for each competition 
are selected in advance by knowledgeable staff to meet the 
specific needs of each project.” I hope that’s true. I hope that is 
what’s going to happen. We know that this requires a high level 
of sophistication that will go beyond, I think, what’s currently 
happening in the tender documents. So that’s something else 
we’ll have to keep an eye on. 
 
And for some reason, Mr. Speaker, the minister saw this bill, 
small changes in highways and public works procedures, to 
remove the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And then he leapt 
into a long speech about P3s [public-private partnership], Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
 And again I do question sort of the connection in his mind 
between how we, as government obtain our contracts, and how 
we do it in a public and transparent way, to all of a sudden a 
speech about the P3s. And he was patting the Premier on the 
back and going on about the creation of SaskBuilds and the 
disappearance, I guess, of Priority Saskatchewan. So I think we 
can clearly see the ideological link that the minister is attaching 
to this type of procurement. I don’t think the connection’s there 
though, and I’m disappointed that the Minister of Justice saw fit 
to make those comments that really aren’t in relation at all to 
what the intent of this particular bill is. 
 
So I think in summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I question why 
best value is not being defined in this Act. I question whether 



November 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7601 

this is a significant change. I don’t think it’s significant in how 
this government does business. The only major change is of 
course the minister now having the authority to accept 
something other than the lowest bidder without having to go to 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. That’s the major change here. 
 
And thirdly, I question why there aren’t explanatory notes 
available for the public. These are going to be looked at far into 
the future, long after the bill is introduced, unless of course it 
gets reversed by the next government. But in terms of what’s 
out there, people do rely on explanatory notes, and I think it 
would be helpful for Justice to take a second look at this one 
and provide those kinds of explanatory notes. 
 
So at this point, I believe other of my colleagues are going to 
want to comment on this bill as well. So I would like to move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 188, An Act to amend 
certain Acts respecting Awarding of Contracts. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 188. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:29.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7583 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7583 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7583 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7583 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7583 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7584 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7584 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7584 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7592 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7584 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7584 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7585 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7585 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Provision of Medical Coverage 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7585 
 Diabetes Awareness Month 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7585 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7585 
 Dresses for Haiti 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7586 
 Bursary Honours the Memory of Three Young Sons 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7586 
 Community Living Association of Saskatoon 60th Anniversary 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7586 
 National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7587 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7587 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7587 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7588 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7589 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7592 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7592 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7596 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7596 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7598 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


