
























































Hansard: October 21, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 71A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7401 
 October 21, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could have 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my great pleasure to welcome several individuals who are 
with us today in your gallery from some of Saskatchewan’s 
largest industry associations. They’re here today to celebrate the 
introduction of legislation that will help transform the way 
governments and Crowns procure services to ensure a level 
playing field for Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Best value-based procurement is a national and international 
best practice, and our government is very pleased to be moving 
forward with another important step to ensure procurement is 
leading edge in Saskatchewan. 
 
With us today, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, we have Shantel 
Lipp, the president of the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association — please give us a wave — thanks, Shantel; 
Carmen Duncan, Chair of the board of the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association; as well as Sean Wilson, also from the 
SHCA [Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association]. 
 
We have Beverly MacLeod, executive director of the 
Association of Consulting Engineering Companies of 
Saskatchewan; Mark Cooper, president of the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association; Keith Moen, executive director of the 
North Saskatoon Business Association; and Carol Morsky from 
Merit Contractors Association; as well as Melissa Fiacco from 
the Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have in your gallery today, Greg Lusk and 
Colleen Huber from Priority Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to take the opportunity to thank these 
individuals for their commitment and their support in moving 
our procurement transformation plan forward. We couldn’t do 
this work without them, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, to my 
colleagues in the legislature, we welcome these guests to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the minister opposite and welcome these leaders in 
industry, these leaders in our economy to their Assembly here 
today. Certainly I’d want to thank them for their leadership 
within our province every day on behalf of industry groups and 
very key players and employers in this province, a very 
important role that you fulfill. And I also want to thank you for 
the input you’ll have provided to this bill, and I guess we’ll see 
what the bill looks like here today. 
 
Certainly it’s critically important that we receive best value for 
taxpayers, and we certainly need to make sure we have a level 
playing field for Saskatchewan companies to participate in 
those very important projects. So I am pleased to join with the 
minister and welcome these leaders here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and Priority 
Saskatchewan, welcoming these guests here today, particularly 
— and I don’t want to point anybody out in particular, but I will 
— to Shantel and Carmen who joined me this morning at a 
construction wrap-up event to celebrate a fabulous construction 
season in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to thank all the road builders, consulting engineers, 
and Highways staff for their great work, and a special thank you 
to Sean Wilson. Against his better judgment, he let me operate 
one of his paving machines earlier this summer. So I cannot 
guarantee the quality of work in the Blaine Lake area; I think I 
did an okay job. 
 
But I just want to ask all of my colleagues to welcome them 
here today and to thank them for all of their very hard work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, 25 grade 
7 and 8 students from Lakeview Elementary School in Regina 
Lakeview. They’re sitting in the east gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Rochelle Anderson, as well 
as teacher interns Janay Welburne and Mike Foraie. I ask all 
members to welcome them here to the legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of GSAs [gender and 
sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. We know that this 
government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students or students bullied because 
of their sexual identity or sexual orientation, and that 
gender- and sexually diverse students are four times more likely 
than their heterosexual peers to attempt suicide, and that gender 
and sexual alliances offer opportunities for gender- and sexually 
diverse students to assert their needs and have their voices 
heard. And we know that these alliances offer opportunities to 
improve attendance, retention rates, generate meaningful 
relationships at schools, and reduce homophobic and 



7402 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

transphobic bullying. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud once again to present petitions to improve cell service for 
northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake and to provide similar quality of cell coverage as 
southern communities. This would provide support to our 
northern industries as well as mitigate safety concerns 
associated with living in the remote North. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, 
there are people that signed from Corman Park, Lloydminster, 
and Saskatoon. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ care. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that many seniors 
are having to wait in hospital beds due to the lack of spaces in 
care facilities. They point out that we all are hearing a number 
of increasing stories about adverse effects of chronic 
understaffing in seniors’ care facilities, including unanswered 
calls for help, seniors being left unattended on toilets for hours, 
and seniors not receiving baths for weeks at a time. I’d like to 
read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
home care; ensuring appropriate staff levels in seniors’ 
care facilities; and providing more support to help seniors 
remain independent in their homes, in their own homes, for 
as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens concerned with the high cost of 
post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They point out that as recently as 2014, there’s a report by 
Statistics Canada indicating Saskatchewan is the province with 
the highest increase in tuition, having increased that year by 4 
per cent in the province for undergraduate students and over 5 
per cent for graduate students. 
 
They also point out that the average Canadian student in 2014 
graduated with debt of over $27,000, not including credit card 
and other private debt. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as 
follows: 
 

These petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislative provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Vanguard, Regina, and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Opening of the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday we 
announced that the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital in 
Moose Jaw began their move to our new facility. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to report that the move-in will be completed today 
and all services are transitioning at the new hospital. I’m sure 
that staff and health care providers will be familiarizing 
themselves to their new surroundings, but are very excited 
about the innovative layout and design as well as the ability to 
treat a patient directly in their room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing the best 
care for the people of Saskatchewan. This $99.5 million facility 
is an example of innovation and design, not only in this 
province but across the country. It’s going to house southern 
Saskatchewan’s first MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] in a 
regional hospital as well as provide hyperbaric oxygen therapy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m counting down the days to November 6th 
when many will attend the grand opening and thank the 
Wigmore family for their personal contribution in honour of Dr. 
Frederick H. Wigmore. This has been an extraordinary local 
support for this project. There has been extraordinary local 
support for this project, and it will be wonderful to celebrate 
everyone’s hard work together in just 17 short days. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7403 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Saskatchewan Library Week 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce to the 
members of the Assembly that it is Saskatchewan Library 
Week. The theme this year is Dare to Know, and libraries 
across the province are holding numerous events highlighting 
this theme. 
 
Library Week provides opportunities to acknowledge local 
authors and artists. To highlight a few from this year, in 
Nipawin, author Janice Howden will speak about her book, 
Badge #124, that reveals the details of her role as an animal 
protection officer in Saskatchewan. At the Glenavon Branch 
Library, Anne Lazurko will offer a reading from her book, 
Dollybird. And at the Spalding Library, author Janice Dick will 
offer a writing workshop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries are extremely valuable public institutions 
and they contribute to our communities in so many ways. 
Libraries not only house immense amounts of information, they 
also offer opportunities for social engagement, access to 
community supports, and a place for Saskatchewan residents to 
feel connected to those around them. 
 
This year’s theme of Dare to Know encourages and motivates 
Saskatchewan residents to foster their interests and passions to 
gain greater knowledge, to think critically, and to strive for 
thoughtful analysis and reflection of the world around them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all of us in Saskatchewan to accept 
the challenge put forward that we should dare to know. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Women’s History Month 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last night I 
attended an event to celebrate Women’s History Month, along 
with the member for Regina Wascana Plains and the member 
for Regina Coronation Park. I was honoured to bring greetings 
on behalf of the Minister Responsible for the Status of Women. 
 
The event was organized by the Women’s History Month 
committee of the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan, better known as APEGS. Mr. 
Speaker, this event was a night to celebrate women’s 
contributions and achievements, not only in Saskatchewan but 
beyond our borders. 
 
It is very fitting that this event was organized by APEGS, 
coincided with Women’s History Month which takes place in 
October. This year Saskatchewan’s theme is Breaking 
Conventional Molds: Saskatchewan Women in Education. Mr. 
Speaker, this theme recognizes the innovative models that 
women in the education field are creating to ensure our future 
leaders have the skills and the training they need to be 
successful. Women’s History Month gives us a chance to 
celebrate the women who have demonstrated determination and 
focus and conviction in their quest for equal opportunity. 

Because of these women, we all benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating the 
women who change society through their passion, leadership, 
and the innovative ways they have helped to create and inspire 
all of our lives. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

North Central Community Bison Feast 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For the 
past two years, the All Nations Hope Network, headquartered in 
lovely North Central, Regina, has been hosting a bison feast, 
paskwâwimostos wîhkohtowin, to honour the ceremonies of the 
ancestors to bring community together and to revitalize 
traditional culture of Indigenous people on Treaty 4 territory. 
 
[13:45] 
 
It was my pleasure and privilege to attend this year’s event, and 
I want to begin by acknowledging George Gordon First Nation 
who provided two bison for the feast. I also want to 
acknowledge the elders who helped with the feast every step of 
the way: MC [master of ceremonies] extraordinaire, Creeson 
Agecoutay; and Margaret Poitras and everyone with All 
Nations Hope Network who made this event happen, complete 
with lunch for 600. 
 
I want to say thank you to the All Nations Hope Network for 
the work they do to fulfill their mandate of bringing health and 
healing to First Nations, Métis, and Inuit people and working 
with a variety of partners here in the city and across the 
province. A cornerstone of the bison feast was the recognition 
of those partners, Mr. Speaker, and representatives of partnering 
organizations were presented with a commemorative photo 
taken in the 1920s of a gathering of Treaty 4 chiefs. 
 
I want to acknowledge all the artists and performers who shared 
their energy and talent with us throughout the day as well as the 
motivational speakers who shared their stories of struggle, 
coming through the trauma of colonialism, overcoming 
adversity, and the healing journey they are now on. 
 
Thanks again to All Nations Hope for the paskwâwimostos 
wîhkohtowin. Hay-hay, ēkosi. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Highway 22 Construction Completed 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today the Ministry of Highways issued a news release in which 
they outlined some of the work that was done in this year’s 
construction season as a result of a record $842 million budget. 
Mr. Speaker, the ministry tells us that some 370 kilometres of 
highways were repaved or received major upgrades. An 
additional 435 kilometres received significant work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is talk about one 
highway in the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, and 
that being Highway 22, that portion of Highway 22 from 



7404 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

Southey to Earl Grey. Mr. Speaker, that portion of highway in 
the past was a thin membrane surface that received significant 
damage these last number of years due to increased heavy truck 
traffic and of course the extensive moisture and runoff that our 
area has received. 
 
Work began on it last year, Mr. Speaker, with the intention of 
completing the project, but last year at this time, the first 5 
kilometres were completed. But the remaining portion provided 
significant challenges, Mr. Speaker, so the designs were sent 
back to the engineers to deal with flooding. But I’m happy to 
report, Mr. Speaker, that it has been completed, and the people 
are driving on a new dust-free highway. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Fundraiser For Leader Health Facility 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
evening I joined approximately 200 people gathered in the 
Leader Community Hall in support of an ambitious fundraising 
effort to benefit their new integrated health facility. The event 
was the brainchild of Tim Geiger, reeve of the RM [rural 
municipality] of Happyland. 
 
At $1,000 a plate, the event had to be good. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the event wasn’t just good. It was great. The evening was 
special in so many ways as the beautiful decor and formal 
dinner settings wowed each guest as they walked through the 
door. There were wonderful flower arrangements, exquisite 
wines, and individual table service. John Gormley participated 
in the evening as the special speaker, providing an historical 
overview of Saskatchewan’s economic development and 
growth, laced with many humorous anecdotes. A comic actor 
and a local band, The Hudecs, provided additional 
entertainment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the highlight of the night was the realization that 
from that single event the community was able to raise 
$200,000 to help equip the soon-to-be-constructed Leader 
integrated health facility. 
 
Congratulations go to each person who helped to make that 
event a success. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to attending the 
sod-turning for this new facility on November 13th. With a 
commitment of nearly $10 million from the Saskatchewan Party 
government and the support of the local community, I know it’s 
going to be a wonderful day to celebrate. Again, thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Institute of Public Administration of Canada Awards 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
October 14th it was my privilege, along with the Minister of 
Finance and the member from Kelvington-Wadena, to attend 
the Institute of Public Administration of Canada Lieutenant 
Governor’s Gold Medal Award ceremony for the Saskatchewan 
region. This Gold Medal Award recognizes a person or work 
team who has demonstrated distinctive leadership and 
exceptional achievement in public administration. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Clare Isman, deputy 
minister of the Ministry of Finance, as the recipient of the 2015 
Gold Medal Award. Throughout her 36 years as a professional, 
Clare has served the people of Saskatchewan at both the 
provincial and municipal level in various capacities. In addition 
to Clare’s public service, she has been a tireless volunteer, 
serving on various community boards and associations. Clare is 
very deserving of this award, and I am pleased that she received 
this recognition. 
 
At the same event, the Promising New Professional Award in 
Public Administration was presented to three individuals: 
Shelby Enevoldsen, Jennifer Huber, and Hillary Prodahl. As 
well, Olena Schell received the IPAC [Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada] Doug Stevens Public Policy 
Graduate Student Scholarship and Kendra Gellner received the 
IPAC Academic Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in thanking all public servants for their service to 
Saskatchewan and in particular congratulating the recipients of 
this year’s IPAC awards. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — For the last three years we’ve heard tons of 
concerns from family members who have loved ones in seniors’ 
care facilities. And we’ve heard from front-line workers who 
have been run off their feet. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has mostly shrugged off most of that. Well today, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to hear directly from 
residents. 
 
Jim Lawrence lives in the Ross Payant nursing home in 
Assiniboia. He says the staff are wonderful, but the Sask Party 
made cuts on May 17th, just four days after the Ombudsman 
released her damning report on the state of seniors’ care and 
just a few days after, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the minister 
claimed, they claimed to take this issue seriously. 
 
How can the Premier possibly justify cuts to seniors’ care 
homes just days after he stood in this House and said his 
government was finally going to work hard to address the 
seniors’ care crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. And I thank the Minister of Health for confirming just 
before I rose to answer that there were no such cuts in this 
particular case, Mr. Speaker. We’ve actually been increasing 
the investment in resources for long-term care here in 
Saskatchewan over the life of our government. 
 
There are nursing, long-term care beds being opened up frankly 
across this province, new ones. That stands in great contrast to 
long-term care bed closures that were occurring under the 
members opposite. We’ve added resources in terms of care aids, 
in terms of nurses of every designation — now over 3,000 — 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7405 

and of doctors. And in this particular budget, as the minister has 
highlighted for members of the House, there’s 10 million 
additional dollars in the budget with respect to seniors’ care, 
long-term care. We’re piloting home care to a greater degree 
than we have in this province’s history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we recognize that there will always be more work to do 
with respect to seniors’ care, long-term care specifically. Mr. 
Speaker, I say again that the best indicator of future behaviour 
is past behaviour. Our past, our record is one of investment, is 
one of care, is one of providing more front-line resources for 
our seniors and for those in long-term care, and that’s exactly 
what we’re going to continue to work towards in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Now, Mr. Speaker, with this Premier, with this 
government, it’s always about the self-congratulatory spin. I 
talked about shrugging off the concerns, and we see it again. 
You know, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 
member from Moose Jaw, this is a serious matter and should 
not be heckling on the issue when we’re talking about seniors’ 
care in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier, Mr. Speaker, needs to know that the 
health region admits that there have been cuts here. Here’s what 
happened. Margaret Warholm died prematurely because of 
neglect in seniors’ care. The Ombudsman investigated it and 
she came forward with a damning report about the state of 
seniors’ care in our province. The Premier claimed, he claimed 
that he took that report seriously but just days later he presided 
over more cuts to seniors’ care homes. 
 
Do you know what makes this even more outrageous, Mr. 
Speaker? In May of 2014, the year prior, the Premier was 
informed that there were serious concerns about short-staffing 
at this particular facility. But a year later, after Margaret 
Warholm’s tragic death, after that came to light, after the 
Ombudsman’s damning report, what happened in this care 
home? The government made more cuts and there are even less 
staff on each shift to help residents. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
utterly disgusting. What word would the Premier use to 
describe it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
again re-emphasize that, with respect to the first question the 
member asked, there are no budget reductions in terms of this 
particular facility. Moreover, right across the system we see 
budget increases. We see more personnel working in front-line 
care. These are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that there are increasing demands in long-term care, 
certainly. We know there is more work to be done. But I just 
want to caution my hon. friend from characterizing the 
government’s action as cuts because, Mr. Speaker, when you 
look across the system you see 3,000 more nurses of every 
designation. You see, I think, over 700 people involved in 
front-line care, new front-line care personnel in long-term care. 
You see the opening of new long-term care beds. 
 
We can have a debate and we should have a debate about 

whether or not we’re providing exactly the care we would like 
to be. I think there, both sides would agree that more work 
needs to be done. But let’s be fair with the facts, and let’s be 
clear about the government’s record and its intent. There has 
been a great increase in resources provided very specifically to 
long-term care in many of the facilities referenced specifically 
by the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, and system wide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what 85-year-old Jim 
Lawrence says about what he’s seen and what he’s experienced. 
If the Premier wants to call him a liar, he can, Mr. Speaker, but 
these are Jim’s words: 
 

The staff here are wonderful. But they went and shorted us 
here in May of this year, shorted our staff. And when they 
shorted the staff, that’s why they had to open the north 
doors where the dementia people are. That’s their home. 

 
So the government, Mr. Speaker, they cut the staff, and that 
means that the specialized dementia unit isn’t used anymore 
because there aren’t enough workers. So now those with 
dementia, Mr. Speaker, that need special attention, special 
support and supervision, are largely left to their own to wander 
around the entire facility. And seniors in this facility, Mr. 
Speaker, are now experiencing incidents of what they describe 
as abuse. Does the Premier think that this is acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to caution members to be careful 
with their language not to cause disorder in the Chamber. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, may I say respectfully that I 
think the hon. member does a disrespect to himself, frankly, 
because he has been an articulate voice on behalf of those in 
long-term care in the province. But I think he disrespects 
himself and his side of the House and this Chamber when he 
would suggest that we think that anyone with a concern in 
health care, including this gentleman, is a liar. It’s just not 
acceptable, I don’t think. I think the hon. member would agree 
that in fairness, that’s not the case. He obviously disagrees with 
the approach of the government, is holding the government 
accountable, as he should. But I think what we just saw there 
was perhaps, frankly, a bit disrespectful, even to the people on 
whose behalf he speaks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this particular facility there have been some 
changes made. I would point out though that since 2007, the 
resources, the budget for this facility has increased 30 per cent. 
There are some organizational challenges with respect to the 
dementia wing, with respect to the needs of patients there. The 
region is working hard to find the right balance so that those 
needs are being met, Mr. Speaker. I know the minister has met 
with families in question here. I think both ministers have. The 
region is aware of it. 
 
We’re working on this particular issue. We’re working on it, 
Mr. Speaker, with the intent and the priority of providing the 
best possible care for Saskatchewan seniors, for those in 
long-term care right across this province. That’s why we have 
increased resources here at this facility and province wide. 
That’s why we recognize that more work is needed to be done, 



7406 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

Mr. Speaker. And based on the record to date, though 
imperfect, I think that’s an indicator that we will continue that 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Jim says: 
 

I told the head lady here one day, I said, I didn’t come here 
to be abused or pushed around. I said, I’ve never allowed 
anybody to push me around my whole life. And I said no, I 
don’t want to start now, not at my age. I’m 85 years old. I 
don’t know how much longer I’ve got, but I want to live in 
peace. We’re paying good money. It’s our money that’s 
keeping the place going. But it’s the shortage of money 
that they say is causing the whole problem. 

 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this quote from Jim is heartbreaking. This 
85-year-old man just wants to live in peace, just wants to be 
safe, just wants to have his basic needs taken care of. But that’s 
not happening because of the Sask Party’s cuts. What does the 
Premier have to say to Jim? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll assume that the Leader of the Opposition 
has provided the House with a consent form to be able to speak 
on behalf of this individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to this one facility, the budget of this 
facility has increased by 30 per cent since the time that the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] sat on this side of the House. I can say 
that there have been improvements made to this facility; for 
example, recreational program will increase to seven days a 
week and two nights every three weeks. This is an increase 
from five days a week, Mr. Speaker. We know that ensuring . . . 
that boredom and loneliness for our residents doesn’t end on the 
weekends. And this facility is doing a great amount of work to 
ensure that there is programming seven days a week. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, as well, for those residents that 
do have some form of dementia, this is their home as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And so we want to ensure that there is the ability for 
these residents as well to have the full experience of living in 
this facility rather than be segregated and locked into one 
specific wing of the facility, Mr. Speaker. Of course that will 
mean that there will be challenges as we ensure that those 
residents are able to interact properly. But, Mr. Speaker, but this 
facility, this region thinks that this is the right care for all of the 
residents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier clearly needs to hear 
more of what Jim has to say. 
 

It’s all because there aren’t enough staff. One of the ladies 
from Five Hills was over and I said, why can’t you take 
them back to the north side like they were before? We 
were quite happy then, and they were too. And she said, we 

can’t because of money. I said, what do you mean by that? 
She said, well we can’t afford to have any more staff. 

 
After a decade of unprecedented prosperity, Mr. Speaker, this is 
really where Saskatchewan is at, where an 85-year-old man in a 
government care home is describing the situation there as 
bedlam, and he’s left begging to be able to live in peace and in 
safety. Will the Premier at least agree with me that this is both 
deeply disturbing and hugely alarming? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll give 
the benefit of the doubt to the Leader of the Opposition that he 
has in fact provided a consent form to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without speaking to the specifics of the individual 
who has been referenced in question period, I will say this. That 
in almost every single long-term care facility in this province, 
we have a situation where residents of all different levels of 
care have the opportunity to live in the facility, to wander in the 
facility, to mingle with other residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is it the position of the Leader of the Opposition that we are 
now going to make secure wards in every single long-term care 
facility in this province? And, Mr. Speaker, I find that . . . If 
that is his position, he should say that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this government, as we have said, 
indicated over and over again, we know that there is a lot of 
work to be done in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, particularly 
with what was left by the NDP government. This government 
has a record of hiring more staff, of adding more investment in 
capital and equipment. We’d like to see the plan from the 
members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, specialized dementia units are a 
good thing. We need more of them and we should be using the 
ones that we actually have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not just Jim Lawrence that’s speaking out about seniors’ 
care today. A 32-year navy veteran named Don Reid is also 
speaking out. He says, “Now they’ve got such a small staff on 
at night that it’s hard to get any help if you need it.” Such a 
small staff that it’s hard to get any help if you need it. Don Reid 
is a decorated veteran. He served our country with distinction 
and now this government is letting him down. Don says, “I find 
it hard to sit back and watch it because with my background I’m 
used to if you have a problem, then you go in and fix it.” 
 
That’s not this government’s approach, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
known about this problem for years. They’ve shrugged it off. 
And at least in one case in this particular nursing home, they’ve 
recently made the situation much worse. My question to the 
Premier: what does he have to say to this former navy diver? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to any 
person in this province is the fact that this government has hired 
over nearly 800 more full-time equivalents in long-term care 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7407 

since the members opposite were the government, with nearly 
the same number of residents in our care, Mr. Speaker. So what 
I would say is that the number of people working day to day in 
long-term care today is higher today than it was at any time 
under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is also, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 1,200 long-term care 
beds were closed under the NDP at a time when our population 
was aging. Facilities all across this province were closing. 
Today they’re opening in this province, Mr. Speaker. Resources 
have been put in each and every budget under this government, 
including $10 million into seniors’ and long-term care. That is 
the record on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, that is the 
record in terms of this government’s commitment to ensuring 
that we have personnel in long-term care. 
 
Is there more to be done? Absolutely, but this is the record on 
this side of the House. I would ask the Leader of the Opposition 
— we’re only months away from that hour of choosing for the 
people of this province — what is his plan? More, Mr. Speaker, 
is not a number. What is his number of how many long-term 
care workers we need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mabel Wasalenko lives in this nursing home as 
well. Here’s what she has to say:  
 

The nurses can’t be everywhere. And at the same time, 
they are decreasing the number of staff. [She says] now 
with all these changes, it has disturbed by rest, my peace, 
my joy. [She says] there are not many here that can 
express their concerns, so I am worried what will happen 
to us. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, just like with Jim and Don, Mabel’s words 
are heartbreaking and they are alarming. Mabel just wants to be 
able to rest, to have some peace, to have some joy. She deserves 
that. What does the Premier have to say to Mabel? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that we need to provide a 
high quality of care in our long-term care facilities. We also 
need to be attendant to the matters, in terms of our seniors, that 
they face in long-term care. Among them are issues around 
loneliness, boredom. We know that we’re doing some work 
when it comes to mental health improvements in long-term 
care. 
 
That is why this facility has decided to increase their staffing 
when it comes to their recreational programming, to ensure that 
there is recreational programming in the evening hours on a 
couple of days a week, every couple of weeks, as well as 
providing recreational programming seven days a week now in 
this facility instead of just Monday to Friday, because we know 
that activities for our seniors, for our elders, don’t just end on 
Friday afternoon, that they need to be challenged and engaged 
seven days a week. 
 
But we know that there is a lot to do within long-term care. And 
that’s why this government has invested record dollars into, not 

just long-term care, but providing support for seniors, whether 
they live in care or don’t live in care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Mabel, Jim, Don — they’re 
talking about being afraid. They’re talking about not being safe, 
Mr. Speaker. You know what this government’s excuse was for 
cutting the staff? They actually said that other care homes were 
worse off in terms of front-line workers so they wanted to be 
consistent. So they chopped the number of care workers at this 
home to match the other care homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk about a Sask Party race to the bottom when it 
comes to caring for seniors here in the province. That’s where it 
comes . . . That’s what we see in their approach to seniors’ care, 
consistently bad across the board and consistently letting 
vulnerable seniors down throughout our entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when there are problems in seniors’ care, the 
government should work to fix those problems and should work 
to improve care in all homes. But the Sask Party looked around 
for care homes that were just a little bit better than the others, 
Mr. Speaker, and actually cut their resources in an attempt to 
ensure that care homes were consistently awful. It doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
My question to the Premier: does he stand by this decision, or 
will he admit that it was a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what utter nonsense from 
the Leader of the Opposition. In fact, in this facility the average 
care hours per resident per day will still be higher than any 
other long-term care facility in this region. On top of that, as 
I’ve said on a number of occasions, these residents will now 
have recreational programming seven days a week instead of 
five days a week. They’ll now have recreational programming 
two nights every three weeks. They will now as well enjoy a 
facility that has seen a 30 per cent increase in its budget in just 
the last eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there is much work to be done in 
long-term care, but what the residents of this facility and any 
other facility can rest assured of is that this is a government of 
action. This is a government of ensuring that we’re putting the 
proper supports in place including the fact that there are nearly 
800 additional full-time equivalents for the same number of 
residents from when the NDP were the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s work to be done but the 
record shows that this government is committed to this. What’s 
the plan from the members opposite? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the staffing levels were a bit 
better at this care facility and that was the cause for having them 
reduced, imagine what the conditions are like in the other 
facilities with even lower standards when these are the 
statements that we’re getting from residents here. 
 



7408 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

After, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cut the staff in this home to 
match the dismal staffing levels in other homes, seniors like 
Jim, like Don and Mabel, are calling the situation bedlam and 
they are begging for peace and for safety. They’re talking about 
being afraid. They’re talking about, as Mabel did, about how 
this government has stolen their joy. 
 
Why won’t the Premier, Mr. Speaker, stand up, apologize to 
these seniors for cutting the staff, and fix this mess so that these 
seniors can live in safety, live with peace, and once again have a 
bit of joy? Why won’t the Premier do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, with the changes 
with respect to the residents with dementia at this one particular 
facility, the average care hours per resident per day is still 
higher than other facilities in this one health region, Mr. 
Speaker. As well I’ll indicate the additional work that’s been 
done to deal with some of our challenges within long-term care 
around boredom and loneliness for our residents, recreational 
programing in this facility is up. 
 
I can say as well, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to gets into a debate about staffing levels in long-term 
care, I would just remind the people of this province: 1,200 
beds were closed under the NDP. Over a dozen facilities across 
this province were closed by the NDP. There was no subsidy 
for seniors of low income living in personal care homes. There 
is today under this government. 
 
This government has hired nearly 800 full-time equivalent 
positions for the same number of residents, which means that 
there are more front-line staff for the residents today than there 
ever were under the NDP. And I would say again to the Leader 
of the Opposition, if he believes that more staff need to be hired 
in long-term care, what’s the number? What is his plan? We’re 
only a couple months away from the election. What’s his plan 
for this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Construction and Maintenance Agreements in 
Public-Private Partnerships 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Highways 
minister admitted that government-owned snowplows, sand and 
salt trucks, and ditch mowers will not be allowed to do any 
work on the Regina bypass. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Lots of giggles from the government with their $2 billion and 
growing boondoggle of taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She said the corporation from Paris, France is going to take care 
of it for the next 30 years. And the Sask Party says that 
accounts for most of the massive $680 million bump in the 
costs of the bypass. 
 
To the minister: just exactly how much is the Sask Party 
government paying to have this Paris-based company plow 
snow, spread salt and sand, mow the ditches while 

government-owned plows, trucks, and mowers drive right past? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I went back 
yesterday and re-watched question period and I had to chuckle 
at the fact that the member opposite called them Paris 
snowplows, giving the implication that somehow they’re going 
to be loaded up on great big transport planes and dropped off at 
the Regina airport, to have Paris snowplows going back and 
forth on the bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, project co. will be subcontracting. Project 
co. . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s asked a question; I would 
think they would want to hear the response. If the member from 
Saskatoon Centre wants to get up and ask the last question, he 
may do so. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, the project co. will be subcontracting to a company out 
of Alberta for the maintenance of the bypass, Mr. Speaker, and 
that particular company will be setting up maintenance shops 
and offices in Regina and hiring Saskatchewan staff. So there 
are no Paris people shovelling snow off of our bypass, Mr. 
Speaker. It’ll be people from Canada and specifically from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can be as 
snarky as she pleases, but it doesn’t cover up the fact that the 
profits and the dollars of hard-earned tax dollars of 
Saskatchewan people are flowing all the way back to Paris, 
France, Mr. Speaker, with a contract worth $680 million. What 
a complete lack of common sense. 
 
You know, it’s not just the maintenance costs on this P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-road scheme that are a 
problem. When you look at the rent-a-hospital P3 that the 
government’s entering into as well, we see that construction 
costs are $222 million, but they’re actually paying $185 million 
to a corporation from the United Kingdom to maintain the 
hospital. Now that amount, on an annual basis, is more than the 
entire health region currently pays for maintenance. 
 
So to the minister: what on earth will this maintenance 
company be doing that could possibly be justifying giving them 
$185 million to a UK [United Kingdom] company? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve commented before in 
this House about the transparency with respect to these P3 
projects. I can tell the member, Mr. Speaker, that the 
opportunities that are available for Saskatchewan companies are 
many, and I’ll give him an example: with the Swift Current 
long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, we know almost 75 per 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7409 

cent of the work and the contractors that are doing work on that 
project are from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’d put that 
up, I’d compare that to any traditional project that’s ever been 
built in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The same thing will happen with respect to the Swift Current 
. . . with Swift Current long-term care facility, will happen in 
North Battleford, will happen with the bypass, Mr. Speaker, and 
will happen with the schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He only has to look at the list of Saskatchewan companies that 
are participating in all of these projects to know what 
opportunities are available for Saskatchewan companies, Mr. 
Speaker, some of them located in their very constituencies that 
they represent, Mr. Speaker. So they can talk to the companies 
that live in their constituencies, that work in their 
constituencies, and explain to them why they shouldn’t be 
participating in these contracts. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to again caution members on 
both sides to choose their words carefully, that their words are 
not providing personal insult or causing disorder. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move 
that Bill 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 188, The Best Value in 
Procurement Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answer to 
question 970. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered response 

to question 970. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 
questions 971 through 974. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to question 971 and 974. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, on December 30th, 2014, Justice 
Ron Barclay issued his final report detailing examples of 
inappropriate actions and conflict of interest of the former reeve 
of the rural municipality of Sherwood No. 159 with regard to a 
proposed development in that RM. 
 
The Barclay report recommended a number of specific 
legislative changes and identified other areas where procedures 
can be strengthened to better address and prevent conflict of 
interest situations. Government has taken these 
recommendations very seriously. As a result, through a single 
bill we have introduced amendments to The Cities Act, The 
Municipalities Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act, 2010 
to strengthen municipal conflict of interest provisions. 
Consequential amendments will also be made to The Planning 
and Development Act, 2007 and The Ombudsman Act, 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments balance local municipal 
autonomy with the need to reassure the public that government 
has been proactive and responsible in strengthening municipal 
conflict of interest legislation in a way that is effective and 
practical. Since potential conflicts of interest are faced by 
council members in all municipalities regardless of type, 
amendments are proposed to all three municipal Acts to ensure 
consistent rules and requirements for elected municipal officials 
across the province. 
 
The amendments in this bill achieve three main purposes. First, 
they implement specific recommendations and respond to 
observations in the Barclay report with legislative changes, in 
effect raising the bar for municipal officials. Second, they will 
improve the ability for government, through the minister and 
cabinet, to address situations of municipal conflict of interest 
that may arise in the future. And finally, they will expand the 
Provincial Ombudsman’s mandate to review and investigate 
municipal matters, including conflict of interest and code of 
ethics matters. 
 
I will expand briefly on the proposed amendments in each of 
these areas. As mentioned, the Barclay report recommended 
specific legislative changes and identified other areas where 
procedures can be strengthened and provisions added to better 
address and prevent conflict of interest situations. These 



7410 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

amendments include, first, requiring council members to give a 
more detailed declaration of the nature of his or her pecuniary 
interest when it’s disclosed. This will move beyond the bare 
declaration currently provided for in legislation and require 
council members to disclose the general nature of a conflict of 
interest and any details that could reasonably be seen to 
materially affect that member’s impartiality in the exercise of 
his or her office. This will also clarify that a declaration must be 
made when any conflict of interest exists, which is defined to 
encompass a wider range of situations beyond financial interest. 
 
Second, requiring the mandatory filing and regular updating of 
public disclosure statements by council members. The 
amendments propose to extend the mandatory public disclosure 
statement requirements currently in The Cities Act to the other 
two municipal Acts. The statements will continue to require 
updates annually and whenever there is a material change or 
declaration of a conflict of interest made. 
 
Third, requiring municipalities to adopt a code of ethics that 
includes a model code and specific ethical standards of the 
municipality. The model code of ethics will be prescribed in 
regulations once it’s developed in collaboration with the 
municipal sector associations over the next few months. Once 
implemented they will be adopted by municipal councils as 
their minimum standard which they can enhance. 
 
The Barclay report also identified that legislation should be 
more aligned with common law respecting conflict of interest 
and its expectation that elected officials act in the entire interest 
of their communities. Through consultation with the municipal 
sector, amendments are proposed to clarify what constitutes 
conflict of interest, private interest, and inappropriate use of 
office. These are modelled on similar provisions already in 
place for MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
 
Other amendments will address issues raised indirectly in the 
report and improve upon current practices regarding 
transparency, declaration, and disclosure of interests. These 
include requiring council procedure bylaws to have clear and 
transparent rules regarding matters such as delegations and 
submissions to council; clarifying a council member must 
withdraw from all meetings on which he or she serves as a 
councillor where a matter of interest may be discussed or 
decided; committees of council, subcommittees, appeal boards, 
planning boards, and other municipal entities; ensuring rules 
regarding declaring and disclosing conflict of interest for 
municipal employees are in place. 
 
Councils will have the flexibility to determine these rules and 
consequential amendments to The Planning And Development 
Act, 2007 to ensure councils consider the impacts and cost 
benefits that proposed development, particularly high-density 
development, will have on servicing and infrastructure in 
addition to or as part of its official community plan where 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to touch on proposed amendments that 
allow the minister and cabinet to address or prevent situations 
of council conflict of interest should they arise in the future. 
This will be accomplished by strengthening and improving the 
authorities in the Acts related to inquiry, inspection, and 
disqualification for the minister, for cabinet, and for those 

conducting inquiries or inspections. An example is ensuring 
authority for the minister to suspend or limit the powers of a 
council member during the course of an inquiry or investigation 
until the results are known. This ability is not present in the 
current legislation. 
 
Another example is broadening the authority to remove council 
members from office, presently just for RMs, to apply to all of 
the municipal sector. Mr. Speaker, this is not a step that any 
government wants to make, but ultimately the government must 
be in a position to deal with situations, such as the one which 
arose in the RM of Sherwood, no matter what municipalities 
such situations arise in. 
 
I also want to point out that the proposed amendments will 
standardize the disqualification period in all three municipal 
Acts. Any person disqualified as per the requirements under 
legislation, which will now include being removed from office 
by cabinet, will be disqualified from running in a local election 
for 12 years, equivalent to three general elections. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to emphasize that these measures will only be used as a 
last resort by government in circumstances where public 
interest warrants it. 
 
The third and final area of proposed amendments will expand 
the mandate of the Provincial Ombudsman to include municipal 
conflict of interest and other municipal matters. Mr. Speaker, 
discussions with the Provincial Ombudsman and the municipal 
associations have resulted in agreement regarding consequential 
amendments to The Ombudsman Act, 2012 to add municipal 
entities, and specifically municipal conflict of interest and code 
of ethics, to the jurisdiction of the Provincial Ombudsman. 
 
With the expanded mandate, any member of the public or the 
minister could submit an issue or complaint to the Ombudsman 
regarding a municipality, including administrative or procedural 
matters and alleged conflict of interest or code of ethics 
breaches. The Ombudsman may investigate if warranted and 
issue a report with recommendations, upon which the minister 
could then act or issue a directive. This will provide 
government and stakeholders an efficient, impartial, and timely 
mechanism for concerns about municipal governments to be 
raised and reviewed. 
 
The Provincial Ombudsman indicated that expanding her 
jurisdiction to include municipal entities is very much in 
keeping with the role of the Ombudsman. It will assure the 
people of Saskatchewan of a credible, independent, and 
impartial office that they can take their concerns to and know 
that their issues will be taken seriously. At the same time, the 
municipal associations have been assured the Ombudsman has 
well-established policies and procedures for screening out 
frivolous or vexatious complaints. The investigative processes 
are not adversarial and are conducted confidentially and in 
private, with the complainant and all other appropriate persons 
being interviewed if a case proceeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of consultations, the ministry has 
consulted extensively on these amendments with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, New North, 
and through them the municipal administrator associations. 
These consultations began in April 2015 and concluded this 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7411 

past September. They involved meetings, presentations, and 
sharing draft side-by-sides of the amendments for review and 
comment. 
 
I’ve also met with the presidents and executives of both SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] to discuss 
the amendment package and can report that they are 
appreciative of the collaborative approach taken with respect to 
the amendments. Many of their suggestions for changes have 
been incorporated into the package where possible. My ministry 
will continue to work closely with these groups to develop 
regulations related to the amendments, specifically a model 
code of ethics and other provisions that might further broaden 
the scope of the conflict of interest provisions in the context of 
common law, as was suggested by Justice Barclay. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I would also like to report that the two associations have met 
with the Provincial Ombudsman and are supportive of including 
municipal conflict of interest and other municipal matters in 
that office’s mandate. I’d like to take the opportunity to 
specifically thank SUMA and SARM for working closely with 
government officials in order to develop this legislation, as well 
as those individuals who took the time to provide input, advice, 
and feedback throughout the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a former municipal administrator, I understand 
that these amendments involve sensitive issues. Nevertheless I 
believe elected officials, municipally and provincially, favour 
clear conflict of interest rules. We have the general support of 
the municipal sector for stronger conflict of interest legislation 
that provides more guidance to municipal councils. More 
important than this, these changes respond to the public interest 
in transparency and accountability. 
 
In conclusion, I believe the bill shows government’s 
commitment to taking action to address the report’s findings 
regarding shortcomings in legislation, consulting with the 
municipal sector and accommodating their requests to ensure 
the changes are practical, and better positioning municipalities 
and municipal officials to deal with the challenges of growth by 
providing more guidance and direction, consistent with MLAs 
in this area. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 
No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment 
Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 
the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it 
was with great interest that I listened to the minister’s 
presentation on Bill 186. And, Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a 
bill that deserves a lot of attention and certainly a lot of thought 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister may know, I also had the pleasure of serving as 
the mayor of my home community for about eight years. And 
some would say they were good years; others would say they 
were bad years. But, Mr. Speaker, what we learned over that 

time is the fact that this is a very serious matter, and mayors and 
councillors of course should be held to a higher standard. And I 
think everybody in the province of Saskatchewan understands 
that and they certainly accept that. 
 
And Bill 186 touches a bit on the important aspect of working 
together, collaborating on trying to ensure that this kind of 
activity doesn’t occur and that we put all the safeguards and 
necessary measures in place to engage as many people as you 
can. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the minister alluded to . . . Those that may 
be listening may be missing a few of his points. I think, as a 
result of the Barclay report that looked at the issues around 
conflict of interest for a particular RM, Mr. Speaker, what has 
happened here is the minister has brought in a lot of the issues 
that resulted from Barclay’s recommendation to include all the 
municipalities, the northern municipalities, the cities, and of 
course the RMs as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there were some specific recommendations 
that the minister made reference to as it relates to raising the bar 
to ensure that conflict of interest rules and regulations are 
certainly strengthened, and that accountability and transparency 
. . . And to ensure that this bar that was raised is wide-sweeping 
in the sense of making sure that all the members of council, 
mayor or reeve and council members and committee members 
as well, Mr. Speaker, that they are also included and they’re 
also subjected to the new way of ensuring that the conflict of 
interest issues that may present themselves to a council member 
from time to time, that there are standards, there are high 
standards. And certainly having consultation with SUMA, 
SARM, and New North are very, very helpful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess one of the things that’s really important when the 
government, or the three points that are raised by the minister as 
trying to resolve this issue, number one, as I mentioned, was the 
specific recommendations to raise the bar to ensure that conflict 
of interest isn’t swept under the table. 
 
Secondly, to improve the government’s ability to act in the 
event that there is compelling evidence and compelling 
arguments that this kind of activity is continuing on with any 
municipality, Mr. Speaker. That certainly I think they want to 
position themselves to be able to do this. 
 
And the third component, of course, of the bill which really 
identifies the different players, is to expand and engage the 
Provincial Ombudsman to involve his or her involvement in 
terms of being able to investigate some of the claims that are 
out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think some of the measures that would require council 
members to make more concise and clear declarations if there is 
a potential conflict of interest, there are tons of questions 
around this, Mr. Speaker, as we all know. Many communities 
and many RMs out there . . . There’s landowners. Some of them 
are involved with businesses. Some of them are providing 
services and supplies. It really, really is important to note that 
this is an issue that has to be investigated and certainly has to be 
thoroughly vetted and discussed, Mr. Speaker, before some of 
these measures are put in place that could really hamper people 
from either doing things, continuing to provide service to a 



7412 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

municipality. If they do have that service available yet, would 
this preclude them from being on the council? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is more concise and clear declaration of a 
conflict of interest, and good rules are followed and council and 
the reeve or the mayor has the ability to remove that person 
from any discussions and follows the regulations as they should 
be followed, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve got to make sure that 
we have those discussions and see where this goes. 
 
I think also what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is requiring 
mandatory updates each year for some of the council members 
that may be involved with the council, and having the public 
viewing certainly things like legislation to reflect common law, 
to devolve some of the aspects of the common law Act, Mr. 
Speaker, to improve transparency in declaration of conflict of 
interest. These are some of the measures that the minister 
alluded to and some of the changes under this particular Act, 
Bill 186. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister went on to identify that 
if there are issues of concern, if there is a pattern of behaviour, 
there’s a continual challenge to the process of properly 
declaring your conflict of interest matters, then of course the 
minister has also reserved the right to have the ability and 
power to suspend or limit council members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is something that’s certainly a brand new era in terms of 
being able to do that. To remove a member from council is an 
incredible challenge that must be very well thought out. And, 
Mr. Speaker, since this involves all the three municipal Acts, 
whether it’s the RM Act or whether it’s the SUMA or The 
Cities Act or The Northern Municipalities Act, Mr. Speaker, 
overall this power to suspend a member of council is wide 
ranging. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the minister alluded to, he does not want 
to go down this path. As a last resort that’s something that will 
obviously be available to him. And that’s something that has to 
merit a lot of discussion and thought, Mr. Speaker, because 
obviously this is a whole new ball game. 
 
And the challenge that we have to balance off here, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we know, in our elected lives, and we’re finding 
more and more evidence of that, that there are less and less 
people willing to become active with their local council or local 
. . . as a reeve or a mayor or as a member of the city council. A 
lot of the issues and the challenges they have to face as 
potential council members, it is a fairly tough business to get 
into, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as you begin to do the expansion, whether it’s a police 
record check or whether it is a conflict of interest declaration or 
whether it’s an application to be a member of a party, Mr. 
Speaker, and all the hoops and challenges that you have to go 
through, is really coming of age now within the municipal 
entities throughout the province, whether it’s an RM or whether 
it’s a city council or whether it’s a community council, that 
we’re finding that a lot of people may not want to get engaged 
with the councils any more. 
 
And to a certain extent, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the 
reasons that I’m hearing that a lot of people don’t want to come 
forward because it’s just a huge pile of forms that you have to 
fill out. It’s a fairly tough process to get involved. So generally 

a lot of people, a lot of people, Mr. Speaker, will not put their 
name forward, will not join some of the councils simply 
because they have all these forms to fill out and all these 
declarations to undertake. And this will add to that particular 
challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m not saying that it’s not necessary, Mr. Speaker. I’m just 
pointing out that the balance that you have to look at is, quite 
frankly it is going to be a . . . This is going to be another 
daunting matter in which we’re trying to get more people 
engaged with putting their name forward, whether they want to 
become an MLA or a mayor or a reeve or a council member. 
And this is what, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that we have to 
discuss and we have to think of as we look at Bill 186 and how 
it’s going to impact the amount of people coming forward and 
the amount of people willing to have their name stand for some 
of these various positions. 
 
Now the third part of the Act, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 
alluded to, was the fact that he was planning on bringing in the 
Ombudsman to expand some of the mandate of the 
Ombudsman’s office, and making consequential amendments to 
The Ombudsman Act, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that the minister 
can order a directive. And all the municipal entities are 
involved. So the Ombudsman would be also engaged, which is 
the third part of the Act, Mr. Speaker. And I’m a bit curious. 
Yes, the Ombudsman’s really important but to be engaged in 
the municipal mandate, so to speak, I’m just a bit confused as to 
why the Ombudsman as opposed to, you know, to the minister 
being able to do some of these things. 
 
Is it the fact that the Ombudsman has the ability and the staff to 
be able to do this? This is the question that you have to ask, Mr. 
Speaker, is that, okay, the Ombudsman’s an important person, 
supposed to be impartial to any particular issue and is there to 
advocate and support as many of the people out there that don’t 
appear to be given some of these services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the real question is that . . . I see a third component 
involving the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. It may be part of 
Justice Barclay’s decision, Mr. Speaker. But quite frankly, we 
need to find out from whether it’s SUMA or SARM, exactly 
who made the decision and what was the logic behind involving 
the Ombudsman. I think we need to ask those questions. We’re 
not saying it’s a bad idea or a good idea, Mr. Speaker. We just 
want to know the logic or the fact that you’ve had in this 
municipalities Act, this Bill 186, you identified the ability to 
remove, remove a council member that’s guilty of a serious 
conflict of interest. 
 
And in the third component, you say the Ombudsman should be 
engaged as well to expand his or her mandate. And, Mr. 
Speaker, while it points out that the Ombudsman could vet any 
kind of frivolous claims, this was in concert and consultation 
with SUMA, SARM, and New North. And the question that one 
has to ask, and I’m going to ask it here, is that what exactly was 
the basis of the decision to involve the Ombudsman as opposed 
to the Ministry of Justice, as an example I would use? What was 
the logic behind that particular part of the Act? 
 
This is where we need to ask the questions of the Ombudsman. 
This is where we need to ask questions of the minister in trying 
to get to the bottom line of this particular Act, which is to 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7413 

ensure that we have a greater bar or a greater standard of 
making sure that municipal officials throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan don’t become too comfortable when it comes to 
conflict of interest and that there are amendments made and that 
there are penalties identified and that there are actions 
undertaken to limit that particular problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to, under the declaration that was 
pointed out to the minister when he talked about requiring 
council members to make more concise and clear declarations 
and to update their declarations on an annual basis, Mr. 
Speaker, or in a more timely manner if the declarations are to be 
made in mid-year, as an example, I think what’s important 
there, Mr. Speaker, is that if you’re a councillor that is going to 
be engaged in a conflict of interest and you’ve identified it, the 
bottom line is, who would have the determining factors to 
determine or the determining ability to say whether that’s a 
serious enough matter to warrant the removal of that council 
member? And this is kind of what some of the questions that we 
need to ask to make sure that we have the right information as it 
results to dealing with this conflict of interest bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 186 has a lot of work that needs to be 
done in front of it just to answer the questions that we have as 
the official opposition. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now when you look at the council member itself having to 
make clear and concise declarations, Mr. Speaker, how wide 
ranging would that net be of responsibility? When I’m talking 
about a net of responsibility, Mr. Speaker, if one particular 
council member has a serious conflict of interest and doesn’t 
really disclose it or doesn’t really identify it to the extent that he 
or she should, and then other council members are aware that 
there’s a conflict of interest and they don’t say nothing, does 
this engage them, does this implicate them in any way, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of some of the processes that might be 
undertaken from here on in? 
 
Now we all know that in many of these smaller communities, 
and many of these smaller committees of the city councils, that 
a lot of people are, a lot of people know each other very well, 
Mr. Speaker. We see that happening all throughout 
Saskatchewan. And we obviously want to be able to work 
together as a team. The municipalities have always done this. 
They have done some wonderful, tremendous work over time to 
really build the Saskatchewan cities, villages, hamlets, and 
communities throughout the province. 
 
And it’s that particular train of thought that I had, Mr. Speaker, 
is that, how do you empower them without shackling them with 
a lot of rules and regulations that (a) discourage people from 
running for office, Mr. Speaker? That’s always a balancing 
issue that we have to incorporate in our thinking as it relates to 
Bill 186. 
 
The second item, Mr. Speaker, is that if there is a serious 
allegation that there is a perceived conflict of interest and if the 
particular member doesn’t come forward on his or her own 
accord, how does that implicate and complicate matters with the 
rest of the council if they are aware of this conflict of interest 
and they don’t simply react or respond to it? Are they 

implicated in any way? And that further complicates, I guess, 
the whole notion that I talked about earlier, is how do we 
engage people in community councils and the RM councils and 
the city councils as well? 
 
So there’s a lot of issues to talk about here, Mr. Speaker. Again 
as I mentioned, some of the points that the minister raised as a 
result of the Barclay report that came forward that had some 
specific recommendations, I don’t think anybody in the 
opposition is going to be argumentative in any way, shape, or 
form when we talk about more concise and clear declarations of 
conflicts of interest, when we require or look at the option of 
providing more updates on an annual basis of statements of 
conflict of interest, when we see that municipalities required a 
greater and updated code of ethics conduct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I mentioned at the outset, improving transparency in 
declaration of a conflict of interest, these are all statements that 
I think the people of Saskatchewan will overall support, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s important that, as an opposition, that we sit 
down and we ask the questions of the people that are engaged 
with the sector. The municipal councils out there need to be 
forthcoming with us in saying, what part of the Act is 
worrisome for you? What part of the Act creates some 
challenges for you? And what part of the Act do you like? So 
we’re able as an opposition to voice those concerns and bring 
the issues forward. 
 
But one of the things that’s really . . . something that’s 
concerning to me, Mr. Speaker, is that, how far is the net of 
responsibility going to be cast in the event that there is some 
conflict of interest or a blatant disregard for the rules and 
regulations occur? And other members of the council or other 
members of a subcommittee or the mayor, as it were: of that 
particular conflict of interest, how much of the responsibility do 
they bear when faced with this particular issue if it came to the 
council’s attention? 
 
So as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, we know each other a lot in 
these communities, and it’s very, very troubling and it’s a very 
tough issue to address when we’re such a small community and 
these issues come forward. And then you have the challenge of 
trying to rebuild relationships locally and continue to lead. And, 
Mr. Speaker, these are some of the issues that we have to 
apprise ourselves of as official opposition. 
 
It’s a very interesting bill, Mr. Speaker. We see the objectives 
identified, and that’s to create a higher standard or raise the bar 
in terms of declaring a conflict of interest. But there are many, 
many issues that we’ve got to speak about, many issues that 
we’ve got to talk about. And again as I mentioned, how do we 
balance some of the necessary rules that we have to put in place 
versus encouraging many other people to run for council, for 
reeve, or for mayor? This is the trade-off that you have to 
incorporate as we think this thing through. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more questions on this particular 
bill that we have. We want to hear from the people of 
Saskatchewan what they think these changes are going to do 
and how do we resolve the matter that it may discourage other 
people from coming forward to put their name in for reeve, 
mayor, or council. 
 



7414 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot more questions. We want to consult 
more. So thereby I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
186. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move second reading of Bill No. 
187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
I’m pleased to speak to the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act. This legislation will clarify who can own 
farm land in Saskatchewan and will provide the Farm Land 
Security Board with the necessary authority to enforce the Act. 
Our priority is to ensure the long-term success and 
sustainability of Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and 
economy. We believe that these amendments will help us 
achieve this. The changes will ensure that farm land in 
Saskatchewan remains accessible to our farmers and ranchers. 
 
Rules around who can own Saskatchewan farm land have been 
in place for about 40 years, with the last significant change to 
the legislation occurring in 2002. Under those rules, only 
Canadian residents and 100 per cent Canadian-owned entities 
could own more than 10 acres of farm land in Saskatchewan. 
 
However over the past number of years, it has become apparent 
that the existing rules on farm land ownership require a 
clarification. Increasingly more and more people are viewing 
farm land as an attractive investment option. There is increased 
interest from Canadian pension plans and other investors in 
holding Saskatchewan farm land as an investment in their 
portfolio. Concerns have been raised regarding Canadians 
owning farm land on behalf of non-Canadians through loans, 
mortgages, or other more complicated agreements. 
 
This increased interest from institutional out-of-province and 
potential out-of-country investors results in unease among the 
farming community. During our consultation, we heard that it 
was becoming difficult for farmers and ranchers to compete 
with these investors and that large tracts of land were being 
bought by people who had no interest in farming it themselves 
or in being part of the local community. 
 
The number of instances where the effectiveness of the Act has 
been questioned is increasing. Also increasing is the number of 
instances where compliance with the Act is being questioned. 
 
Farmers are beginning to worry about the long-term success of 
their operations and their ability to expand and remain 
competitive. They express fear that young farmers and new 

entrants into the industry are losing the ability to own land and 
fully benefit from farm land ownership. Furthermore there are 
fears that the connection to the land . . . The foundation of 
Saskatchewan as a province, farm land, is being sold to those 
whose livelihoods do not depend upon it. There’s also concern 
that the Farm Land Security Board did not have the necessary 
tools to monitor and enforce the rules. It became clear that 
something had to be done. 
 
Today I am pleased to speak to the changes that will keep our 
farm land in the hands of our farmers and ranchers while still 
allowing for a continued economic growth. Exemptions will 
continue to be granted for economic development initiatives. 
We welcome investment in our province, and our government 
will continue to ensure that we maintain a positive investment 
climate. 
 
The changes being introduced are what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. We know this because we asked. We 
needed to make sure that our government is on the right path 
and making the right decisions regarding farm land ownership. 
So through a consultation process, we asked who should or 
should not be allowed to own farm land in the province. We 
asked specifically about pension plans, investment trusts, 
pension plan administrators, and foreign investors. Over the 
summer of 2015, more than 3,200 people shared their views, 
and the results were clear: the vast majority of respondents do 
not support pension plans or foreign investors purchasing farm 
land in Saskatchewan. They do support our government in 
taking a stronger role in enforcing farm land ownership rules. 
 
In fact 75 per cent of respondents opposed allowing institutional 
investors such as Canadian pension funds to purchase farm land 
in Saskatchewan. Eighty-seven per cent of respondents do not 
support foreign ownership of farm land, and 69 per cent do not 
support foreign financing. Eighty-five per cent of respondents 
support giving the Farm Land Security Board a greater role in 
enforcing compliance of farm land ownership rules. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan told us what they thought 
regarding farm land ownership, and we listened. We are making 
changes that will keep farm land accessible to Saskatchewan’s 
farmers and ranchers. The legislative amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act will strengthen the regulations 
introduced in April as law, including designating pension funds, 
administrators of pension fund assets and trusts as ineligible to 
purchase farm land; defining having an interest in farm land to 
include any type of interest or benefit, for example capital 
appreciation, either directly or indirectly that is normally 
associated with the ownership of the land; and when financing a 
purchase of farm land, all financing must be through a financial 
institution registered to do business in Canada or through a 
Canadian resident. This legislation removes ambiguity around 
who can own farm land in Saskatchewan. It also provides the 
Farm Land Security Board with more tools to enforce the Act. 
 
The Farm Land Security Board will receive new and expanded 
authority to enforce the legislation including: at the discretion 
of the Farm Land Security Board, any person purchasing farm 
land must complete a statutory declaration; increasing fines for 
being in contravention of the legislation from 10,000 to $50,000 
for individuals and from 100,000 to $500,000 for corporations; 
authorizing the Farm Land Security Board to impose 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7415 

administrative penalties to a maximum of $10,000; and perhaps 
most importantly, the purchaser of the land must prove to the 
satisfaction of the Farm Land Security Board that they are in 
compliance with the legislation. 
 
Our government understands that to many citizens in the 
province, farm land is not just an asset. It’s a connection to our 
history, and who we are as people. There’s a strong connection 
between ownership and stewardship of the land. I’m pleased 
that our government is strengthening the rules around farm land 
ownership in the province. Our government asked the people of 
Saskatchewan, who should be able to own farm land in 
Saskatchewan, and the response was clear. 
 
The legislation that is being introduced reflects what the people 
of Saskatchewan asked for. Saskatchewan’s farmers and 
ranchers are the best people to care for this land and ensure its 
sustainability for the future growth of the province. Changes to 
The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act will only have positive 
effects, positive effects on the agricultural community in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I propose that the amendments to this Act be 
passed in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
alternative of not making these changes increases the risk of 
farm land being removed from the hands of Saskatchewan’s 
farmers and ranchers over time and placed into the hands of 
investors such as foreign interests and institutions. Therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Amendment Act, 2015 be read a second time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Amendment Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 
indicated on numerous occasions, I have the great opportunity 
of responding to the bills that the government have introduced 
as to how they plan to proceed with the fall session in terms of 
what their priorities are. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a really 
interesting bill overall. 
 
And I want to explain to the people that may be listening one of 
the things that’s really important to us as a caucus, and we’ve 
received this on a continual basis from our leader, is that he 
wants to make sure that every single member of his caucus are 
aware of some of the issues that Saskatchewan faces overall. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So this is how an MLA from northern Saskatchewan gets the 
opportunity to talk about something that’s really important, 
such as farm land ownership, Mr. Speaker. It is something that 
has an affect, an impact on all of us.  
 
And people right across the province, whether you’re living in 
Pinehouse or whether you’re living in Saskatoon or whether 
you’re living in Esterhazy, the bottom line is we need to know 
more about Saskatchewan. And as directed by our leader, he 
wants us to be acutely aware of what all the challenges are 
throughout all of the province of Saskatchewan, not just in our 

home constituencies, Mr. Speaker. And this is the manner in 
which our leader wants us to conduct ourselves. So it’s 
important for us to point that out, that we participate and we 
often learn a lot about what Saskatchewan’s all about. And 
agriculture from my perspective, there’s something that is quite 
important to the province overall. 
 
And as a northern MLA, we’ve had some involvement and 
some experiments, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
agriculture overall, as I mentioned earlier in some of my 
comments, several years ago as it relates to the Cumberland 
House farm, Mr. Speaker, the Ile-a-la-Crosse farm, and of 
course the Silver Lake, Green Lake farm, Mr. Speaker. Those 
were experiments in agriculture. At the time, the Liberal 
government wanted to see if the northern communities could 
make a go of the agricultural economy that was benefiting the 
rest of the province. And as a result of that, we saw the 
establishment of three northern farms, Mr. Speaker. As a result 
of the Devine government, they of course shut down those 
farms because quite frankly while there was people working in 
that particular industry, they really had no confidence that 
agriculture could make it in the North, and they made the 
arbitrary decision to shut down those farms. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there’s still a lot of great 
work being done in Cumberland House, a lot of great work 
being done in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and of course a lot of great work, 
and the leader in the whole pack, done around the Green Lake 
area. There’s such a tremendous opportunity in agriculture. And 
the three experiments in northern Saskatchewan did not fail 
when it came to looking at the opportunity to raise cattle, Mr. 
Speaker, to grow the feed for that cattle, and to really begin to 
make an effort to get the communities involved with 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while it’s on limited basis, Mr. Speaker, the northern part of 
the province, and certainly myself as a former mayor of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, we were engaged quite frankly with a lot of the 
agricultural activity associated with some of those northern 
farms. And we did learn a lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can recall and remember some of the comments 
made by another friend of mine, the former mayor of Green 
Lake, Fred McCallum. Fred was an avid farmer. He worked 
very, very hard, and he was one of the salt-of-the-earth kind of 
guys. And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we lost Mr. McCallum 
several years ago. And he had a really good operation; he 
worked very hard. And he was one of the people that certainly 
from my perspective I considered one of the agricultural leaders 
in northern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, he showed us 
exactly how you work the land properly; you look after your 
cattle well and you apply yourself, and you can really make a 
go of the agricultural opportunities such as raising cattle. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have an uncle also involved, an uncle and 
an aunt, that do have a cow-calf operation. They do lease a 
piece of land in Ile-a-la-Crosse in which they graze their cattle. 
And most recently they had to move them, go further south, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the predator problem. The wolves got a 
couple of head. And, Mr. Speaker, we spend a lot of time in and 
around their small operation. And my uncle’s name of course is 
Gordon Aramenko and, Mr. Speaker, he transplanted from the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] area and brought a lot of different skill sets 



7416 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

a number of years ago. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the school does, and 
I’m quite proud of that, is they actually take school kids out to 
his operation. And the kids get to see the horses and get to see 
the cattle and of course the chickens as well. And they get to 
see how to run a farm. That’s really, really interesting, and it 
gives the young kids a very good perspective of what the 
agricultural sector has to offer. 
 
And it really, I think, as our leader wants to do with all of us, it 
really begins to give you a different insight, as students and as 
learners, if you take the opportunity to discuss and learn as 
much of Saskatchewan as you can. And I think that’s the basis 
of why our leader wants to make sure that we participate in all 
the bills, and especially from a northern MLA perspective, that 
we understand agriculture a heck of a lot more as each year 
passes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important I explain that perspective 
of why we’re in the discussion around the farm land security 
Act, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we participate in these 
discussions. And as you probably are aware, Mr. Speaker, we 
get to travel throughout the province on numerous occasions. 
There are many times I was east of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and 
south of Morse, travelling and looking at some of the farm land 
and some of the issues and the challenges, whether it’s flooding 
or whether it’s a lack of habitat for some of the wildlife, Mr. 
Speaker. These are some of the things we’ve learned over the 
years. 
 
And as we’ve watched some of the activity in our province, the 
farmers and ranchers of the province do really want to teach a 
lot of people their particular industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
been a benefit to me, and certainly it’s made me a better MLA 
overall to understand the agricultural sector as much and as 
constantly as I can, Mr. Speaker. But like I said, there’s a lot of 
work that needs to be done. We continue struggling, being a 
landlocked province, in terms of getting our crop to market, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I say when I was talking about agricultural overall, I hear 
the former Finance minister chirping from his chair, but I can 
tell you, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s 
really important, Mr. Speaker, is that a number of years ago we 
had the agricultural transportation crisis in which we couldn’t 
get our product to market. And, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t hear a 
peep from the Saskatchewan Party MLAs because this 
happened under their watch. I don’t know how many billions of 
dollars the producers lost, but they couldn’t get their grain to 
market because the grain was quite frankly stuck in the 
elevators. 
 
There was no leadership at all from, at the time, the Prime 
Minister, Stephen Harper, or the Premier, Mr. Speaker, or the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party caucus. They’re very mute. 
And, Mr. Speaker, from my perspective as a northern MLA, 
I’m saying, well these guys should be really working hard to 
find solutions. And, Mr. Speaker, not a peep. There was not one 
single word from the Saskatchewan Party MLAs on how we 
deal with this crisis. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would characterize that as a big, fat F in 

terms of grading their ability to respond to the agricultural 
transportation crisis of several years ago. And how many 
producers actually paid the price for the ineptness of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? The number was staggering, 
and I think the effects are being felt even today. 
 
So to say, Mr. Speaker, what’s important, from a person that 
has limited background in agriculture, when I saw that lack of 
leadership by the Saskatchewan Party in dealing with that crisis, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s two things that prompted a lot of thought 
in my mind, Mr. Speaker. Number one is they’re taking this 
community for granted, and number two is they just couldn’t 
figure out how to deal with that problem, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the bottom line. And many farm families were affected by that, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly it’s something that we saw from our 
perspective as a total lack of leadership. 
 
So one of the things that’s really important, my point in all of 
this discussion, is that the member from Saskatoon Nutana who 
was raised on a family farm, Mr. Speaker, who was raised on a 
family farm, has more knowledge, more compassion, and more 
ability to understand what the agricultural sector is going 
through than any member of the supposed Saskatchewan Party 
that’s supposed to represent producers and farm families across 
the province a lot better than they have been, Mr. Speaker, a lot 
better than they have been. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the farm security Act is another issue that 
kind of confuses me from the northern perspective, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sitting here wondering, okay, was it not a number 
of years ago when the NDP were in power, when the 
Saskatchewan Party was screaming at the top of their lungs, 
open up the land sales to foreign ownership? Open up land sales 
so people will buy land in the province. I can remember the 
current Minister of the Economy who was yelling across on a 
continual basis saying, open up the farm land rules. Let our 
farm land be sold, is what the Minister of the Economy was 
yelling across. And, Mr. Speaker, he was pretty consistent in 
that message. And when the NDP finally did open up the farm 
land ownership rules, Mr. Speaker, he was very, very happy. 
 
And now you fast-forward to 2015, and now we’re back to 
square one where the Saskatchewan Party is saying, well hold it 
here; we may not want to do that. So my point being is what 
happened at the time, Mr. Speaker, is their philosophy was 
driving their argument here. It wasn’t common sense, Mr. 
Speaker. Their philosophy, the Saskatchewan Party philosophy: 
let’s have a wall-to-wall sale of anything in the province that’s 
for sale, Mr. Speaker. Let’s bring in the free market. Let’s do 
anything we want. Everything’s for sale. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see a lot of their aspirations being 
tempered by resistance from rural Saskatchewan on some of 
their philosophies, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I was kind of 
smiling, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the minister saying . . . The 
phrase he used was, we know this because we asked, Mr. 
Speaker. Well you know this because you should actually 
believe in it, Mr. Speaker. And they didn’t believe in it a short 
10 years ago until the producers finally telling them, well you 
guys better relook at this farm land security Act because we’ve 
got a problem here. And it was almost like the light bulb came 
on over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7417 

And again from a guy from northern Saskatchewan, a guy from 
northern Saskatchewan giving the Sask Party agricultural 
advice, saying that you should not have embraced the idea of 
anything in Saskatchewan is for sale including our farm land. 
That’s exactly what you preached 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
They were yelling at the top of their lungs when they were in 
opposition: open the door; let the opportunity for buyers of our 
farm land from all throughout the world. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, 10 years later, what are they saying? 
Hold it. Hold it. Hold it. We made a mistake here; 3,200 people 
responded to this issue. So as a northern MLA, my argument is 
you guys should check your facts before you start screaming at 
the top of your lungs based on your philosophy, that maybe the 
people of Saskatchewan didn’t want their farm land sold to 
foreign ownership. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we see 
that here today. 
 
So the NDP were right to limit foreign ownership of our farm 
land in the province of Saskatchewan. So the NDP were on the 
right track, Mr. Speaker. The NDP knew very well that in order 
to secure farm land and defend the family farm, Mr. Speaker, 
that at the very least they had to own the land. 
 
At the very least, the NDP were going to protect the family 
farm, the family farm attitude, Mr. Speaker, because a lot of 
families in this province wanted to own the farm land. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as we sat here, the Saskatchewan Party, the 
Saskatchewan Party came along and they said no, we’re going 
to sell everything. We’re going to have a wall-to-wall sale of 
our Crown corporations, a wall-to-wall sale of our farm lands. 
Anybody who wants to buy land, come to Saskatchewan; we’ll 
sell it to you. 
 
And all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden we have this 
survey. And now we have the Minister of Agriculture eating 
crow in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because he was wrong 
from day one. He was wrong from day one. And this is a big, 
glaring mistake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He failed on the grain transportation crisis, Mr. Speaker; a big 
fat F for our mark for him. And now, Mr. Speaker, he’s failed 
when it comes to the farm land security and protecting the 
family farm and the right for Saskatchewan people to own farm 
land in this province. So from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, he 
ought to be fired, Mr. Speaker, or culled from that herd, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The bottom line is that on both those fronts, on both pivotal 
moments, on pivotal moments, Mr. Speaker, that Minister of 
Agriculture failed terribly, Mr. Speaker. He failed terribly. And 
this is an example of how philosophically off the conservatives 
are — sorry, the Saskatchewan Party members are — when it 
comes to protecting agricultural practices and agriculture in 
general in the year 2015. 
 
So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when we have an agricultural 
discussion, I would rather take the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana’s advice any day of the week as opposed to that minister 
who has a warped sense of what’s the priorities for agricultural 
Saskatchewan overall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here’s evidence. Here is evidence today. Here is evidence 

today as he makes these changes on Bill 187. As he makes these 
changes on Bill 187, what are they doing, Mr. Speaker, the right 
wing Saskatchewan Party? They’re limiting farm land sales to 
non-Saskatchewan residents. That’s right. You heard it here 
first, Mr. Speaker. As a free enterprise, right wing 
Saskatchewan Party, they’re going back to the NDP practice of 
limiting foreign or out-of-Saskatchewan ownership of land in 
the province. 
 
Now is that going against their philosophy, Mr. Speaker, that 
they go around and spout off so much, Mr. Speaker? They go 
around spouting off that they’re a free market, free enterprise 
party, Mr. Speaker. Well hold it. Hold it. Bill 187 is limiting, 
limiting people from buying farm land in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So what is it? Are you guys New Democrats or 
are you free enterprisers? 
 
[15:15] 
 
You’ve got to make up your mind. You guys can’t morph into 
something overnight. Because if you’re willing to morph into 
something overnight, then obviously you’re not sticking to your 
beliefs and that’s not much of a leadership quality that I think 
from my perspective . . . If you’re sitting on this side of the 
Assembly you see . . . Well hold it here. Maybe polling does 
dictate how that government reacts to certain situations, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re going to find out that polling sometimes, 
Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t be the basis of how you make your 
decisions. You should lead and govern according to what you 
believe in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are many times you’re going to have to 
say no. And the Saskatchewan Party so far has almost broke the 
province financially because they don’t know how to manage 
the province well. 
 
And this is another example of how on the agricultural front, 
from a northern perspective, as I sit here and I observe how 
they’ve failed this particular sector terribly, and the minister has 
failed terribly on the grain transportation strike or the grain 
transportation issue, failed miserably, Mr. Speaker. He was 
going to fix the railway companies and nothing happened. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he almost sounds like a New Democrat over 
there saying, we’re not going to sell. We’re not going to sell 
farm land to non-Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
their right wing government over there. They’re willing to sell 
the Crowns. But farm land? Oh, hold it, maybe the 
Saskatchewan Party made a mistake here. 
 
So what is it, Mr. Speaker? Are they free enterprisers or market 
champions, Mr. Speaker? Or are they protectionists, Mr. 
Speaker? So how’s this going to affect the people that gave 
them money to say, look we want to come and invest in 
Saskatchewan so the Saskatchewan Party, we’ll give them 
money. But they want to buy everything up in sight. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, now they’ve got a problem. They’ve 
got a problem, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got a problem. They’ve 
got a real issue on their hands. What do they do now? What do 
they do now? (a) Do they go back and say, well we let our 
philosophical beliefs muddle our thought so that’s why we’re 
changing our mind? Well they can’t admit that, Mr. Speaker. 



7418 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

We know that on this side of the Assembly. 
 
But then all of a sudden they’re saying, well how do we attract 
investment? Well we’re not going to do that by limiting who 
can own farm land in the province of Saskatchewan, but they’ve 
done it anyway, Mr. Speaker, because polling says they should. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we are in financial ruin today 
because of a lack of leadership on that side. You cannot govern 
by poll results, Mr. Speaker. You’ve got to govern according to 
what your finances can afford you, Mr. Speaker, and based on 
common sense, not on philosophies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you look at some of the examples that I talk about, Mr. 
Speaker. The Farm Land Security Act, Mr. Speaker. We know, 
we know. We sit here and we say, oh my goodness, the 
Saskatchewan Party, right wing Saskatchewan conservative 
party, Mr. Speaker, they are now limiting who can buy farm 
land in the province of Saskatchewan. Does that not curtail 
investment in the oil and gas sector? Does that not curtail 
opportunities to attract families? Isn’t that contrary to their 
philosophy, Mr. Speaker? Like what are these guys doing? 
 
And the big, massive argument on this side of the House, we’re 
saying, well we know they don’t know what they’re doing. We 
know that. But the question is, you guys got to figure out, what 
are you guys? Are you guys NDPers hiding in conservative 
clothing or do you really believe in your philosophies? What 
are you? And that’s the whole argument. 
 
We know they’re not liberals. The liberals have been eaten up 
alive over there. There’s no more liberals left there, Mr. 
Speaker. But the question is, what are you guys? Do you guys 
believe in the free enterprise system, yes or no? Do you guys 
believe that investing into farm land opportunities from across 
the globe is important? Do you think attracting companies from 
around the world is important? Well I think if you . . . 
[inaudible] . . . this particular aspect, Mr. Speaker, what they’re 
doing today, it really lends itself to our argument, is that they 
don’t have a clue what they’re doing. That’s the bottom line, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now an observation from a northern MLA telling them, you 
guys have got to make up your mind what you’re going to be, 
agricultural champions or chumps. And our biggest argument is 
I see you guys being agricultural chumps because you don’t 
know how to handle situations like the grain transportation 
crisis, and you certainly don’t know what you’re doing on farm 
land ownership. 
 
Now this is where I go back to the minister’s comment, Mr. 
Speaker, when he said, we know this because we asked, Mr. 
Speaker. But why didn’t you ask when you first got in if people 
appreciated this notion, Mr. Speaker? And this is one part of the 
bill that I see, Bill 187, where they can’t go retroactively back 
to all those organizations outside of our province’s borders to 
kill some of these farm land purchases. What’s done is done, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s identified in the bill. So what happens, you 
have . . . I’ll use the analogy. If you’ve got 100 head of cattle in 
the corral and then you open up the gates and all of a sudden 90 
of those cattle are gone, you’ve got 10, it’s oh, maybe it’s time 
to close the gate now. Well, Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of the 
issue or 90 per cent of your herd’s gone. Now how are you 
going to get them back, Mr. Speaker? 

And now the member from Wood River . . . not Wood River, 
from Thunder Creek, the current Minister of Agriculture, I 
would say to him, my goodness, do you know what you’re 
doing? That’s the fundamental question I would ask from the 
northern perspective. Does that Minister of Agriculture really 
know what he’s doing, Mr. Speaker, when he flip-flops, when 
he sits on his hands? When he had the greatest transportation 
crisis in the history of Saskatchewan, he sat on his hands, didn’t 
push the agenda with the then-prime minister, Stephen Harper. 
And today, now, Mr. Speaker, he’s capitulating, he’s changing 
his mind on opening up Saskatchewan for investment. He’s 
saying, no, no, no, we’re not going to let our farm land be sold 
outside of our borders. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question, the question I would ask him 
is, you’ve got to make up your mind what you are. Are you a 
free enterprise, right wing kind of guy? Or are you an NDP, 
protecting Saskatchewan families’ interests, supporting, 
supporting the family farm structure, Mr. Speaker, supporting 
rural Saskatchewan to the extent it should have been supported? 
And, Mr. Speaker, all we’ve seen from this minister, Mr. 
Speaker, is failure upon failure upon failure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you today, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana knows more about agriculture — raised on a 
family farm — than the current Minister of Agriculture. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the advice we get from her is sound. Mr. Speaker, 
it is from the philosophy of ensuring that we protect family 
farms. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there won’t be any 
confusion on our side of the Assembly that we have seen and 
witnessed from that particular minister and that particular party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the question we ask, the question I ask is, what are they, Mr. 
Speaker? Are they going to be a party that’s going to attract 
investment to Saskatchewan? Or are they going to be a party 
that’s going to say, we’re open for business like Grant Devine 
done in the 1980s? But then hold it, all the investors outside of 
Saskatchewan in the oil and gas sector, the tourism industry, 
Mr. Speaker, the manufacturing industry, they’re saying, oh but 
the Saskatchewan Party’s saying no, we’re not going to let any 
farm land go for sale. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is it? What is it? Are you going to 
allow investment in or are you not going to allow investment 
in? And if you are not going to allow investment in to begin 
with, why did you open the gates when you became 
government? Why didn’t you applaud the effort that we had to 
attract more investment into the agriculture sector? Why didn’t 
you applaud that? Because, Mr. Speaker, they are driven by 
their philosophy. They weren’t driven by common sense. And 
we in northern Saskatchewan see that every day in this 
Assembly. We see this every single day, massive confusion on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I look at this whole notion, Mr. Speaker, and you wonder 
why the former minister of Finance is heading out of Dodge, 
Mr. Speaker. Because things are going to get a little tougher 
around here, getting a little tougher around here, Mr. Speaker, 
because there are choices that will have to be made on that side 
of the Assembly. And I don’t think the Saskatchewan Party 
have the courage to share that information with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7419 

That’s why we’re not going to have a budget, Mr. Speaker, 
before the next election. We’re not having a budget because I 
think the people of Saskatchewan are going to quickly learn that 
these guys, what we told them not to do, they messed things up. 
They messed things up because, Mr. Speaker, their long-term 
plans don’t include investing in Saskatchewan and making 
Saskatchewan a better place. They’re going to, like the former 
Finance minister, head out of Dodge as soon as things get 
tough. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you right now that the NDP are 
going to work very hard to regain the trust of the people of 
Saskatchewan and to tell them that Bill 187, Bill 187 is a 
capitulation at its worst from the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, because he’s the one that championed the 
open-for-sale argument for years and years. And now he’s 
saying, no, we’re putting up walls and we’re not going to allow 
the sale of non-Saskatchewan . . . ownership, 
non-Saskatchewan ownership of farm land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things I think we looked at . . . And a lot of 
people would know this that generally follow the management 
and finances of our province. People know this as well. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, we know that on the education portion of the 
property taxes that many farm families pay, Mr. Speaker, we 
know that a large portion of that is actually paid by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, the property tax, and rightfully so, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that a lot of farmers have a very difficult 
time making ends meet at times. But we recognize, Mr. 
Speaker, that the whole notion of the property tax matter, which 
so many farmers pay on their farm lands, that the current 
government — and certainly we did a lot of the work, some of 
the work as well — that some of the taxes are being subsidized 
by the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the question I would ask today, Mr. Speaker, the question 
I would ask today, of those taxes being paid on the education 
portion, on the education portion on farm land, Mr. Speaker, the 
question I would ask the people of Saskatchewan is this: 
number one is, do you think it’s right that those subsidies for 
the education portion on farm land, that the payment of taxes 
should go outside of our borders to people that own land outside 
of our borders? That’s the fundamental question that I ask 
today. 
 
And I’m going to ask the Minister of Finance: how many acres 
are owned outside of Saskatchewan? And do you think that 
subsidizing non-Saskatchewan owners on the property tax part 
of the education portion is actually . . . Do you agree it should 
be sent out of province? That’s the fundamental question I ask 
for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, he won’t answer that question, Mr. 
Speaker, because the bottom line is driven by his philosophy. 
He allowed many more sales of land to occur, many more sales 
of land to occur, acres of land to occur, and now the subsidy 
that we give to the hard-working farmers of our province is now 
also being sent out beyond our provincial borders. Now is that 
fair? Does that make common sense that we’re sending 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money that should be here to help our 
farmers and family farms here in Saskatchewan . . . That’s 
where the concentration of support should go, and it’s going 
outside of our borders. And there’s many investors outside of 

our borders saying, thank you, Saskatchewan, for the support. 
Does the minister think that that is the correct thing to do? Does 
he believe that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s why this bill is so important to this debate and to this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It is so very important because we see 
that the Saskatchewan Party are massively confused. They don’t 
know what they stand for, and they’re going back and forth. 
They’re blaming everyone, and they’re not taking the 
responsibility themselves for their mistakes, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s costing the Saskatchewan taxpayers a whole whack of 
money, Mr. Speaker. And this is yet another example that you 
can pile on to the lean program, Mr. Speaker, another example 
you can pile on to the smart meter fiasco, another layer of debt 
that you can add on, Mr. Speaker, is all the money leaving our 
province. 
 
Does the minister think that’s a good idea when our intent is to 
help the Saskatchewan-based people, the Saskatchewan-based 
farm families, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to investors outside of 
our borders or owners outside of our borders getting the benefit 
of our taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, without lifting a hand, 
without even touching a cow, Mr. Speaker? They get those 
benefits. Does that make any sense, Mr. Speaker? That’s the 
question I would ask the minister. 
 
So today the bill would beg the question: how much land in the 
province of Saskatchewan is actually owned by 
non-Saskatchewan residents? Is it 800,000 acres? Is it 1.2 
million hectares? What is the exact amount? And of that 
amount, how much is actually being shipped out of our 
province? Does the minister believe that’s the right thing to do 
with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money? Does he believe that, 
Mr. Speaker? These are the questions we have around Bill 187. 
 
And based on the past practice of that minister . . . And I can 
tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you one thing is that if 
there was a major transportation issue facing any one of my 
constituents, I’d be the first one in the front row hollering for 
action, Mr. Speaker. But when it happened to Saskatchewan, 
the Minister of Agriculture sat on his hands and said, it wasn’t 
me; it was the railway company. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not leadership. That’s not leadership. 
And as a result of that, I don’t know how many billions of 
dollars it cost the producers of the province of Saskatchewan, 
based on the ineptness and non-response by the current minister 
that’s now saying, we’re going to put up trade walls and trade 
barriers to farm land ownership because — not because he 
doesn’t believe in it — because he was told that’s what he has 
to do to retain support in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So philosophical beliefs on that side, Mr. Speaker, are out the 
window when it comes to common sense. People of rural 
Saskatchewan said you’d better start using common sense. 
Otherwise the Saskatchewan Party will be out the window, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what’s really important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a result of this particular Bill 187, it gives me great pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to stand in this Assembly to see the Saskatchewan 
Party change their philosophy on farm land ownership, Mr. 



7420 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

Speaker. All this time the NDP were right, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP were right by limiting foreign ownership of lands in 
Saskatchewan. The NDP were right not sending out benefits out 
beyond our borders. And, Mr. Speaker, they meekly come in 
here and present Bill 187 as it’s a triumph. It’s a triumph for us. 
It’s a failure for their philosophy, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
bottom line on this particular bill. 
 
And I know my colleagues are going to have a lot more to say 
about this bill. But it’s a great day, it’s a great day to be a New 
Democrat in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a great day. Why is it 
a great day? It wasn’t a great day for us when they had the 
agricultural transportation crisis because we knew farm families 
were suffering. We knew that. We knew that there was a lot of 
hurt in rural Saskatchewan as a result of their ineptness, Mr. 
Speaker. So it was not a great day then. We knew there was a 
lot of suffering. 
 
But it’s a great day for us today when we see the current 
Minister of Agriculture who is supposedly rural Saskatchewan’s 
representative from wherever he is . . . Thunder Creek, Mr. 
Speaker. And today we find out that he’s standing up in the 
Assembly and he’s saying, the NDP were right. That’s what 
he’s saying today. He’s saying, the NDP were right to limit 
foreign ownership of farm land in the province. That’s what 
he’s saying today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s saying that today, and it gives us great pleasure to hear 
that from probably one of the most right wing Saskatchewan 
Party members, Mr. Speaker. Because the bottom line is when 
we were in government, they were yelling every day to loosen 
up those sales, Mr. Speaker. They were decrying protectionists 
and they were decrying all these adjectives to describe the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker. And today now in 2015, he just admit as a result 
of this bill that the NDP were right. 
 
The NDP were right. And 2,300 people in the farm community 
responded, and a vast majority of them said, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan people are saying to this government, 
our farm land should stay in Saskatchewan farm families’ 
hands. And if there’s any benefits going to support the 
agricultural sector, it should not go out of our borders. It should 
stay here to protect our communities. It should stay here to 
protect our interests. It should stay here to protect this vital 
industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my mind that as we 
sit here and learn, as directed by our leader and as coached by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana, that agriculture is one of 
the strongest pillars of our economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We understand that, Mr. Speaker. We 
understand that. As the economy of agriculture goes, so does 
the fortunes of our province go. 
 
So we understand that even in remote northern Saskatchewan. 
We understand that and we appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. But 
we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the bottom line is we see the 
face of family farms changing into a lot more corporate 
ownership. Larger farms, Mr. Speaker. At one time there may 
have been 50, 60,000 farm families. It may be down to 20 or 30. 
I’m just taking a guess here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 

But we’re seeing that the family farm so to speak, Mr. Speaker, 
is fading under the Saskatchewan Party watch. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because it didn’t respond to the transportation crisis. 
That’s one reason. And number two, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
have allowed the farm family to be cordoned off and sold off 
because their philosophy dictated that, Mr. Speaker. And 
number three, the amount of money dedicated and should be 
focused on supporting the family farm in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — that money’s going out of our borders. 
 
So just on those three fronts, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing to me 
why the rural people of Saskatchewan entertain supporting a 
Sask Party candidate in the future, Mr. Speaker, because quite 
frankly, quite frankly there is a lot of dissention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out that in due time, in due time, Mr. 
Speaker, in due time the finances of the province are going to 
dictate some really tough choices, really tough choices in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. We know that on this side of the 
Assembly. There’s going to be some tough choices coming 
down the pipe. And that’s why today, Mr. Speaker, that’s why 
today the quandary that the current Minister of Agriculture 
finds himself in, and the entire caucus of the Saskatchewan 
Party is that they . . . We know, and they won’t admit it, but we 
know that they’re broke, Mr. Speaker, that they are flat broke. 
 
And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, they are going to have to 
figure something out here fairly quickly. So if they’re in that 
bad and dire financial strait, Mr. Speaker, and now all of a 
sudden they put up these measures to limit investment into farm 
land, purchasing farm land at the same time they’re shipping 
our money out of the province that’s designed to go to farm 
families, Mr. Speaker, one can only speculate what choices that 
they will make, Mr. Speaker, in the future. And that’s why it’s 
important to the people of Saskatchewan that we stop them 
now, that we stop them now, Mr. Speaker, because quite 
frankly they do not know what they do. 
 
And as a member of this NDP caucus, I’m not going to forgive 
them, Mr. Speaker, because they ought to have known what to 
do, Mr. Speaker, from day one. And the fact of the matter is 
they didn’t know. And as is traditional, Mr. Speaker, one would 
say, forgive them, for they do not know what they do. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not going to forgive them. They put the people of 
Saskatchewan at risk financially, and they hurt our family farms 
to the extent that they have hurt them by their inaction. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to protect farm families’ 
interest in the province of Saskatchewan. And you know what, 
Mr. Speaker? Again it gives me great pride to stand in this 
Assembly to say, you were wrong on farm land ownership. The 
NDP were right, and this bill proves my point. On that notion, 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 187. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7421 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 179, the MRI bill, Mr. Speaker. A 
few things that I’d like to cover today, I’d like to talk a little bit 
about why we’re actually having this debate at this particular 
time. I’ll talk a little bit about why in fact this is an important 
debate to have in light of the fact that the bill is before us, and I 
think it’s a very important discussion to have. And I will also 
talk a little bit about some of the problems with private MRIs 
and where the evidence actually falls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I would like to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with why we are 
having this debate. So as you’ll know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have no Throne Speech this fall. This is highly unusual in my 
time as an MLA; it’s been six years, Mr. Speaker. And we have 
no Throne Speech. The government hasn’t presented us with a 
vision of where they’d like to go, which is an odd and 
interesting thing. Only two terms in, Mr. Speaker, and heading 
into an election, you’d think that this government would have a 
plan and a vision to present to Saskatchewan about where 
they’d like to go. 
 
Instead we have a very light legislative agenda fixing things 
that this government has failed to do properly. We’ve got the 
essential services legislation before us. We’ve got some 
changes to farm land sales. Not that those aren’t important 
things, but normally at this time, two weeks into the legislature, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’d be talking about the Throne Speech. 
Members on both sides of the House would have an opportunity 
to weigh in, and we just don’t have that opportunity. And I 
think it’s sad and disappointing that this government is so 
lacking in vision that they wouldn’t be able to produce a Throne 
Speech at this particular time. 
 
I think it’s also an interesting thing to look at the timing of this 
MRI bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Late or mid-fall — I think it was 
in October — the Premier actually, via social media, floated a 
tweet about private MRIs and wondering if it was time to do 
this. And then we came into the legislative session and there 
was no legislation before us. He had floated the idea, and we 
came into the legislature and not . . . The time when bills are 
usually presented, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in the fall where we 
all have an opportunity to see the bills before us, debate them, 
and then between the fall and spring session we have the 
opportunity to reach out to stakeholders and see what people 
think about those bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s usually how 
it’s worked. It’s worked for the last six years. I don’t know why 
the government has chosen to take a different path this 
particular time. 
 
But I think it’s an interesting thing when you are introducing 

public policy. You’d think that . . . You’ve got two things going 
on here. So you either have a government who truly believes 
that this MRI policy is good public policy . . . And I want to 
give them the benefit of the doubt but, as I said, the Premier 
himself floated the idea about private MRIs last October and 
then in the dying days of what should have, what should have 
been the dying days of the legislative session at the end of May 
or mid-May, introduced the bill. 
 
So the bill is before us now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we will 
have a fulsome debate both now and in committee. But I find it 
passing strange. And I will give the government the benefit of 
the doubt that they think that this is an effective approach, 
although I will argue that the evidence throughout Canada and 
other jurisdictions shows quite the opposite. So I’m concerned 
that this is a political motivation, that the government felt like 
this should be the issue going into the election. Private MRIs? 
When we look at health care in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, introducing a bill on private MRIs is this 
government’s highest priority, when in fact we know we have a 
seniors’ care crisis in the province? 
 
The Ombudsman’s report of late last spring, we have a myriad 
of people who have come forward describing their stories, and 
not easy stories to tell. We all hear from health care workers. I 
know what I hear in my office and I have no doubt that 
members opposite hear those same issues too around the 
provision of long-term care services and services for seniors, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We can talk about other . . . This is what this government has 
chosen as their high priority, private MRIs, when we have 
specialist waits going up, despite the Premier’s commitment to 
specialists. In 2012 our Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, made a 
seven-day pledge that citizens in Saskatchewan would wait no 
longer than seven days to see a specialist. And in fact in 2014 
there were waits for specialists for 50 per cent longer than 2013. 
And on average, people here in Saskatchewan wait about seven 
months in our two largest health regions to see a specialist. That 
is far longer than the seven-day pledge that the Premier made 
2012. 
 
So I think priorities, private MRIs . . . And I will not discount 
the need for improved, not just capacity, but I think handling of 
wait-lists actually is another issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 
MRI issue is the one that this government has chosen to tackle 
in this legislative session. 
 
We can talk about ER wait times. I know anecdotally too. I 
think the numbers show it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We heard some 
numbers yesterday that almost 1 in 10 patients in Prince Albert, 
in that particular health region, leave the ER without seeing a 
doctor. So that totals about 2,700 people in that city alone 
leaving the ER before they’ve been served. And those aren’t 
people who are just walking away with a child who’s got an ear 
infection. There have been several months over the last year in 
which over 15 per cent of the people needing urgent care end up 
leaving, and 10 per cent of those needing emergent care end up 
leaving. And that 10 per cent are those people who are 
supposed to see a doctor in 15 minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this government has chosen to put the issue of private MRIs, 
which . . . There is no evidence in Canada showing that this 



7422 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

particular plan will work. They priorized this over fixing the ER 
issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ve priorized it over the 
seniors’ care crisis. They have priorized it over wait times for 
specialists. This is what this government’s agenda is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We can talk about infrastructure issues. This government, at last 
count — and it’s been a year and a half so undoubtedly this 
number has gone up — but this government has a $2.2 billion 
infrastructure deficit in health care, Mr. Speaker, that has grown 
under their watch. That number has grown. 
 
The Saskatoon Health Region a couple of years ago under the 
former CEO [chief executive officer], Maura Davies, had said 
in the budget that she would need five times the amount she got 
just to do basic maintenance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In this last 
budget this spring, I believe the number was about 29 million 
allocated for maintenance for all of the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on a $2.2 billion infrastructure deficit, which was a 
conservative estimate at that time and has undoubtedly gone up 
since the report was done a couple of years ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So again this government has chosen to prioritize 
private MRIs over some incredibly pressing issues, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Again I have to go back to long-term care. That’s been an issue 
over the last two and a half years where the stories keep getting 
more and more difficult to hear. I had three cases in my office 
in a period of about six weeks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of people 
— three individuals — in their 90s. And we’re not talking about 
the incredibly spry 90-year-old that is running half marathons 
and doing all kinds of things like this. These are people who 
were suffering some dementia issues, were having falls, 
multiple cancers, all kinds of issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 
were people who desperately needed long-term care, and they 
were all assessed as not needing long-term care. 
 
After some advocacy, one of them was able to get into 
Sherbrooke, but the demand is great. And not just for long-term 
care. Adding long-term care spaces is absolutely imperative, but 
on the flip side of that, how do you keep people from needing 
long-term care? And that’s all about making sure that those 
supports are full on the front end when it comes to things like 
home care. And I’m not just talking about medical needs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m talking about all those things that keep 
people who start to experience some challenges. 
 
I think about my own parents, who I talk about an awful lot 
here in this Assembly. They live two blocks away. They’ve 
been really healthy. They’re both in their early 80s, and we had 
a bit of a crisis here this summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Both of 
them at the same time were ill. And there are seven kids in my 
family, so we have a big family, but it happened to be the 
August long weekend and five of us live in the city and four of 
us were out of town. So there were multiple trips, three trips to 
the emergency room, medications. My mother was not doing 
very well. My dad wasn’t doing very well. In and out of the 
hospital over the period of a couple of weeks. And I saw, for the 
first time in my life, parents who are still incredibly active and 
doing lots of things, but the first signs of aging really were 
setting in. 

And I think about the things that they need to stay in their 
house. They have a huge yard, a huge garden. My dad has taken 
over the whole boulevard for growing food. It used to be grass 
when I was little, and I’ve talked I think about mowing that 
grass, but it’s all used for food production now. So I think about 
those kinds of needs, and I think about home care. And I think 
about what we need on that front end, and not just the medical 
needs of coming and having bandages changed and those kinds 
of things which are really important, but we need to make sure 
that our seniors have good meals and help with tree trimming or 
snow shovelling or cutting the grass, all those kind of things, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when we talk about priorities, we have an MRI, a private 
MRI bill before us which is questionable whether or not . . . It’s 
more than questionable. I think it’s important to have that 
debate, because I believe the evidence shows that it is not going 
to be an effective approach. But we have the government 
choosing to do that rather than focusing on the things that are 
important to the people of Saskatchewan like ER [emergency 
room] wait times, like specialist wait times, like making sure 
our most vulnerable citizens, including our elders, have the care 
and dignity that they need. This is this government’s priority, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that that is completely backwards. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about, since we are having this debate, 
since we are having this debate, some of the principles around 
health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think as Canadians in a 
universal health care system that we all cherish and value. And 
I’d like to quote on Mr. Romanow’s, former Premier 
Romanow’s report that he did for the Government of Canada, 
his Building on Values: The Future of Health Care in Canada 
from 2002. And one of the things he talks about, this is from 
page 8, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Medicare rests on the principle that an individual’s 
financial resources should not determine access to services. 
In the Commission’s view, governments have a 
responsibility to guarantee that the public system has 
sufficient resources to ensure appropriate access to 
advanced technology. Increased investment within the 
public system for new diagnostic technology can remove 
the temptation to “game” the system by individuals and 
health care providers through the private purchase of 
diagnostic tests that could allow them to jump the queue. 

 
And that’s on page 8. I think two pieces of the discussion that 
are interesting here, and I’d like to quote from page 139 of the 
same, of the Romanow Commission here too. I’ll quote here: 
 

The current debate appears to be polarized between two 
extreme and incompatible positions: 
 

Those who look at the way wait lists are managed across 
the country and conclude either that it is impossible to 
say whether there is a problem or that the problem is 
more perception than reality; and 

 
Those who use incomplete information to conclude that 
the problems are so severe that the only solution is to 
allow parallel private facilities in which individuals can 
use their own funds to purchase some services and, in 
their view, “take some pressure off the public system.” 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7423 

Mr. Romanow rejected both of these positions and put forward 
some good arguments. I actually reject those as well. I know as 
the Health critic, I have had people who’ve come into my office 
and I think by virtue of being Health critic, this is what 
happens: people come into my office stressed about MRI wait 
times. I would not dismiss the need for improving access to 
MRIs here in Saskatchewan, but this government is providing a 
so-called solution and not addressing the real problems, which 
are both capacity and organizational structure of wait-lists, and 
that is ultimately the problem. So I would not diminish that 
when people get sick and need some diagnostic testing that 
there’s huge stress and huge pressure and anxiety when you 
find out that you have to wait for a test. 
 
I can’t even imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know I have 
colleagues who’ve been in the position of family members 
waiting for MRIs, and it’s an incredibly stressful thing. I can’t 
imagine as a mom, if one of my two kids, or both of them for 
that matter, were having medical issues and had to wait. 
Waiting is an incredibly difficult thing when you’re unwell and 
uncertain about what the problem is. I understand that pressing 
need to have that resolved, so I don’t diminish people’s 
concerns about the need for improving MRIs, access to MRIs. 
But again it’s about capacity and organizational structure. 
 
The second piece that Mr. Romanow talks about: 
 

Those who use incomplete information to conclude that the 
problems are so severe that the only solution is to allow 
parallel private facilities in which individuals can use their 
own funds to purchase some services and, in their view, 
“take some pressure off the public system.” 

 
This is exactly what this government is doing, and it hasn’t 
been shown to be effective anywhere in Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think what people in Saskatchewan deserve . . . And 
I’d like to draw your attention to page 149 of this same review, 
and this is important to keep in mind, that the system does need 
to be repaired. 
 
And what should people in Saskatchewan deserve? Mr. 
Romanow goes on to say: 
 

Taken together, the recommended actions to manage wait 
[time] lists should achieve three broad goals — fairness, 
appropriateness, and certainty. Fairness means that wait 
times are set on objective criteria based on patients’ needs 
rather than by individual providers or hospitals. 
Appropriateness means that the time people wait is 
appropriate for their condition. And certainty means that 
people will have a clear understanding of how long they 
can expect to wait and why. In future, it should be possible 
to set benchmarks and track progress in meeting those 
benchmarks on an ongoing basis. 
 

I would agree that those things can be resolved, and I don’t 
think that they can be resolved in the manner that this 
government is proposing resolving them. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about some of the problems. I’d like to 
talk . . . I’m not quite sure why the member from Carrot River is 
heckling when we’re having a debate about some really 
important ideas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’m going to move on 

to some of the problems with private MRIs. 
 
But I actually think I need to . . . I missed one particular thing 
that I think it’s important to mention about a government who is 
willing to backtrack. In 2009 the Premier actually said in the 
media that offering medical services such as MRI for a fee 
“seems to be outside the Canada Health Act” and is an area 
where the government doesn’t want to tread. So that was the 
Premier himself saying that. He also had used the line, “to use a 
bulging wallet to jump the queue.” He used that very argument 
that people who have more money shouldn’t be able to jump the 
queue. 
 
This isn’t just about individuals getting access to service more 
quickly. This is about the rest of us who don’t buy those 
services getting . . . our services diminishing because of the 
ability to queue jump. So I think it’s important to add into the 
context that this is a Premier and a government who said they 
were not going to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And here we have this on the eve of the election, when we 
should be having a Throne Speech and should be talking about 
big, broad ideas, instead we’re talking about private MRIs and 
not the pressing concerns of people like ER wait times, like 
specialist wait times, like the seniors’ care crisis, like the 
growing infrastructure deficit that this government continues to 
add to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So some of the problems with private MRIs, where does the 
evidence point to, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Where does the 
evidence point to, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well I’d like to draw 
the members opposite attention to a report that was done in 
Alberta in 2013, the Health Services Preferential Access 
Inquiry Alberta by, in fact, the government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The Hon. John Vertes was the commissioner and it 
was a report into preferential access which grew, I understand, 
in part out of private MRIs. And there were many issues that led 
to this particular inquiry, but part of it was the perception and 
the possibility that people were getting preferential treatment or 
able to access public services because of private MRIs. 
 
So I just want to take you to the executive summary of this 
particular report, the Health Services Preferential Access 
Inquiry Alberta, page 4: 
 

Private diagnostic imaging: A person who pays for 
diagnostic imaging at a private facility, instead of waiting 
for the same service through publicly funded channels, can 
receive a prompter diagnosis. If the diagnosis indicates a 
need for treatment, that person can immediately step into 
line for treatment. The person waiting for a diagnosis 
through the publicly funded system cannot step into that 
line for treatment, since he or she has not received a 
diagnosis. By circumventing the long wait for diagnosis, a 
patient who steps outside the public system for diagnosis 
obtains preferential access to treatment when he or she 
rejoins the public system. 
 
The proliferation of private diagnostic services poses a true 
ethical dilemma in the context of access to health care. It 
undermines the principles of fairness and equity in access 
to health care, and provides an advantage to those who can 
pay for this service. On the other hand, the practice is not 



7424 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

illegal. It is accepted by governments and by physicians’ 
regulating bodies. 

 
And so the reality is actually . . . And I’d like to read a little bit 
further down. 
 

There is no correct answer, practically or ethically, in the 
debate over the role that private diagnostic services play in 
permitting preferential access. It is a question for public 
discussion to define what is acceptable. 

 
And thus we are having this debate here. But it’s funny coming 
out of a province . . . So this review came out of Alberta where 
they do in fact have the second-highest per capita number of 
MRI scanners. They have a proliferation of private MRIs, and 
in fact we need to look at the numbers there. 
 
The wait times. Let’s look at the wait times between Alberta 
and Saskatchewan. So these were comments that . . . This was 
in 2013 this particular review happened. 
 
So Alberta versus Saskatchewan, when you look at CIHI 
[Canadian Institute of Health Information] numbers, 90 per cent 
of people in Alberta get their MRI in 247 days versus 
Saskatchewan, 90 per cent in Saskatchewan get their scan in 88 
days. I would again argue that 88 days isn’t good enough but it 
is considerably better than Alberta that has a proliferation of 
private MRIs. 
 
So the typical . . . Just in terms of averages, it’s 80 days to get 
your typical MRI in Alberta and 28 days in Saskatchewan. So 
looking to a place that’s experimented with private MRIs and 
has found that there is problems, and their own review points to 
the fact that people do get preferential treatment in a system like 
this, we need to seriously consider. 
 
I need to point out again, in this same review, just some of the 
evidence. The issue of inferior access, I think this is quite 
interesting. On reviewing some of the literature and preparing 
for this . . . Actually lots of the literature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
points to the fact that even in a public system, people of lower 
socio-economic status actually receive diagnostic testing in an 
inequitable fashion. So there is actually a study from . . . This is 
written from the CMAJ [Canadian Medical Association 
Journal] 2005, November 8, “Socioeconomic status and the 
utilization of diagnostic imaging in an urban setting.” Just in the 
abstract, “We found a pattern of increased diagnostic imaging 
utilization in patient groups with a higher socioeconomic 
status.” 
 
[16:00] 
 
So even in a public system, we recognize that there’s some 
inequities when people have lower socio-economic status. 
There’s another study actually that states the same thing. I just 
will dig this out for you. 
 
So that was from the CMAJ. “Socioeconomic status and the 
utilization of diagnostic imaging in an urban setting” points to 
the fact that people with a . . . people even in a public system 
with a higher socio-economic background receive diagnostic 
testing. So I think opening this up to people being able to 
purchase it just is going to create even more inequity, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I’m going to find the other study. 
 
Actually I’m just going to point you to page 59 of the review 
that I was speaking of, the Health Services Preferential Access 
Inquiry. 
 

E. The issue of inferior access 
 
This inquiry is focused on whether people are getting 
improper preferential access to publicly funded health care. 
In other words, are people getting access that is superior to 
the norm? The events leading to the establishment of this 
inquiry, along with its terms of reference, meant that it did 
not focus on the other side of the preferential access issue: 
systemic barriers and discrimination that may result in 
access that is inferior to the norm. In both cases — 
preferential access and inferior access — the result detracts 
from the ideal of equitable access at the core of Canada’s 
approach to publicly funded health care. 
 

And so the Consumers’ Association of Alberta, in their 
submission, they argue, 
 

. . . that barriers to access to publicly funded health 
services are equal to if not more deserving of examination 
than preferential access. Several groups can be identified 
as facing some discrimination or systemic barriers to 
access in Alberta: 
 
Rural populations; 

 
I think the members opposite would be interested in hearing this 
piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that rural populations have 
inequitable access to health care, including MRI services, and 
I’ll get into that here in a moment. 
 

Individuals without family doctors, particularly individuals 
with complex medical issues; 
 
Individuals with addictions and/or mental health issues; 
 
The poor; 
 
The elderly; 
 
Individuals whose first language is not English; 
 
Those with hearing or vision loss or mobility issues; and 
 
First Nations communities. 

 
And generally, I’ll quote here from page 60: 
 

Generally, there is a strong correlation between 
socio-economic status and health outcomes: the lower the 
status, the poorer the health outcomes. There is also 
considerable evidence in Canada of the relationship 
between socio-economic status and health care utilization. 
The lower the income and education levels of individuals, 
the more likely they are to use health services at the 
primary level, while those with higher incomes and 
education levels tend to make greater use of the specialist 
services. 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7425 

They go on to point out that: 
 

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) . . . found that even in public health 
care systems . . . [like Canada’s], there are inequities in 
access due to socio-economic status. Individuals with 
higher income and education tend to wait less time for 
publicly funded hospital care than the less well-off and the 
less well-educated. 

 
So I think this is something we need to keep in mind here. So 
the fact is even in a public system, the system that we have right 
now, there are disparities between those who have lower 
socio-economic status and those who have higher 
socio-economic status. 
 
So I think that this is just opening up the door to further grow 
that disparity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I think is a problem. 
And the reality is when we talk about access to health services, 
it’s interesting. Canadian Doctors For Medicare, when we talk 
about access in rural Saskatchewan, the fact is every single one 
of these private clinics in other communities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is located outside of, or is not . . . These are all found 
in large centres where this is a population who will pay for 
those services. So I think that’s an interesting piece, that these 
centres or these MRI clinics are located in cities like . . . would 
be in Saskatoon or Regina or again making access for rural 
people a little bit more difficult. 
 
Some of the things that I’d like to point out is the poaching of 
staff. So it’s interesting in a place like Alberta. So what’s the 
problem? You’ve got more MRIs per cap, the second-highest 
number of MRIs per capita, and way higher, way higher 
wait-lists, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the reality is what often 
happens is poaching of the limited number of radiologists and 
technologists. That is the reality. We can look to different 
places. We can look actually to . . . I’m just going to find that 
here. 
 
There was a case in Manitoba actually that when they started 
using private MRIs there that the hospital MRIs, the wait-list 
grew because there were a lack of technologists. They moved 
over to the private system. I do in fact have that here. I’d like to 
speak to the Eroding Public Medicare: Lessons and 
Consequences of For-Profit Health Care Across Canada. This 
is from an October 6th, 2008 report, page 34: 
 

Eroding Public Capacity: Poaching Staff from Local 
Hospitals 
 
The experience of for-profit MRI/CT clinics in Canada 
yields very clear evidence of damage to the public 
non-profit hospital system as a consequence of 
privatization. For-profit clinics in Manitoba and Ontario 
have demonstrably caused reduction in MRI hours in 
nearby public non-profit hospitals as a result of recruiting 
radiologists and technologists out of the public facilities. In 
Ontario’s experiment with eight for-profit MRI/CT clinics 
in the early 2000s, three clinics were publicly reported to 
have lured technologists away from non-profit hospitals, 
forcing the hospitals to reduce their MRI hours. In 
Manitoba the poaching of radiologists caused a shortage at 
the nearby public hospital, forcing it to reduce its MRI 

hours. 
 
Simon Enoch actually also cites a case of poaching. There were 
technologists who were at a clinic in Calgary paid $10,000 
signing bonuses, so poaching is a reality. There are only so 
many radiologists and so many technologists to go around, so 
just because you open up a private MRI clinic doesn’t mean you 
have a plethora of people who can work there and provide the 
services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so that is a very real issue. 
 
The high costs of private MRIs, I’d just like to read this into the 
record. Again this is from Eroding Public Medicare: Lessons 
and Consequences of For-Profit Care Across Canada. 
 

High Costs 
 
Most for-profit MRI/CT clinics are located [this is, as I 
said, from 2008] in British Columbia and Quebec . . . 
followed by Alberta. Our interviews yield significant 
variance in the prices charged to patients by these clinics, 
but in all cases, the prices are out of reach for the average 
income resident. 

 
So just some recent numbers actually. Alberta MRI rates: 
routine brain scan, $895; brain and facial bones, 1,120; brain for 
tumour, 1,195; brain for stroke, 1,245; spine, 895; body, 895; 
abdomen, 1,095; whole body, 2,450. It’s interesting. Canadian 
Doctors for Medicare did a little bit of legwork. They did some 
calling around in 2008 and again last year on costs on MRIs in 
private clinics, and in fact the costs varied wildly from the 
lowest price at a private clinic of $800 in some areas, and some 
provinces to $3,000 or more as clinics charge the highest price 
they can. And the costs are higher than in public hospitals. So 
they point to a Trillium health study, a 2011 press release, just 
to get a sense of what a public MRI might cost. 
 
The Ontario Minister of Finance announced a grant of 800,000 
for one hospital to buy 3,120 additional MRI scans. So this 
means an average price per scan in a public hospital of $250. 
And that was compared to the Auditor General’s report on 
MRI/CT scans in 2006 that found a public scan was about $250 
from 2002 to 2007. So that cost hasn’t changed very much. But 
that is about $250 for a public scan, which I would argue is 
probably close to the same in Saskatchewan. And maybe with 
inflation it’s gone up a little bit to do it in the public system. If 
we want to be conservative, let’s say it’s $350 here in 
Saskatchewan to do a public scan, still far cheaper than the 
cheapest scan at $800, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one of the problems with that that I need to point out is that 
in a place like Alberta where they do, they have private clinics, 
so what happens, this is my understanding that this is what can 
happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I have a referral from a doctor, 
but I’m on a public wait list. And I’m not happy with the public 
wait list, so I get a referral to a doctor. I go to the private clinic 
and I get my scan. And as it turns out, the scan in my case 
yields something really, really damaging, a tumour or 
something like that. Then that person is eligible to claim that 
scan back or have that cost reimbursed. So the private system 
costs far more than the public system, so the person who is able 
to, and rightfully so . . . at that point discovers that they’ve got 
something really wrong with them, their MRI costs way more 
than had they got it in the public system. 



7426 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

So this should be about the public system streamlining, building 
capacity, and dealing with some of the wait-list issues. Because 
of course, if someone has a medically necessary scan and it 
shows something, they need to have that addressed. But that’s a 
huge issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ve talked about poaching radiologists and technologists. 
We’ve talked about the Alberta system with the higher 
wait-lists. And I think we’ve talked about the cost of private 
MRIs, that I think the two-for-one argument that this 
government is making is worth having a bit of a discussion 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So actually it’s interesting, the former president of the SMA 
[Saskatchewan Medical Association], Dalibor Slavik — Dr. 
Slavik, actually, who coincidentally enough used to be my 
doctor many years ago — one of the things that he said is, “The 
concern among the radiologists is that it’s going to be a 
two-for-one deal where they have to cover the cost.” And he 
goes on to point out that most people would rather get a cheaper 
scan in Alberta. So we’re setting up a system that we have no 
idea if it’s going to work. 
 
I need to point out that right now the private clinics in 
Saskatchewan already offer public scans. That’s what they do. 
So the scans they do for the public system are paid from the 
public purse. We do some contracting and it’s paid by the 
public purse. So the scans that they’re doing for the public right 
now are all paid for publicly. So you start doing a two-for-one, 
that means that the private system can do one less scan for the 
public system, the way that works, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As well I think you have a huge bureaucratic mess in terms of 
when we talk about streamlining wait-lists and figuring this out. 
How the heck is this going to work in practical terms? I think 
that the wait-list challenge is already struggling enough, let 
alone trying to figure out a way that patient X, who is paying 
for the private scan, and then the patient from the public system 
who needs their scan paid for, how do you know that they’re of 
equal illness or have the same condition? I think 
bureaucratically it is an absolute nightmare. 
 
I think the other piece that’s interesting is that in order for the 
private scans to make money for the companies coming in . . . 
Because that’s why companies want to open up MRI clinics 
here. They’re for-profit companies, and nobody begrudges 
anyone the opportunity to make a profit. But when it comes to 
health care, the reality is I think that there’s not a lot of room 
there. So you have private MRI companies who are going to 
have to figure out a way to make a profit. So the private MRIs 
are quite likely going to be quite expensive, which means 
people who have more money will pay for those, which means 
that the access for all of us will diminish again because of that 
there are limited number of technologists and radiologists. 
 
I think the other point about the two-for-one and paying . . . So 
let’s say a whole body scan is $2,450. I’m not saying that that’s 
what it’s going to be, but let’s say that’s what the scan is. And 
you have a sick child and you are not of great means, but you 
feel like waiting that time for your child to get the scan is not 
going to be appropriate. And you decide that you are going to 
try to either, well, put the money on your credit card, try to 
borrow money. People shouldn’t be in a position to have to 

access health care by stretching themselves thin. We’ve seen 
what happens to people in the United States, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So the reality is there will be people of means who 
will access these private MRIs, but there will also be people 
who cannot afford it because of the stress and anxiety, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
It’s funny. The members opposite are heckling something about 
the public system and creating more space. I can’t exactly hear 
what they’re saying, but the reality is, the evidence shows the 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The evidence shows exactly the 
opposite, that the public system isn’t enhanced at all by private 
MRIs.  
 
So I remember last year I had a brief conversation, I think 
actually via text, with the Health minister. And I said, you 
know, show me some evidence. I’m a big believer in 
evidence-based policy. Show me some evidence that this will 
work. And I’m a reasonable person. I think the opposition is 
reasonable. If it was a reasonable, evidence-based decision, we 
could get behind it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the reality is the 
evidence is not there for private MRIs. Quite the opposite, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we have all kinds of issues around the cost. The cost is part 
of the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact that people will 
take on debt when they can’t . . . the fact . . . Oh, you know, I 
haven’t talked about queue jumping. That is a very . . . That is 
the reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when I think about queue 
jumping, I’m thinking less about the people who are spending 
their money to get in line and more about how that impacts 
everybody else who can’t spend the money. But our health care 
system is premised on the notion of equitable access and of 
good-quality health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the reality 
is, you might create two lines for MRIs, but there is only one 
line for surgery and treatment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only one 
line for surgery and treatment. 
 
So again going back to the Alberta review, they said it 
themselves, that yes, this creates disparities. And you get your 
private MRI; it allows you to get into the publicly funded 
system more quickly. So why don’t we just fix it for everybody, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why don’t we fix this for everybody with 
evidence-based policy if we . . . Again fixing the wait-list issue, 
one of the things that Romanow pointed out, Mr. Romanow 
pointed out. So again it’s about capacity and organization of 
wait-lists. He points out that there’s often a lack of 
coordination. There’s few rules about who gets on the list. 
There’s no serious auditing of the list, if people are on the list 
appropriately or should be taken off. 
 
Let’s put our focus, instead of on debating an MRI bill and 
passing an MRI bill, let’s put our focus on fixing those 
wait-lists and how they’re administered, and making sure that 
people have access and an understanding of when they’ll get 
their diagnostic so they can then get their treatment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s hugely problematic. 
 
I would like to . . . I think a person who says this far more 
eloquently than I do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Tom McIntosh. He 
wrote quite a fabulous Twitter essay regarding private MRIs. 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7427 

And you know, let’s talk about . . . I just would like to put this 
on the record. He points out that: 
 

#skpoli has approximately 5,000 people waiting for MRIs 
currently delivered in two sites (soon to be three) in the 
province. 
 
We know that simply opening up private . . . MRIs doesn’t 
reduce wait times in the public system (Alta has both 
private MRIs and longer waits). 
 
Gov’t proposes that if the individual buys MRI privately 
and one for person on a public list then the wait [list] will 
shrink. 
 
But they offer no evidence that this will work. There is no 
jurisdiction that has tried this, so it is at best an assumption. 
 
And, I think, it is an assumption that is based on a number 
of faulty premises which I will discuss in turn. 
 
It assumes that the reason for the wait times must be that 
we’re not “buying” enough MRIs in the public system. 
 
Their proposal, in effect, is to have wealthy individuals buy 
more MRIs for the public system rather than have the gov’t 
do it. 
 
Yet all wait time evidence I’ve seen (I’ve done the research 
on this myself) [he says] shows that “throwing money” at 
wait times doesn’t work. 
 
This indicates that “we’re not spending enough” is rarely 
the cause of waits for diagnostics, surgeries or other 
services. 
 
Thus, solution to wait times lies in other areas — capacity 
(both technological and human) and organizational issues 
in the system. 
 
Nothing the government proposes would solve those issues 
and might actually make them worse. 

 
Like in Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He goes on to say: 

 
It isn’t evident that there is a surplus of qualified personnel 
to operate these machines just waiting to move into the 
system. 
 
Which means they would likely, in the first instance, come 
from the public system and thus reduce capacity there. 

 
And we did see this in other jurisdictions, in Manitoba and in 
Ontario, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where there was poaching. He 
goes on: 
 

Could we train more? Yes. In time. We’re training pretty 
much at capacity now and health care training is not a tap. 
 
You can’t just turn it on and off at will. Building increased 
training capacity takes time and (mostly public) resources. 
 
Could we import more people? Yes we can. Assuming 

they’re out there and qualified. 
 
But there are also ethical issues raised by such a move. 
We’re asking other jurisdictions (countries) to solve our 
problem. 

 
And as well, other provincial jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which is what Manitoba and Ontario found. Mr. McIntosh goes 
on: 
 

Western gov’ts have repeatedly been asked to quit the 
active recruitment of scarce human resources from 
developing nations. 
 
So at least we have to confront the issue of where the 
human resources will come from in both the short and 
longer term. 
 
There are other issues raised by this proposal as well. At 
the forefront of course is the idea of queue jumping. 

 
While queue jumping already exists in parts of the system 
. . . this would certainly increase it. 
 
That the system already has a queue jumping problem is 
not a rationale in my view to make it worse. 

 
The principle of “need not ability to pay” remains key to 
our commitment to medicare & is a cornerstone of public 
support for it. 
 
This proposal is now saying that ability to pay (and pay 
twice) will get you better preferential access to the system. 
 
The claim is that the rich have to take a poor person along 
with them so it’s all for the good — indeed it’s altruistic. 
 
But it comes back to the assertion that underlies the 
proposal, that this is a “not enough money” problem. 
 
But, again, there’s no evidence to suggest that the lack of 
spending on MRIs is what is causing the public waits. 
 
And lots of evidence to suggest that the problem lies 
elsewhere in how we organize the delivery of services. 
 
Ironically, if lean is supposed to teach us anything it is that 
how one organizes the system matters. 
 
But for some reason gov’t is now not looking at 
organizational solutions and instead just throwing (private) 
money at the problem. 
 
It’s ill-thought out, lacks an evidence base and, like past 
money throwing instances, likely to make things worse. 

 
So none of those are good things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
none of those are the things that we should be talking about, 
like none. We should not be talking about doing this in health 
care right now. 
 
We should be talking about the real issues in health care: 
specialist waits, crowded ERs. The wait at the General in 



7428 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

Regina is 4.5 hours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you’ve ever gone to 
the emergency room with a sick child, you know that that is not 
an acceptable wait time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seniors’ care — 
these are all things we should be talking about rather than an 
ill-conceived idea that came out in a premier’s tweet a year ago, 
and then they fleshed it out. Lord only knows how, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because they didn’t bring it forward in the fall, and 
then it was hastily brought forward at the end of the spring 
session, which is highly unusual, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What we should be talking about is the things that really matter 
in health care to people. And instead again I will give this 
government the benefit of the doubt, but I think this is . . . Is 
this evidence-based policy? I would argue that the evidence 
isn’t there. We can look at other jurisdictions. Or is this purely 
political in motive? And if it is purely political in motive, that is 
not the way public policy should be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That is not the way public policy should be made. 
 
It’s interesting. There’s a really great article by Dr. Ryan Meili 
who this government, actually in the government’s last Throne 
Speech, actually listed him and named him in their last Throne 
Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it came to the anti-poverty 
strategy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Dr. Meili’s done great work 
through Upstream, a think tank that is meant to put forward 
some really positive ideas. He’s worked very hard. He knows in 
health care that the disparities in health care are about the social 
determinants of health. He sees that in his practice at the West 
Side Community Clinic. 
 
But it’s ironic because this government was very happy to 
actually . . . I’d never seen that before, someone actually named 
in the Throne Speech, like an individual named in the Throne 
Speech. There were a few in last year’s Throne Speech. But 
they liked what he had to say on anti-poverty work, but don’t 
seem to like what he has to say about MRIs. I think it would be 
worth maybe, when he’s meeting with the Minister of Social 
Services to talk about his anti-poverty work, maybe he could 
tag in the Minister of Health to talk about MRIs and where the 
evidence is. 
 
One of the things that he points out is that, in an op-ed that he 
wrote on October 28, 2014, he says: 
 

There are ways of improving access to MRIs that don’t 
undermine the principles of or confidence in the public 
system. Imaging is one of the most overused elements of 
our health care system. A 2013 study of MRI use in 
Alberta show that over half of low-back MRI scans in 
Alberta hospital were not appropriate. Working to promote 
rational use of technology is one way to make sure it is 
available for those who need it most. Expanded hours of 
use, training programs for personnel and the number of 
machines in the public system is another. Anyone can learn 
from their own mistakes; a true leader learns from the 
mistakes of others. 

 
I want to say that last part again because I think that that’s 
something worth quoting again. Dr. Ryan Meili writes, 
“Anyone can learn from their own mistakes; a true leader learns 
from the mistakes of others.” And there have been many 
mistakes in other jurisdictions when it comes to private MRIs 
that have seen increased cost, poaching of services, which 

means access for most of us diminishes where a few get 
improved health access. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate that we’re 
having this debate right now. I think that there’s many things in 
health care that we should be discussing that really are front and 
centre in the minds of individuals. I wouldn’t diminish people 
who are waiting a long time for an MRI, that their needs are 
important, but I do know that there’s other ways of fixing that 
system. It’s about capacity and organizational structure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Maybe the Health minister, maybe the Health 
minister should read the Romanow report. I wonder if he’s done 
that. And maybe the Fyke report as well. Those are actually 
quite good and helpful documents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
For the record, I don’t think this is a debate that we should be 
having. We should be talking about things that are front and 
centre in the minds of people. Again benefit of the doubt that 
they think that the evidence is there, but I have a sneaking 
suspicion that this might be politically motivated. And that’s 
not how public policy should be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I look forward to the opportunity in committee to try to 
flesh out some of the . . . I know that I will have many 
questions, as will my colleague from Regina Lakeview, and 
others probably as well when we get to committee. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’ll have an opportunity to ask some more 
detailed questions. I appreciate the opportunity to weigh in on 
the debate now, and with that I’d like to conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 179, The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
committee of Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 183 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7429 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter debate here briefly this afternoon on Bill No. 
183, the essential services amendment Act, The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, you know, it seems that some level of reason with 
government has finally prevailed after a long reign of just 
nonsensical behaviour and waste and malicious actions that 
attacked workers’ rights and wasted a whole bunch of money 
and was just a really wasteful, ideological process of this 
government. 
 
I do want to say that I want to thank all members of the 
committee that worked to bring this bill together and to shape 
this bill. Certainly we’ll be engaged in, you know, broader 
consultation with this bill and ensuring we understand all detail 
and all consequences of that bill, intended or unintended. 
Certainly it seems to be getting to a lot more reasonable place, 
of course, than it’s been. 
 
You know, in many ways this has been an embarrassing debacle 
for this government and for this Premier who had promised one 
thing before an election in 2007 and then came out and did 
something entirely different and was incredibly reckless in his 
ideological agenda, where he attacked workers’ rights, some of 
their fundamental constitutional rights, Mr. Speaker, and with 
that reckless approach has wasted a whole lot of taxpayers’ 
money, Mr. Speaker. And we know this Premier has no 
problem, it seems, unfortunately, wasting taxpayers’ money. 
We see it on front after front. But to do so, to attack the workers 
of this province and their rights, Mr. Speaker, is shameful. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And you know, it was an embarrassing debacle that stretched 
out as dollars have been wasted. And now the taxpayers, I 
understand, are also going to be on the hook, because of the 
reckless actions of this Premier, to pay dollars back out to 
labour organizations and unions as well, Mr. Speaker, because a 
whole bunch of wasted energy and money has been caught up 
in this process. 
 
I would want to commend some Saskatchewan people and 
workers who rallied together a small group and said, this is 
wrong, and who said, this is wrong from a constitutional 
perspective. And they put together that fight. And despite 
having a large, stubborn majority in this Assembly who wasn’t 
willing to listen to reason on the floor of this Assembly as the 
opposition and members of this Assembly fought this 
unreasonable, unconstitutional bill, Mr. Speaker, they took up 
the battle and exercised their rights and took on the hard work 
and did the research and had a hard-fought win for workers here 
in Saskatchewan and right across the country. And I think it’s 
an example again of that spirit of Saskatchewan: people who 
are ready to do their part, to roll up their sleeves, and to protect 
what’s right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I commend those individuals who came together as they had 
a right wing government come in and break its promise and 
bring forward a reckless, unconstitutional bill, Mr. Speaker, and 

for those individuals to take on that battle. 
 
You know, I also know . . . I remember those debates well. And 
I remember the effort of the opposition in working with 
stakeholders and bringing forward the debate in this Assembly. 
And you know, I commend those members that were intimately 
engaged in taking on that debate at the time, that put a lot of, a 
tremendous amount of energy and care into that bill when that 
reckless unconstitutional bill was brought forward. And I think 
of some of those members like Andy Iwanchuk, and Sandra 
Morin for that matter, Mr. Speaker, who were both fully 
invested in that process. And I know for them that’s a chapter of 
their life where they worked incredibly hard to challenge an 
unconstitutional bill. 
 
Of course we’ve continued to see those efforts by all members 
of the official opposition, and I’d want to recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre who’s continued to push for certainly 
human rights and workers’ rights and has been there every step 
of the way to ensure that we fix this legislation, ensure that we 
protect the public of course, but that we protect workers’ rights, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s sad to see that this has sort of become the 
approach on too many fronts of the current government — ram 
forward with an ideological agenda, not consult with 
stakeholders, not think of the consequences, not think of the 
waste of taxpayers’ dollars that they’re creating, Mr. Speaker — 
and you know, an approach that has increasingly on more and 
more fronts been noted by Saskatchewan people to defy 
common sense and sort of defy those very Saskatchewan values 
of working together and making sure that decisions we’re 
making today are in the best interests of families and 
communities today and well into the future. 
 
And as I say, it’s a sad and sorry debacle that this right wing 
Premier pushed Saskatchewan into in a reckless way. This bill 
is, you know, certainly his legacy. But the hard-fought win 
needs to be there directly with the workers and the people and 
the organizations who took on and challenged, you know, a bill, 
a law that was brought forward that attacked the rights of 
working people. And we know that’s sort of within the . . . that 
approach is, you know, sort of deep values within that party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think if you look across Canada, if you look across 
Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan people and Canadians are 
rejecting that old, tired, conservative, right wing approach, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that you see it, you know, within our country 
just this last week that Saskatchewan people aren’t interested in 
the reckless, ideological, right wing games of these kind of old, 
tired, conservative-type parties, Mr. Speaker, as we see with 
members opposite. 
 
And so I’m heartened on that front, Mr. Speaker, that we know 
that as we work for a more common sense approach, when we 
push for an agenda that’s going to serve us today and for the 
future and going to be respectful of the hard-earned dollars of 
taxpayers and serve the priorities of Saskatchewan people and 
yes, respect human rights and workers’ rights, we know that the 
majority of Saskatchewan people and Canadians are strongly in 
support of that agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 



7430 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

So at this point in time, I don’t have a whole bunch of other 
comments with this bill. You know, I’ve certainly spoke often 
on this bill in this Assembly. Some members of this Assembly 
have spent hours upon hours upon hours trying to get 
government to see the light on this, to see how wrong their 
approach was. It’s unfortunate that government wouldn’t listen. 
They wouldn’t listen to experts. They wouldn’t listen to 
workers. They wouldn’t listen to the opposition, and they 
rammed forward with this law, Mr. Speaker. And then it took 
the Supreme Court of Canada to strike down this 
unconstitutional law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I say, you know, it seems that we are at a much more 
reasonable place with this piece of legislation. Certainly we’ll 
do some more consultation on this front, Mr. Speaker, and you 
know, certainly I thank all those individuals who came together 
on the committee of late, Mr. Speaker, to contribute and ensure 
we got to a reasonable place that protects the public and 
protects workers’ rights. 
 
So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate for Bill 
No. 183. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 183, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 184 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 184 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 184, An Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. This bill is somewhat 
lengthy but I think what I need to do is remind people what 
we’re dealing with here. The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Act is technically an insurance contract that is legislation. And 
so what happens is, if you buy insurance from another insurance 
company, you would get a lengthy contract or you would get a 
reference to something on a website which has hundreds of 
pages, and there’s not much that you can do about it to change 
any clauses in that contract. 
 
Now one of the advantages we have in Saskatchewan because 
we own, as citizens we own our own insurance company, is that 
we have that contract in legislation which gets discussed here in 
this Chamber. And so, Mr. Speaker, this automobile accident 
insurance Act is one of the pieces of the type of legislation that 
deals with particular issues as it relates to motor vehicles and 
related types of insurance. And so the ability to change some of 
the clauses within our “insurance contract” in Saskatchewan 

includes lobbying the minister, the government, members of the 
legislature around changes that people want to take place in the 
legislation. 
 
And so the bill we have today comes as a result of a fairly 
extensive lobby in response to some changes in the fees that our 
government insurance company was charging for motorcycles. 
And basically the response was that the fees that were being 
charged for people who drove motorcycles were increasing so 
dramatically that it was making it very difficult for many people 
who obviously enjoyed riding motorcycles to get them insured. 
 
And so this discussion is interesting because it relates to a 
specific class, if I can use that term that’s in our legislation 
which is also our contract, of motor vehicle. And SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is a good insurance 
company with professionals of many types examining the 
legislation and examining the policies around how the contract 
should be implemented, analyzed. And said, in the class of 
motorcycles, the amount of damages that we’re paying both for 
damage to physical things — so the actual motorcycle itself and 
maybe things that a motorcycle might hit in an accident, and 
probably more importantly, the actual damage to people who 
have been riding motorcycles or riding motorcycles as 
passengers — were not . . . 
 
Basically the review showed that they were not collecting, or 
we or SGI was not collecting enough money from the premiums 
for the people who were buying that kind of insurance to 
actually pay for the costs of the people that were, as a result of 
people riding motorcycles. And so when that happens, 
internally there’s a process to increase the fees. And so that 
came about in a way that surprised many riders of motorcycles. 
 
And it’s possible . . . I don’t know the whole history. I used to 
be the minister of SGI many years ago so I understand the 
process, but I don’t know the exact timing over the last few 
years. But clearly this was not maybe dealt with on an annual 
basis, but then all of a sudden the gap was between the amount 
of the policy fees collected and the amount that was being paid 
out for damages, both physical and also damages to individuals, 
to people, was much greater than what was being collected in 
insurance fees. And so a decision was made, well, we’re going 
to have to figure out a way to rebalance those fees or get the 
fees back into a position where they’re actually paying for the 
costs. 
 
And this, because our insurance contract is a piece of legislation 
which gets dealt with in the legislature at the instance of one of 
the ministers of the Crown, it becomes a political issue. So what 
we saw was a whole number of people who said, well, this isn’t 
fair to us because you’re making such big increases in the price 
that we can’t afford to keep riding motorcycles that we bought 
with our hard-earned money. Sometimes people didn’t have a 
lot of money but they, you know, bought their motorcycles. 
And so they said, we don’t accept this. And so there were some 
fairly strong protests right across the province. 
 
The result, as the minister says in his second reading speech, 
which I know it is quite short given the import of this, said that 
these kinds of things came as a result of the discussion that 
arose out of the protests. And as a result, the whole area was 
sent to the review committee or to a committee that was set up 



October 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7431 

to specifically look at this. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And so one of the options discussed was not, how do we 
continue with relatively, I think, good coverage for motorcycle 
drivers, good insurance coverage, and make sure that we 
actually collect the appropriate amount of fees? The discussion 
got into a point where okay, how can we have lower insurance 
fees for motorcycle riders and people that own motorcycles? 
 
And clearly one of the options to change the insurance fees is to 
reduce the amount of coverage. Now that’s not always an 
advisable thing to do, and I think the minister actually 
referenced in his second reading speech that one of their 
members of their injury review panel had . . . I’ll quote him 
directly; this is on page 7384: 
 

One of our injury review committee members had himself 
been seriously injured in a motorcycle collision, and he had 
made the point very strongly that people shouldn’t make 
the choice with their wallets. He makes it a very valid 
argument, Mr. Speaker, and I just want to convey that to 
the Assembly today. 

 
That’s a quote from the minister. I reference that because even 
within the structure of the injury review group, and in the words 
of the minister who, as we all know has a long history of 
dealing with traffic safety issues, both before he became a 
politician and now subsequently in various roles that he’s had, 
there’s a strong recommendation that this type of watered down 
insurance, which this legislation will introduce, is not really the 
best option for these motorcycle riders. And it’s almost as if the 
legislation is being brought forward with a bit of a hesitation or, 
well I don’t really want to do this. But if you want some 
cheaper insurance, we can do it, and we’ll bring forward this 
proposal that we have today. 
 
And so what we have then is insurance that’s being brought 
forward to give more choices in coverage to motorcycle owners, 
and the choices are less coverage for a lower cost, even though 
clearly the minister says, I don’t recommend that you buy this 
because you’re going to have less coverage. 
 
Now what do we do when that’s the type of recommendation 
that comes forward from the minister? I think we need to look 
pretty carefully at the underlying policy that is here, because I 
think we’re all proud in Saskatchewan that our motor vehicle 
insurance coverage is quite comprehensive and it has the ability 
for people to buy supplementary insurance to add on to the 
basic package. 
 
But what this insurance appears to be doing is allowing for 
there to be a reduction in coverage for a very specific class or 
small group of people within the overall system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it may be a short-term fix for people who are in this 
category that allows them to get some cheaper insurance. It has 
the, I guess, the political sort of cachet that allows for 
motorcyclists to have further choice on injury cover at a lower 
rate. But it begs the question of whether this is a good thing to 
do. 
 
Now traditionally, our insurance for vehicles in Saskatchewan 

has had common coverage at a basic rate with then the ability to 
add supplemental coverage. My sense of this as I’ve looked at it 
is that this is saying, well everybody else has a certain rate of 
coverage, but if you’ve got a motorcycle, you can get a little 
cheaper one that covers less. And that’s okay. 
 
Now what happens if another group comes and says, well we all 
drive, you know, Chev pickup trucks and we think they’re 
pretty tough cars and we don’t get as many injuries and so we 
are paying too much insurance; we should pay a little less? Well 
all of a sudden you’ve got another group that says, well give us 
another package that maybe more accurately reflects our area. 
What we know internally, in SGI they look at all of the different 
categories that any insurance company looks at. And they’ve 
made — and we have made as legislators over many decades — 
the choice to say we’re going to have common coverage. 
 
The biggest example of where that applies relates to our young 
people. We know that if you’re under 30 years old in 
Saskatchewan, your car or vehicle insurance rates are going to 
be probably some of the best in the country. Manitoba might be 
close, but when we go and compare them to some other areas, 
they’re very good rates. And people then try to retain their 
Saskatchewan residence so they can have this kind of coverage 
as they travel around North America. 
 
But we also know that there are other categories of drivers, say 
the plus 50s or plus 60-year-old people, who pay a little more to 
cover the cost for those young people. And we have made a 
decision as a society that that’s what we’re going to do. That’s 
not the same choice that’s made in every jurisdiction in North 
America, and we need to recognize that. 
 
One of the questions I have is whether this kind of adjusting 
with the limits, adjusting with the coverage that’s happening in 
this particular piece of legislation, isn’t the thin edge of the 
wedge into a whole number of categories where there will be 
special considerations. And I think that’s something that needs 
to be thought about and discussed, because we have had a 
situation where we’ve had good coverage for people who are 
injured, for damage that takes place in motor vehicle accidents, 
and we’ve been I think well treated in that area. And so 
anything that somehow messes up that overall principle and that 
system of providing the coverage for our Saskatchewan people 
needs to be examined very, very carefully. 
 
It reminds me a bit of the discussion that’s happening in the 
United States right now as it relates to health insurance 
coverage. And basically there’s a recognition that health 
policies for families, for individuals in the United States, have 
certain standards that they have to meet, including some form of 
portability or the ability that you don’t lose your insurance 
because of some catastrophic kind of illness or things like that. 
But what’s happened is that there’s been a whole proliferation 
of insurance policies that are called insurance policies, but they 
might have huge deductibles. You know, you might not be able 
to get any coverage for the first $10,000 or whatever, or more. 
Or there’s other ways that the insurance companies cover how 
they do that and how they provide the coverage. 
 
And this is the basic tenet of how insurance works — it’s been 
for centuries — is that you assess the risk of the pool of people 
that you’re covering and then you deal with it. What happens is, 



7432 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2015 

as long as that pool is large and covers a whole number of kinds 
of risk, you can keep your rates relatively straightforward and 
relatively reasonable. But this bill starts us into a discussion of, 
okay, well those motorcycle fees are going to be adjusted in a 
way to recognize that, well, we’re not totally covering the costs 
there. But rather than work out a method of increasing the fees 
to actually cover the costs so that people have good coverage in 
case of an accident, what’s being done is that the coverage is 
being reduced. 
 
Now clearly there is a political problem for the minister and for 
the Premier. And they’ve come up with a political solution 
that’s couched in lots of words, but I think ultimately it’s that 
principle that we’re talking about here of, how do we share the 
risk? How do we cover the risk for our citizens in the province? 
 
Now another way to do it would be to say, well in 
Saskatchewan driving a motorcycle is beyond an ordinary 
person’s ability to use it, and we’ll charge whatever fees are 
necessary to cover those kind of costs. And I think that there are 
some ways of dealing with that, but I think a way that in some 
way it impacts the overall system of coverage that we have, that 
kind of a perspective is wrong. 
 
And so when you look at the legislation itself, you know that 
they’ve worked hard to limit this kind of a change to the group 
that’s involved. And so it says, motorcycle . . . If we look at 
page 1 of the bill under the sort of the definitions section, it says 
in 3(1)(f): 
 

by adding the following clauses after clause (aa): 
 

“(aa.1) ‘motorcycle’ means a motorcycle as defined in 
the regulations. 

 
Well we don’t quite know what that means because we don’t 
have the regulations obviously. It’s not as good as the other Act 
I had the other day where I had draft regulations so I could talk 
forever. But this one, we don’t have those regulations. 
 
But then in the same one, they’ve added another definition 
which is under section 3(1)(f)(aa.2). The term: 
 

‘motorcycle election’ means a written election made by a 
Saskatchewan resident that complies with the requirements 
of Part II.1”. 

 
And this gets us into this question of how you then make sure 
that people know that they’re making an election, that they’re 
making a choice that actually means they have less coverage. 
And what any lawyer who is working on this knows is that if a 
person signs up for this cheap insurance and thinks it’s just 
cheap insurance, they need to be reminded that it’s actually 
cheap insurance because it doesn’t provide you the same 
coverage as you had last year. And that becomes a major issue I 
think for all of us, because when the coverage isn’t totally there, 
it goes back into our health care system and it’s provided 
through our public health system. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are a whole number of 
choices in this legislation which need to be more fully 
explained. I had expected to see some of these policy choices 
being set out by the minister so that we could actually 

understand where the choices have been made and why they’ve 
been made. 
 
I think that it’s showing up this fall because they don’t want 
protests from motorcycle riders in next spring’s election. And I 
think that’s the wrong way to do legislation. I think it’s 
legislation that is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to continue talking next week 
because I think this type of legislation is a sign of trying to do a 
patchwork on something that’s really, really important, and I 
don’t think that’s what we should be doing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:01.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7402 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7402 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7402 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Opening of the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7402 
 Saskatchewan Library Week 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7403 
 Women’s History Month 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7403 
 North Central Community Bison Feast 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7403 
 Highway 22 Construction Completed 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7403 
 Fundraiser For Leader Health Facility 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7404 
 Institute of Public Administration of Canada Awards 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7404 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Funding for Seniors’ Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7404 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7404 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7406 
 Construction and Maintenance Agreements in Public-Private Partnerships 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7408 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7408 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7408 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7409 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7409 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7409 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7411 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7414 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7415 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7421 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7428 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7429 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7430 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


