
























































Hansard: March 18, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 18, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6591 
 March 18, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
make a statement regarding a clarification. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to make a 
statement regarding clarification. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Community-Training Residence Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
provided information to this Assembly regarding the 
community-training residence, based on information I had 
received from officials. The information I have received was 
incorrect. I have since learned that there will be or are violent 
offenders and sex offenders at the community-training 
residence. As a result of this new information, Mr. Speaker, and 
the community concerns, I have directed my ministry that 
Dale’s House will not be used for the community-training 
residence program. The community-training residence will 
remain in its current location. 
 
I apologize to the Assembly, and I would like to thank all the 
community members who reached out and raised their concerns 
to us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we have a 
great number of guests with us today in the Legislative 
Assembly, and so we won’t be introducing all of them or any of 
them individually, but I do want to welcome them on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, on behalf of members on this 
side of the House, welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 
for budget day. 
 
Many of the people here are representing other groups in the 
province, stakeholders, third parties that deliver important 
services across Saskatchewan, that deliver important services to 
the disabled, that deliver services in health care, who provide 
education across the province, who provide post-secondary 
education, who provide local leadership and stewardship for our 
municipalities both rural and urban. And so we’re grateful that 
they’re here. 
 
This budget that will be presented represents a partnership, and 
we’re grateful for their presence here, but more importantly for 

their ongoing partnership in delivering what we would . . . what 
we all aspire to, which is the best possible quality of life in a 
growing province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask through you to all members of the Assembly that they 
would join with me in welcoming all of our guests to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to join in and welcome all 
of the guests that are here in the Chamber and at the Assembly 
today, Mr. Speaker. And I’m saying that not just because we 
enjoy having a few more people sitting on this side of the 
House for one day, Mr. Speaker, but I’m saying that because of 
what the Premier appropriately points out, that in this Chamber 
we have a real cross-section of the province — folks involved 
in business, in the arts, education, health care, and so many 
other sectors. 
 
And I know everyone in this room, Mr. Speaker, believes in the 
potential of this great province and loves it dearly, and that’s 
why they’re here today. So on behalf of the official opposition, 
I welcome all guests here to the Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of education. And we 
know that education is one of the most vital services the 
government provides to its citizens and that this government has 
failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 
resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. 
And we know that we must build the best education system for 
today and for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the prayer, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources that 
provides the best quality of education for Saskatchewan, 
that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, that builds strong educational infrastructure to serve 
students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people presenting this petition are from Moose 
Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise once again to present petitions on behalf of concerned 
residents as it relates to the unsafe conditions created on 
Dewdney Avenue by this government and their failure to 
respond and ensure safety for residents and users. And the 



6592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and in 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty and skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is supported by many northern leaders and 
signed by hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of northern 
residents. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term 
care are deteriorating under this government; that the 
Government of Saskatchewan needs to recognize the need for 
safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents; that 
the government has removed the regulations requiring a 
minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in neglect; and 
that chronic understaffing in long-term care facilities results in 
unacceptable conditions including unanswered calls for help, 
infrequent bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst 
residents. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to commit to the 
creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team, and to reintroduce actual numbers of 

safe staffing to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from folks from across the 
province: Swift Current, Abbey, Stewart Valley, Regina, La 
Ronge, Cupar, Esterhazy, Prince Albert, Big River, Saskatoon, 
Warman, Gull Lake, Morse, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Weyburn, 
Ponteix, Mankota, Martensville, and other places as well. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured today to rise to 
present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 
individuals who have signed this petition want to bring to the 
attention of the Assembly the following: that Saskatchewan 
produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 
of Canada and that the Saskatchewan government has failed to 
tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the province’s own 
targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural environment. 
Since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced 
climate change funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per 
cent cut in the 2014-15 budget. I’d like to read the prayer. It 
goes: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions were signed by folks from Spruce 
Home, Prince Albert, Macdowall, Regina, Moose Jaw, and 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Miller Comprehensive High School Makerspace Program 
 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Teaching 
innovative thinking in our classrooms is something that is often 
easier said than done, but the makerspace program at Regina’s 
Miller Comprehensive High School seems to be doing just that. 
 
Reminiscent of an early tech start-up in the Silicon Valley, 
makerspace is a room filled with 3-D printers, motion-sensing 
computers, Arduino electronics, and various robotics. Available 
to students grades 9 through 12, makerspace was opened by 
Miller teacher Jodi Wilton at the end of January. Up to 20 
students can be in the room at one time, and students are free to 
tinker with whatever project or piece of equipment they want. 
Various classes can access the room throughout the day, as can 
school clubs and other groups outside of regular school hours. 
 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6593 

Mr. Speaker, we all remember the days when computer science 
was on the forefront of innovation. Teachers like Jodi Wilton 
have brought innovation back to the classroom, letting the 
students choose to learn what interests them the most. Mr. 
Speaker, student success is about student engagement. This, Mr. 
Speaker, is 21st-century student engagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating Jodi Wilton and her colleagues at Miller 
Comprehensive High School for pushing the boundaries and 
truly providing opportunities that engage the next generation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Seizing an Opportunity 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve all heard stories of people 
who win the lottery or inherit a big fortune, and just a few short 
years later there’s not too much to show for it. Oh sure, they 
know they’ve spent a lot of money because it’s almost all gone. 
But then they look around; they can’t really see where all the 
money went. 
 
That’s a bit like this government. It inherited a fortune and a 
strong economy, but it’s been spending up a storm. But so many 
people from Saskatchewan haven’t felt the benefits of all that 
spending. People are waiting far too long in emergency rooms, 
and they’re crammed into hospital hallways. We keep hearing 
about a quality of seniors’ care that is far from acceptable, and 
our kids’ classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced. 
 
Despite record revenues, this government hasn’t invested 
wisely in health care or seniors’ care or education. It hasn’t 
saved a single penny for the future, and it sure hasn’t invested 
properly in things like renewable power or our cultural sector. 
So no wonder more and more families are wondering where all 
the money went. They’re feeling the cost of living squeeze but 
they haven’t experienced the benefits of this government’s 
massive spending. 
 
In today’s budget this government has an opportunity to get its 
priorities straight, to cut spending on its own wasteful projects, 
and to start focusing on what really matters to Saskatchewan 
families today. We hope this government seizes this opportunity 
because we believe it’s never enough to simply have the 
province doing well. We should always ensure that people and 
families are doing well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Preschool Program Treats Symptoms of Autism 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to recognize some of our guests seated in the gallery for 
their outstanding work with preschoolers with autism. I recently 
met with parents who have their children in the Little Tots 
program in Saskatoon. They told me about the 12 preschoolers 
attending Little Tots, an applied behaviour analysis preschool 
that provides 20 hours of programming a week. 
 

This program, that is completely tailored to each child, makes 
sure that each child gets what they need for treatment. I had the 
opportunity to talk with some of these parents and they have 
noticed a huge difference in their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no cure for autism and it is a lifelong 
disorder, but symptoms are definitely treatable. These 12 
preschoolers are being taught fine motor skills, language and 
communication, socialization, and self-help skills. All of these 
skills are broken down into simple steps, making it easier for 
the child to follow along and learn in a way that works for 
them. 
 
This government believes that programs such as the Little Tots 
will give our children the best start in life. That is why this 
government has increased funding for autism support by 1,400 
per cent since 2007. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members 
join me in thanking Kelly, Brandy, and Janine for their amazing 
work with the Little Tots program in Saskatoon. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Budget Suggestions 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition New 
Democrats have been pushing this government to diversify our 
economy. Our natural resources are a gift, but we can’t keep 
putting so many of our eggs in just one basket. We need more 
eggs and more baskets. We need to encourage growth in 
knowledge-based fields like research, science and technology, 
and in arts and culture including film and television. 
 
We’re grateful that this government changed its mind and 
agreed to support the legislation put forward by the Leader of 
the Opposition for a monthly Buy Local Day. We hope this 
government will also change its mind on the bill put forward by 
our Deputy Leader which would fix this government’s 
procurement policy so that Saskatchewan businesses don’t keep 
losing out to out-of-province corporations. We want this 
government to restore our film employment tax credit, and we 
want them to finally get serious about education and training 
opportunities for First Nations and Métis people because we 
know the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] economists say 
that we’re missing out on a $90 billion economic opportunity 
by failing to do that. 
 
These are a few tangible steps that this government could take 
today to boost and diversify our economy and to ensure that our 
prosperity is sustainable over the long term. We hope they’ll do 
that today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Community Connections Celebrates Cultures 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. On March 15th, my colleague, 
the member from Regina Northeast, and I were able to attend 
our fourth Community Connections annual event held at the 
Glencairn Neighbourhood Rec Centre, celebrating the growing 
multicultural character of Regina. This year’s event was titled 



6594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

This is Our Community a Celebration of Cultures. 
 
Community Connections began in 2012 with the Government 
of Saskatchewan Ministry of Advanced Education, 
Employment and Immigration Community Connections grant 
program. The Regina Public Library used this grant to partner 
with the Regina Open Door Society, the Dewdney East 
Community Association, and members of the community to 
create the first Community Connections event. With hundreds 
of people in attendance, the event offers a fun afternoon of free, 
family-friendly, multicultural performances by local artists and 
performers, ethnic food, and a chance to meet and visit with 
neighbours. Community Connections is known for attracting 
citizens from across the city, and many in attendance are brand 
new to our country. Mr. Speaker, events like Community 
Connections are continuing to make our community strong and 
our newcomers feel welcome. 
 
I’d ask all members in this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating all the hard-working volunteers on another 
successful event. It was a real pleasure to meet all the wonderful 
families and welcome new Saskatchewanians to our 
neighbourhood this past Sunday. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Students Perform at Carnegie Hall 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to rise in the House today to congratulate the 11 students from 
Vanier Collegiate Chamber Choir on being invited to perform at 
Carnegie Hall. Last year the choir took gold at the WorldStrides 
Heritage Music Festival in New York. Their gold rating at the 
festival earned them an invitation to perform with other students 
in the festival at Carnegie Hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the four-day event began last Friday with the 
Vanier Chamber Choir heading to New York to join some of 
the best student musicians from around Canada and the United 
States to perform at Carnegie Hall. The students performed as 
part of the National Youth Choir and rehearsed with the 
world-renowned musical educators like André J. Thomas. They 
practised hard during rehearsals to learn the music that they 
were given for the prestigious performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is always great to hear how the young people of 
our province are ambitious and hard working. I believe we will 
be hearing about these students’ musical careers in the future. I 
ask all members to join me in congratulating the Vanier 
Collegiate Chamber Choir for making it to the Big Apple to 
perform at the prestigious Carnegie Hall. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Population Growth in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an exciting day 
for many reasons, and this government has more people than 
ever to share that excitement with. Saskatchewan is continuing 
to grow, and our population has topped 1,132,640 people for the 
first time in our province’s history. This morning Statistics 

Canada reported Saskatchewan grew by more than 17,000 
people in 2014. 
 
This past year was the eighth straight year that our population 
has grown by more than one and a half per cent. This rate of 
growth is one of the highest in Canada, second only to Alberta. 
Saskatchewan was also one of three provinces that had positive 
net interprovincial migrations, as every other province lost more 
people to other provinces than they gained overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t seem that long ago when the members 
opposite were calling such growth farcical. Yet this province 
has more to offer than ever before. People across the world are 
seeing that, and wanting to make Saskatchewan their home. We 
will never go back to the days of buying our children luggage 
for graduation presents because they had to move away to find 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome all of the newcomers to 
Saskatchewan this past year and wish them all the best in 
making this their new home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Seniors’ Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Last year seniors’ care facilities put forward 
250 pages of urgent requests. Now the total value of those 
urgent requests was just $18.5 million. This government 
rejected a whole bunch of those requests, Mr. Speaker. Does the 
Premier remember the exact amount of the urgent requests that 
his government just completely rejected? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, going through a process over the last year and a half, 
we did work with the health regions and CEOs [chief executive 
officer] and the senior managers within the system and our 
board members to work through what are the issues within 
long-term care that we need to address, Mr. Speaker. We did 
indicate at that time — in mid-year, it wasn’t in the budget — 
but through the work of this government, the cabinet and 
treasury board, we found $10 million, Mr. Speaker, that went 
towards purchasing over 700 pieces of equipment needed: lifts, 
slings, mattresses. It also went towards some training programs. 
It went towards, Mr. Speaker, improving the food delivery in a 
number of our long-term care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think though, what is important to note, that this 
government recognizes that we need to do more in long-term 
care. We have done a tremendous amount in long-term care in 
adding over 700 additional full-time equivalents in our 
long-term and integrated facilities, Mr. Speaker, and we are 
rebuilding the long-term care stock in this province which was 
neglected for many years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the Premier doesn’t 
remember the amount of the request that they just rejected from 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6595 

the care facilities, or perhaps he doesn’t want to talk about it, 
Mr. Speaker. But here’s the answer: this Sask Party government 
rejected $8.5 million in urgent requests put forward by seniors’ 
care facilities. And we’ve been hearing from facilities across 
this province, Mr. Speaker, that it has just kept getting worse 
and worse. And we have heard as family after family after 
family has come forward to this legislature to demand better 
from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I wonder if this government can put aside the 
self-congratulatory back-patting for just one day, for just one 
day, and acknowledge that this government could have done so 
much more for seniors here in this province, especially given 
the record revenues that they have raked in year after year. My 
question to the Premier: will he at least acknowledge that 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to assure the member opposite that this government from day 
one, from November of 2007 recognized the state of seniors’ 
care in this province, recognized the importance of continuous 
improvement for seniors’ care in Saskatchewan for the reasons 
that the member opposite has mentioned. 
 
We found the system, Mr. Speaker, with too few staff. One 
thousand nurses short, that’s what the province was. We were 
short in terms of care aids in long-term care. The previous 
government had shut down facilities, had closed long-term care 
beds, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we found. 
 
You know, I noted in members’ statements, the member for 
Nutana asked the Leader of the Opposition’s question for him, 
where did the money go over the last number of years? Well 
here’s where some of the money went. Some of the money went 
to build 13 brand new long-term care facilities in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Some of the money went to fix the deficit left 
behind in terms of health care human resources: 2,600 more 
nurses practising of every designation. That’s where some of 
the money went, Mr. Speaker. Four hundred more doctors 
practising in the province, Mr. Speaker. Capital improvements 
in long-term care. Urgent and emergent funds here now when 
the previous party in power simply ignored the issue. Their 
answer on long-term care was to jack up fees for long-term care 
residents by 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’re never going back 
to those days. 
 
We know that continuous improvement is needed. Mr. Speaker, 
in a few moments the Minister of Finance will confirm that this 
remains a priority for the government, that the effort, the 
ongoing effort of dealing with what was left behind by 
members opposite continues on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we see the actions of this 
government, we see evidence, Mr. Speaker, that they have had 
their head in the sand. They’ve had a dismissive approach about 
the concerns when it comes to seniors’ care here in the 
province. When you speak with families, when you speak with 
front-line workers, they say if staff have been added, what they 
see are folks sitting behind computers. What they see is more 

administration. What they see are more lean consultants 
following front-line workers with stopwatches, Mr. Speaker. 
That is the reality that we have heard time and time again. 
 
Let’s look at the Saskatoon Health Region, for example. In their 
urgent request, they said that they need 450 care aids to provide 
better care. They modestly requested 38. You know what, Mr. 
Speaker, what this government gave? Nineteen. We can look at 
lifts. Saskatoon Health Region said they needed 1,700 lifts. 
Again they only asked for 100, Mr. Speaker. You know what 
they got from this government? Fifty-six. This government’s 
record on seniors’ care is absolutely appalling. With record 
revenues, Mr. Speaker, this government could have made smart 
investments, and we should have some of the best seniors’ care 
in Canada. 
 
My specific question to the Premier is this. When can we expect 
all of those urgent requests, the ones that the health regions 
submitted last year, when can we finally expect those requests 
to be filled? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, increasingly the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan have questions for members opposite 
and the member who just posed the question in terms of what 
they would do differently. He just characterized the government 
as basically making no, quote unquote, smart decisions in terms 
of long-term care. 
 
Here’s what’s happened here recently and since 2007: health 
regions have received 10.04 million to address priority issues in 
long-term care; 3.7 million in the ’14-15 budget for an Urgent 
Issues Action Fund; 4.5 million for Home First/Quick Response 
pilot programs, Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. We 
might hear more about that later this day. Since 2007 full-time 
equivalents have increased by nearly 800 in long-term care and 
integrated facilities. Those are care aids. Those are people 
providing care for seniors. I wonder what the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition would say about the nature of that decision.  
 
We’ve funded 15 new long-term care facilities in the province 
of Saskatchewan; 350,000 for expansion of Alzheimer’s. SIP 
[seniors’ income plan] increase, the seniors’ income program 
neglected by members opposite for our most vulnerable seniors 
for 16 years, has received in increased benefits, now 260 a 
month or 180 per cent increase since we took office, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a personal care home benefit now in the 
province that didn’t exist under them. 
 
There is more work to be done but, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of this province understand that when it comes to talk 
about seniors’ care, they’ll ask members opposite and the 
Leader of the Opposition. When they want action on seniors’ 
care, they’ll look to the record of this government and what’s 
upcoming in the years ahead. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the Premier 
. . . I would remind him of his constituents who came to the 
legislature just yesterday, Mr. Speaker. They came here 
concerned about their loved ones living with Alzheimer’s 



6596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

because of the short-staffing that they see with their loved ones. 
They asked the question, how is it that their health region, this 
government had money for 13 lean consultants, Mr. Speaker, to 
be following health care workers around for three weeks with 
stopwatches, but they had no money to have enough care aids 
on hand in order to provide dignity and safety for their loved 
ones? That’s the question that Saskatchewan people are asking. 
 
The Health minister himself has said before, Mr. Speaker, that 
they have to actually check where the money’s going because 
they’re not sure it’s going to the front lines. And that’s backed 
up, Mr. Speaker, by what front-line workers and patients have 
been saying, Mr. Speaker. When senior care facilities put on 
their concerns, put up their concerns for urgent requests, they 
talk about how little hands-on care that they can actually 
provide to residents. 
 
So let’s look at Heartland Health Region as one example. 
They’re struggling to provide two and a half hours of care per 
day to residents. We know in Regina the amount is about 2.9 
hours per day. These are incredibly uneven levels across the 
province and they’re also incredibly inadequate, Mr. Speaker. 
And I don’t think that’s acceptable. It wouldn’t be acceptable if 
my grandma needed care, and I believe it’s not acceptable for 
any senior in the province. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will we finally have 
minimum regulated care standards, Mr. Speaker, and 
appropriate regulated staffing levels here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are standards of care for 
senior care in the province of Saskatchewan. We constantly 
have to stand in this place and correct the record when the 
Leader of the Opposition is done asking a question. 
 
Here’s another important correction. Mr. Speaker, what we 
found out yesterday, in terms of what’s happening in Swift 
Current, is that under this new model pilot project there are 
more continuing care aids than before; the model that the 
opposition would have us, I guess, return to. There are actually 
more continuing care aids providing care. 
 
Now the commitment yesterday I made when I met with those 
constituents, and I made it here in the House as well, is that 
when this pilot project concludes, if we’re not finding that more 
care aids provides better care, well, Mr. Speaker, we won’t 
continue with it. We will continue to pursue ways to improve 
care for seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the best indicator of future behaviour is 
past behaviour for both sides of the House. In the past, those 
members didn’t train enough nurses, didn’t train enough 
doctors, left the province with a shortage. In the past, those 
members, when they had a chance to do more than talk about 
something, what did they do? They closed long-term care beds 
in the province. That has changed in the last seven years. 
 
Admittedly, there’s more to be done. But what has changed is 
that we are now building long-term care facilities in the 

province: integrated care open in Kipling, a facility open in 
Radville as well, Mr. Speaker, very recently . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the member for Athabasca is chirping 
from his chair, where’s the money? Well part of the money 
went to a care home in Radville and a care home in Kipling and 
13 other long-term care facilities. We paid $3 billion off of 
NDP [New Democratic Party] debt. We’re doubling 
infrastructure spending in the province. That’s where the money 
went. We’re increasing tax relief for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The member wants to know where the money went. It went 
back in Saskatchewan people’s pockets where it belongs. It 
went to long-term care and to health investment. And I look 
forward to answering more questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s constituents didn’t 
drive all the way to Regina and share their stories in the public, 
Mr. Speaker, because they think it’s going well and they’re 
satisfied, Mr. Speaker. They’re here because they see the very 
real concerns with the model and the resources that this 
government is putting in place. 
 
We talk about minimum care standards. It’s ridiculous for this 
government to suggest that there are minimum care standards in 
place. Otherwise we would not have horrific story after horrific 
story coming to the legislature. You know, we should listen to 
the chief of staff of the Health minister who admitted in an 
email, Mr. Speaker, that what’s in place with this government 
after they pulled the minimum regulations in 2011 are now 
extremely vague and general guidelines, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
clearly not working. 
 
We think of Adrian Seaborne, Savannah Gunderson, Emily 
Krushelnicki, Jessie Sellwood, Margaret Froess, Lorne Rowell, 
Irene Hohne, Art Healey, Fern Chingos, and Margaret 
Warholm. These are just some of the people who have come 
forward and shared their horrible stories, Mr. Speaker, and our 
heart breaks for them, Mr. Speaker. But we need a government 
that pulls its head out of the sand and actually realizes what its 
actions have done and the reality for so many seniors here in the 
province. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many more families have to 
come forward with their tragic stories? How much more 
heartbreak and sadness do we have to see before we can see this 
government bring in regulated staffing levels, minimum care 
standards, and better investments when it comes to seniors’ care 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the health care system in this province each and every day 
works hard to provide care for over 8,700 residents that are in 
our care in a loving and compassionate manner that meets their 
needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to put on the record, as the Premier has 
already, that we do have minimum standards in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We have a document that is 193 pages long that 
clearly reflects and outlines what the rights and responsibilities 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6597 

of not only the facility and those that operate it, but also of the 
residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that in this province that despite 
having, I think, a significant number of new facilities being 
built across this province — the Premier outlined 13 that were 
announced; Swift Current is going to replace three outdated 
facilities; Samaritan Place, a 100-bed facility that also allows 
for partners to stay together even if one of the partners doesn’t 
need long-term care, which the NDP opposed that project, Mr. 
Speaker — we have roughly the same number of beds that we 
did seven years ago under the NDP and we have nearly 800 
additional full-time workers. We take staffing seriously, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note that there was the ability for the 
Ministry of Health to inspect long-term care facilities, but that 
ended under the NDP when they stopped inspecting and then 
actually repealed that standard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the real needs in health 
care, in seniors’ care have been woefully neglected by this Sask 
Party government despite record revenues, and that’s a direct 
reflection upon the misplaced priorities of that government. We 
see this in education as well. 
 
School boards and teachers and support staff are doing the best 
they can, but they don’t have the kind of partner they need in 
that government. With record revenues over the past number of 
years, we should have the best schools in the country, and we 
certainly shouldn’t have overcrowded classrooms and schools 
propped up with two-by-fours and two-by-sixes and a top secret 
list of $1.5 billion of needed repairs. 
 
How can the Education minister explain the disconnect between 
the government’s record revenues and the growing challenges 
in our schools? Why have they failed to get the job done where 
it counts the most? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An interesting 
question from the government that chose to leave us with over a 
$1 billion deficit on capital in schools. Interesting question from 
the members opposite that closed 176 schools. They neglected 
the schools that they didn’t close. We’ve invested almost four 
times what the NDP did into the schools in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, something else that they did: they drove 35,000 
students out of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under this government, we’ve increased operating 
funding by 26.5 per cent. We’ve increased capital spending by 
268 per cent. We’ve increased child care spaces by 53 per cent. 
We’ve increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ve undertook a historic consultative 
process called Student First to make sure that we commit 
resources, we commit capital, and we commit people where 
they need to be — in the classroom for the students of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, like we see from that Ed. 
minister all the time, it’s more boasting and back-patting, and a 
real failure to look at the realities in classrooms across 
Saskatchewan. The Prairie Spirit School Division sent out a 
letter to parents this week saying that their per-student funding 
has been cut every year since 2012. Here’s what the school 
division identifies are the implications of the Sask Party 
government’s decisions: fewer staff working directly with 
students, less funding to support students with diverse needs, 
less funding to support extracurricular activities, less funding 
for student programs, and less funding for building and 
maintenance needs. 
 
And by the way, this is the very school division that found five 
of their schools not structurally sound, that are now propped up 
by two-by-fours and two-by-sixes. And everyone in this room 
would know these issues aren’t isolated to just that school 
division, Mr. Speaker, there are issues right across the province. 
What does the Education minister have to say to parents and 
students and teachers facing these kinds of cutbacks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to be able to correct some factual things that was in 
the release made earlier. Mr. Speaker, the newsletter claims 
there will be a $6 million reduction. In fact that has never been 
the case. There has never been a case where Prairie Spirit 
received less than they did before. Mr. Speaker, in fact they’ve 
received increases each and every year since we formed 
government. 
 
Since November 2007, that division has received a 27 per cent 
increase in operating funding, outpacing their enrolment growth 
of 18 per cent. That is over and above $90 million in capital to 
build new schools and repair existing ones. Mr. Speaker, there 
may have been a deficit in capital over there, but it was caused 
by those members over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2007-2008, Prairie Spirit received $79.135 
million; 2014-2015, $100 million, Mr. Speaker, an increase in 7 
years of 27 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies with 
regard to our record with Prairie Spirit. I can go on, and I’ve got 
other things that I can provide as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government has been neglecting what 
really matters in health care, seniors’ care, and education. At the 
same time, it has been pouring untold millions into wasteful pet 
projects like the John Black lean project. 
 
Earlier this week, we showed that this government is still taking 
health care workers off the front lines and forcing them into 
John Black lean training which involves memorizing Japanese 
words. Yesterday the second Health minister said that health 
care workers have told him “. . . they don’t know how they 
would communicate with staff as efficiently, as effectively as 



6598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

they have been trained through lean processes and using some 
of the Japanese terminology.” Really? Does this minister 
seriously think that it’s easier for our health care workers to 
communicate with each other in Japanese? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as the members will know, since 2008 we’ve invested 
$40.5 million in lean initiatives in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we have saved approximately $125 million since 
that time. Mr. Speaker, when we’re endeavouring to ensure that 
our health care system is more efficient and able to serve a 
better quality of product, Mr. Speaker, we have looked towards 
other industries to see what is best practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say this though, that in terms of the quality 
of the product, the service that we can provide, Mr. Speaker, 
lean has been an important tool. But it’s one tool. We have to 
ensure that we have the proper facilities. That’s why we’ve 
invested over $1 billion in health care capital in this province. 
We have to ensure we have the front-line staff: 425 additional 
physicians, Mr. Speaker, in this province; 2,600 additional 
nurses in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure 
that we are operating in an efficient way, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that we are doing so in this province. 
We’re demonstrating that in this province, and we’ll continue to 
do so in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government has spent untold millions 
flying in senseis from Japan to Saskatchewan to provide bizarre 
training to health care workers. It has sent over 800 health care 
workers to the United States for John Black lean field trips 
which include a tour of an airbag factory in Utah. This is the 
kind of nonsense that that Sask Party government has 
prioritized. 
 
And this government is still forcing the 45,000 health care 
workers in our province to memorize Japanese words. And 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we learned why. The second Health 
minister said this government believes it’s easier for our health 
care workers to communicate with each other in Japanese rather 
than English. That’s what he said. Could the minister please 
explain how this makes any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll give another example of why we’re doing this work in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, for the in-patient mental health recovery 
support program — I believe this is in Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region — for a patient that was accessing services, Mr. 
Speaker, they would wait two to three weeks after having 
services as an in-patient, then being discharged, their follow-up 
care, they would wait on average two to three weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
After redesigning that process, Mr. Speaker, resulting in double 
of the capacity without a single increase in resources, Mr. 
Speaker, patient intake per nurse doubled from two to four. 

Patients now start their program immediately upon discharge, 
Mr. Speaker, instead of waiting two to three weeks. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what we should be 
doing in health care. I think we should be lowering our wait 
times. I think we should be improving our systems and our 
services, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should be acting in a more 
timely way. This is just one example of why we’re doing that 
work. I would hope the members opposite would agree that 
that’s good work to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Government Usage of Consultants 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Ministry 
of Central Services has dramatically ramped up its use of 
consultants, 168 per cent since 2008, alongside the 228 per cent 
government-wide that’s taken place under this government’s 
watch. 
 
The independent Provincial Auditor has criticized this, saying 
that the Sask Party government’s approach leads to money 
being spent unnecessarily and inefficiently and at a much 
greater expense for taxpayers. The auditor even says that in 70 
per cent of the cases, this government isn’t documenting why 
the consultants are being hired. How can the Minister of Central 
Services possibly explain why the government is hiring so 
many consultants without even documenting the reasons? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor would like to 
see a more formalized process, and the ministry has prepared a 
draft of a new policy called consulting procurement guidelines. 
The guidelines outline how to measure consultant performance 
and the need to do so. This new policy is currently in draft, but 
we are hoping to provide these new guidelines to employees 
who hire consultants at the beginning of April. Work on these 
guidelines began in February. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Let me repeat the point, Mr. Speaker, because 
it speaks volumes to how this government has been treating 
taxpayers’ money. The independent Provincial Auditor said this 
government has dramatically increased spending on consultants, 
and 70 per cent of the time this government is not even 
documenting why those consultants are being hired. So there’s 
not even a proper paper trail for why the consultants were hired 
or what exactly they’re supposed to be delivering. 
 
This government has created an all-you-can-eat buffet for its 
friends in consulting companies, and Saskatchewan people are 
being stuck with the tab. Again to the minister: how can she 
possibly explain why this government isn’t even documenting 
the reasons why it’s hiring the consultants in the first place? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, under that government, 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6599 

they had as many as 343, 344 FTEs [full-time equivalent] 
working on IT [information technology]. We have reduced that 
by 43 per cent and have also reduced our consultants by 33 per 
cent. And we’ve never had as many as 100 IT consultants on 
the IT file like that government had. 
 
Further, given the hiring restraints, I have instructed when IT 
consulting contracts come up for renewal, an evaluation and 
determination of whether they are required is done to ensure 
base services are maintained. Since December the Ministry of 
Central Services has terminated 12 IT contracts for a total 
contract value of $2.1 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 
2014 (No. 2), bilingual, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
this bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 165, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 and that 
the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hazard 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that this bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2014 (No. 2) and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment 
Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 



6600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to submit 
the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied by a 
message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — All please rise for a message from the 
Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2016, and supplementary 
estimates - March of certain sums required for the service 
of the province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2015, 
and recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
The Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
You may be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, colleagues, and visitors, I’m honoured to rise 
today and present our government’s 2015-16 budget. This is my 
fifth and final budget as Finance minister. I’m going to still be 
around for a little while yet, but this does seem like a 
culmination of the 20 years I’ve had the privilege to serve in 
this Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many, many people I need to 
thank. The people of Canora-Pelly constituency who elected me 
five times, thank you for your support. The many individuals 
and organizations I have met with over the years as an 
opposition member, as Deputy Premier, as Education minister, 
and most recently as Finance minister, thank you for all of your 
ideas and advice. The many hard-working professional public 
servants I have worked with, the Ministry of Finance officials 
led by an extremely capable deputy minister, Clare Isman, 
thank you for your hard work and dedication. The staff I have 
worked with over the years in my ministerial offices, thank you 
your for hard work and for putting up with me. 
 
And of course the Premier and my colleagues in the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, thank you for your counsel, your 
patience, your support, your good humour, and for giving me 
the opportunity to serve as Finance minister of this great 
province. It has been the greatest opportunity, the greatest 
challenge, the greatest privilege, and the greatest honour of my 
career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would even like to thank the members opposite 
for all those years in government for showing me what not to do 
and, as opposition, for performing the important democratic 
duty of holding government accountable. 
 
And I would like to thank my family. I could have done 

precisely none of this without you. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t going 
to bother getting new shoes for this year’s budget, but my 
family insisted that I should have new shoes for my last budget, 
so I am standing in new shoes today because of my family. And 
that seems fitting because I quite simply wouldn’t be standing 
here at all today without the love and support of my family. 
Thank you so much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased to see everyone in the 
Chamber today. Welcome to all of you. I’m especially pleased 
to welcome friends and relatives from many different 
communities in Saskatchewan but especially those who have 
travelled from the Canora-Pelly constituency and more 
importantly from my hometown of Invermay and Rama. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to introduce some very special guests. 
Seated in the west gallery are my son and daughter-in-law, 
Bryce and Olivia Krawetz, and my precious granddaughters 
Willow and Scarlett. Hi, girls. On the floor of the Assembly, 
seated behind the bar are my brother and sister-in-law, Dave 
and Marlene Krawetz, from Big River, Saskatchewan, and some 
long-time friends who have travelled from Calgary, Alberta to 
be here today. I am pleased to welcome Barry and Pat 
Slusarchuk. And the most important person in my life, my wife, 
Gail, thank you for your support and encouragement. There I’m 
done. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I stand before you and before this 
Legislative Assembly to announce my fifth and final budget as 
Minister of Finance, honouring tradition, confident in our 
economy, proud of the budget I am about to deliver for the 
people of this province and tremendously excited about the 
future of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues will tell you I use a lot of numbers 
when I speak, so I want to set the stage for today’s budget with 
two important numbers. The first one is $100.08. One year ago 
today, that was the spot price of a barrel of oil — $100.08. 
Today a barrel of oil sells for less than half that. Obviously this 
number presents some pretty significant challenges when 
building a budget. In a moment I will outline how our 
government is meeting those challenges. 
 
But first I want to note one other number, an even more 
important number: 1,132,640. That’s the new population of 
Saskatchewan announced just this morning — 1,132,640. Mr. 
Speaker, that represents growth of more than 122,000 people in 
the past seven years, and it means Saskatchewan’s population 
has now grown more during the term of our current Premier 
than during the term of any other premier since our first, Walter 
Scott, a century ago. That’s the strongest period of growth since 
the earliest days of our province. 
 
This number tells us, while our budget faces challenges, 
Saskatchewan is strong. Our economy is strong. Our people are 
strong. And this budget is all about keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. Despite the falling oil price, Saskatchewan’s economy is 
more diversified than ever and well positioned to meet this 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6601 

challenge. 
 
Now government does not drive the economy but, by making 
the right decisions, governments can create the right conditions 
for economic growth. Or as we’ve seen in the past, 
governments can make the wrong decisions, such as raising 
taxes and failing to invest in infrastructure, decisions that lead 
to economic decline and population loss. We have chosen a 
different path. We’re determined to avoid the mistakes of the 
past and make the right budget decisions that will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Here are some of those decisions. 
 
One, we will keep taxes low. Over the past few years, our 
government has delivered the largest tax cuts in Saskatchewan 
history, and this budget contains no new tax increases. 
 
Two, we will continue to invest in infrastructure. Our 
government has already made record investments in 
infrastructure, and this budget invests an unprecedented $3.3 
billion in highways, schools, health facilities, and Crown sector 
capital. 
 
Three, we will control operating spending. This budget contains 
just a marginal increase in spending of 1.2 per cent, and 10 
ministries and agencies have seen their budgets reduced. 
 
Four, we will help the private sector create jobs. This budget 
contains new tax incentives for new job creation and continues 
to support increased training opportunities for our young 
people. 
 
And five, we will balance the budget. I am pleased to say for 
the fifth time as Finance minister, this budget is a balanced 
budget: overall revenue of $14.28 billion, up just 1.2 per cent 
from last year; overall spending of $14.17 billion, also up just 
1.2 per cent from last year. Saskatchewan’s 2015-16 budget is 
balanced with a surplus of $107 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to get to balance without raising taxes, we 
had to make some tough decisions. That meant keeping our 
operating spending under control. This budget continues our 
government’s track record of investing in what matters most: in 
Saskatchewan people and in the types of infrastructure that our 
people value and depend upon most, such as schools, highways, 
and health care facilities. At the same time, we have made some 
difficult but necessary choices on the spending side with the 
goal of keeping Saskatchewan strong. That means some areas 
funded by government will receive less than they might have 
hoped for once again this year. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Our government’s commitment to control operating spending in 
this budget actually began last month with the Premier’s 
announcement of a wage freeze for all senior government 
officials, including MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and cabinet ministers throughout the 2015-16 fiscal 
year. Across government the wage freeze is expected to save 
about $15 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investment in health, education, and social 
services and assistance continue to be priorities of our 
government, accounting for nearly three-quarters of all expense 

in this budget. The overall operational spending lift in those key 
areas is just under 2 per cent. Categories outside those priority 
areas are budgeted to spend 0.6 per cent less this year. In 
addition, the active families benefit, graduate retention program, 
seniors’ drug plan, Saskatchewan employment supplement, and 
the research and development tax credit program are being 
changed to ensure their ongoing sustainability. 
 
The income threshold related to the seniors’ drug plan is being 
lowered from about $80,000 to about $65,500, ensuring the 
benefit is sustainable and continues to help those seniors with 
less income. 
 
The active families benefit will be income tested, available to 
families with net incomes below $60,000 to ensure it continues 
to benefit those families who need it most. 
 
The graduate retention program will become a non-refundable 
tax credit while remaining the most aggressive youth retention 
program in Canada. Post-secondary graduates who stay in 
Saskatchewan will still be able to receive the full amount of 
their tuition back, up to $20,000, through a reduction in their 
provincial income tax. They will now have up to 10 years 
instead of seven to use this tax reduction. 
 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement is changing to keep 
the benefit affordable and still help families with younger 
children, those who need it most. 
 
The research and development tax credit will now be fully 
non-refundable, and the rate is being reduced from 15 per cent 
to 10 per cent of qualifying research and development 
expenditures. These changes will also help to maintain a 
sustainable level of support for innovation and research 
activities in the province. 
 
On the revenue side, a change is being made to the potash 
production tax. The total amount of deductions which potash 
producers receive from their capital spending will now be 
utilized over a longer period of time. As a result of this change 
and overall growth in the potash industry, potash revenue is 
expected to be up nearly $400 million this year. This change 
was made following consultation with the potash industry, and I 
note that this industry continues to show tremendous confidence 
in Saskatchewan. Major capital expansions are continuing, and 
just last week Mosaic announced a further $1.7 billion 
investment in the K3 mine at Esterhazy, making this the largest 
potash mine in the world and creating as many as 600 new jobs 
during construction. 
 
This interim step, taken this year, will be followed by a broader 
review of the entire potash taxation and royalty regime. 
However, any further changes resulting from a review must 
balance the excellent investment and operational environment 
for this sector, which is so important to the provincial economy, 
with the need for a fair return for the owners of the resource, the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of controlling operating spending, our 
government could have made a different choice, a choice we 
have seen in the past. We could have raised taxes. But that 
would have been bad for Saskatchewan people and bad for the 
economy, and this budget is about keeping Saskatchewan 



6602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

strong. As a result of controlling operating spending, this 
budget contains no tax increases — no personal tax increase, no 
business tax increase, no education property tax increase, no 
increase to the fuel tax, and no reduction in revenue sharing 
with municipalities which could have contributed to higher 
taxes at the municipal level. 
 
This budget provides $265.3 million in revenue sharing — the 
largest grant ever provided to Saskatchewan municipalities — 
an increase of $8.3 million compared to last year, and an 
increase of $138 million, or more than 108 per cent, from the 
2007-08 budget. 
 
In total, since 2007 our government has delivered more than $5 
billion in tax relief. As a result, a family of four pays no 
Saskatchewan income tax on their first $49,155 of income, the 
highest tax-free threshold for a family of four in Canada. And a 
family of four with $50,000 income has seen their provincial 
income tax cut by more than 95 per cent since 2007, from about 
$2,300 to less than $100 in 2015. A single senior with an 
income of $25,000 is now paying only $16 in provincial income 
tax for 2015. 
 
This year consideration was given to increasing education 
property tax, but we decided to keep the mill rates the same. 
Since education property tax reform in 2009, mill rates have 
only been lowered. Mill rates have not been adjusted to keep up 
with inflation, growing enrolments, or the increased cost of 
school operating over the past several years. In fact the share of 
operating funding provided by the government has risen to 65 
per cent with education property tax providing 35 per cent, 
surpassing our government’s goal of 60/40. 
 
While there is no increase this year, rebalancing may be 
necessary in future years in order to ensure a sustainable and 
equitable funding base for the critically important education 
sector. I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that we will 
never go back to the days of 40/60. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government had another choice to make in 
this budget. Do we stop building? Do we stop investing in 
infrastructure as we have seen governments do at times in the 
past? Or do we continue to show confidence in Saskatchewan’s 
economy today and continue building for the needs of 
tomorrow? We chose to keep building Saskatchewan. 
 
Controlling operating spending also allows us to continue our 
government’s unprecedented investment in infrastructure. This 
budget begins a four-year, $5.8 billion commitment — the 
Saskatchewan Builds capital plan — to build and maintain 
needed core infrastructure such as schools, health care facilities, 
municipal infrastructure, roads, bridges, and highways. 
 
This budget provides more than $1.3 billion for core 
infrastructure in 2015-16, the largest infrastructure allocation in 
our province’s history and an increase of almost 50 per cent 
from last year. This investment is in addition to the $2 billion in 
capital investment forecast this year by the commercial Crown 
corporations, largely SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy. 
 
Including this budget, our government has now committed more 
than $3 billion to core government infrastructure since 2013-14, 
exceeding the growth plan commitment to invest 2.5 billion in 

infrastructure from 2013-14 to the end of 2015-16. 
 
We are continuing to build roads and highways. This budget 
commits 842 million in 2015-16 to building, operating, and 
maintaining highways and transportation infrastructure, which 
will bring the total over the past four years to more than $2.7 
billion, exceeding the $2.2 billion commitment in the growth 
plan. This includes $211 million to begin construction on the 
next phase of the Regina bypass, the largest infrastructure 
project in Saskatchewan history. 
 
This budget also provides funding for significant twinning 
projects: 23 million for the twinning of Highway 16 east of 
Saskatoon to east of Clavet, 11.4 million for twinning Highway 
7 from Saskatoon to Delisle, 7.6 million for twinning Highway 
39 from Estevan to Bienfait, and $1.2 million for initial work on 
twinning Highways 6 and 39 from Regina to Estevan. 
 
This budget also includes funding for interchanges at Warman 
and Martensville, and passing lanes on Highway 7 from Delisle 
to Rosetown, and on Highway 5 from Saskatoon to Humboldt. 
 
We are continuing to support municipal infrastructure 
investment. This budget commits $74.5 million for municipal 
infrastructure in 2015-16 with plans to invest over $400 million 
over the next four years. Including provincial, municipal, and 
federal contributions, more than $1 billion has been invested in 
municipal infrastructure in Saskatchewan since 2008. 
 
We are continuing to build and renovate schools. This budget 
provides $248 million in capital in 2015-16 for K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] schools, up over $150 million 
compared to last year. Mr. Speaker, that allocation is the largest 
we have ever put in place for school construction and 
renovations in our province’s history. 
 
In 2015-16, construction will begin on nine joint-use schools, 
potentially through a P3 [public-private partnership] 
procurement process in the high-growth communities of 
Martensville, Warman, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 
Construction will also begin on three new schools approved for 
planning last year: Connaught elementary and Sacred Heart 
both here in Regina, and a new school in St. Brieux. This year a 
major renovation project will begin at Hague High School. And 
this budget also provides more than $28 million to complete 
eight other school projects started in previous years in the 
communities of Saskatoon, Martensville, Weyburn, 
Langenburg, Gravelbourg, and Hudson Bay. Over the next four 
years, almost $900 million will be invested to build and 
renovate schools. 
 
Beginning this year, school divisions will no longer be required 
to contribute the local share costs of major school capital 
projects. This policy change means the province will fund 100 
per cent of the capital costs for major school projects, including 
those that have been announced but have not begun 
construction. 
 
We are also continuing to make a significant capital investment 
in our universities, regional colleges, and other post-secondary 
training institutions. This budget commits $46.6 million in 
capital in 2015-16 for advanced education and training, 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6603 

including 23.6 million for maintenance and the balance for 
continued construction of the Southeast Regional College, the 
Trades and Technology Centre at Parkland Regional College, 
and the Academic Health Sciences facility at the University of 
Saskatchewan. The four-year plan forecasts almost $185 
million for advanced education and training capital. 
 
We continue to invest in hospitals and other health care 
infrastructure. This budget provides $256 million for health 
capital, an increase of over $161 million from last year. Some 
of the key projects include $65 million to continue construction 
of the Swift Current long-term care P3 project which is 
expected to be complete in spring 2016. And it includes funding 
in 2016 for construction of the replacement of the 
Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford, potentially using a 
P3 procurement model. Several other major projects are under 
way, including the new hospital in Moose Jaw, planning for 
rejuvenation of the Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert, planning 
for a new acute care centre in Weyburn, the new Leader 
integrated care facility, and the Kelvington integrated care 
facility. The four-year plan is to invest more than $700 million 
in health facilities. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And this budget will continue to support tourism by investing 
over $13 million in capital projects at Saskatchewan’s beautiful 
provincial parks, including new campgrounds, new campsites, 
and the electrification of existing campsites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Builds capital plan is an 
ambitious plan to address the growing infrastructure of a 
growing province. And it required our government to ask an 
important question: is now the time to borrow for capital 
projects? Interest rates are at historically low levels. Over the 
past seven years, our government has paid off more than 3 
billion of the province’s operational debt, resulting in 
cumulative savings of nearly $1 billion in interest. 
 
Last September, Moody’s Investor Services upgraded 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating to AAA, the highest rating 
possible. Moody’s said the upgrade, and I quote, “. . . reflects 
the province’s fiscal discipline and sustained low debt levels, 
which underscore prudent financial management practices.” 
 
Saskatchewan now enjoys the highest possible ratings from 
both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s. Overall, our province has 
achieved one of the highest credit ratings of any jurisdiction in 
North America, and the second lowest tax-supported 
debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio among the 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our population continues to grow, as do our 
capital needs. Just as a growing family moves to a larger house 
when a mortgage can be managed, the province’s resilient 
economy, positive outlook, and sound fiscal management 
leading to strong credit ratings now provides a solid foundation 
from which to borrow in order to build. We looked at perhaps 
stopping or pausing some projects, but delaying much-needed 
projects would just mean higher construction costs in the years 
ahead, and the infrastructure gap would continue to grow. 
 
As well we believe that continuing major capital construction 

projects this year through the Saskatchewan Builds capital plan 
will have a positive impact on the economy, creating jobs and 
sending a strong signal that Saskatchewan is confident we will 
weather the downturn in the oil sector. We chose to continue 
building Saskatchewan. 
 
So our government will borrow an estimated $700 million to 
invest in core government capital during 2015-16, taking 
advantage of the current low interest rates. The balance on the 
capital plan will be funded with available cash including $106 
million from the proceeds of the 2013 sale of Information 
Services Corporation, public-private partnerships, and federal 
transfers. 
 
A key aspect of the borrowing plan is the debt repayment plan. 
It’s okay to have a mortgage on your house as long as you are 
able to manage the mortgage payments. We will manage our 
payments. Amounts borrowed to finance infrastructure assets 
will be separately identified, and at least 2 per cent of the value 
of the borrowed amount will be set aside and invested each year 
to ensure sufficient cash will be available to repay the debt as it 
comes due. 
 
Borrowing for long-term capital needs for tangible assets such 
as schools, hospitals, and highways that Saskatchewan people 
need and will use for decades is much different than borrowing 
for annual operations. And, Mr. Speaker, let me be clear: our 
government will not borrow for operating. 
 
To help keep Saskatchewan strong and also fulfill our growth 
plan, our growth plan commitments, this budget also introduces 
two new tax incentives, the first one aimed at job creation, the 
second with a goal of generating more capital investment. 
Saskatchewan is already Canada’s largest per capita exporter, 
and we’re going to build on that strength. 
 
The new manufacturing and processing exporter tax incentive 
supports the growth plan goals of doubling Saskatchewan’s 
exports and having 60,000 more people working in the 
province, both by the year 2020. This incentive will provide tax 
credits to eligible corporations that increase their number of 
full-time employees. In addition to the traditional 
manufacturing and processing sector, the incentive will also 
apply to corporations involved in the commercial development 
of new economy products for export including interactive 
digital media and creative industry products. The incentive will 
also provide tax credits to eligible corporations that increase the 
number of full-time employees who do work typically 
considered to be head office functions. 
 
The second new tax incentive is an income tax rebate for 
primary steel production, supporting the growth plan 
commitment to encourage new capital investment. The income 
tax rebate will provide an incentive for eligible primary steel 
producers that make a minimum capital investment of $100 
million in new or expanded productive capacity. We believe 
these incentives and the overall strength of Saskatchewan’s 
economy will continue to lead to new job creation in our 
province. 
 
Our government remains committed to ensuring our young 
people have the skills and training they need to take on those 
new jobs. This budget provides for various training 



6604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

opportunities to help develop a skilled workforce, vital to a 
growing province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when asked about the 
number one challenge businesses face in Saskatchewan, owners 
and executives say loud and clear it is about finding and 
keeping skilled workers. And it all starts with training. 
 
We are continuing to invest in the training of nurses and doctors 
with the provision of nearly $27 million, which is up more than 
10 per cent from last year, to fulfill three medical training 
commitments: 100 medical training seats, 120 medical 
residency seats, and 20 new nurse practitioner seats. 
 
This budget also helps Saskatchewan people complete their 
adult basic education or ABE, enhancing their employment 
prospects and quality of life. This year 200 additional ABE 
seats will be added, bringing the total to 8,780 through a total 
investment of more than $25.6 million in 2015-16. As a result, 
we expect to meet our growth plan commitment to eliminate 
ABE wait-list in 2016-17. 
 
Our diverse economy also needs more skilled tradespeople. 
This budget provides $1 million in additional funding to help 
add 300 more apprenticeship training seats this year. This 
brings the total number of training seats to 7,000 in 2015-16 at a 
total cost of about $23.2 million. 
 
This budget also includes more support for Aboriginal students 
and training programs. We are increasing the operating funding 
for the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies by more 
than 22 per cent in this budget to a total of nearly $2.2 million 
in 2015-16, to better align SIIT’s [Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies] funding to other technical institutes. 
 
Overall this budget provides more than $210 million for 
targeted program funding for First Nations and Métis people, 
including a significant portion for training and employment 
initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to supporting students, and this 
budget includes a $1 million increase in provincial training 
allowance, bringing the total to more than 32 million to cover 
living costs associated with the additional ABE seats while 
people attend training. We are also providing $3.25 million in 
total for the apprenticeship training allowance to support the 
increase in training seats. The Student Aid Fund, including 
grants, bursaries, and student loans, amounts to $32.5 million in 
this budget. The Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship which 
lowers tuition for every Saskatchewan high school grad is $9 
million, an increase of $2.3 million from last year. 
 
There is $5.5 million for a number of other scholarships and 
$6.5 million for the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings. Our commitment to students supports 
accessibility to post-secondary education and the future of our 
province. 
 
Health spending by the Ministry of Health, health regions, and 
agencies such as the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will increase 
by about 1.1 per cent in this budget to $5.5 billion. That 
includes $3.3 billion in regional health authorities, an increase 
of $55.7 million compared to last year for operating funding 
and for targeted initiatives. Much of the increase in operational 
spending in 2015-16 will go to increased compensation for 

health care workers, the people on the front lines who ensure 
the system is providing the best possible care to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Seniors’ care will be improved, with $10 million in targeted 
new funding in the 2015-16 budget, bringing the total to $14.5 
million specifically for enhanced seniors’ care initiatives. 
Funding includes a $3.5 million increase dedicated to enhance 
the HomeFirst program, bringing the total commitment to $8 
million, and a $2.8 million increase for dementia behaviour 
units in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, $2 million in this budget will provide increased 
choice and flexibility in care options for home care clients; $1 
million will improve quality and safety in long-term care; and 
$700,000 will develop a new geriatric program in Regina. 
 
This budget includes $3 million in additional funding to help 
reduce emergency department wait times and improve patient 
flow. And it includes almost $300 million for the drug plan and 
more than $157 million for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
This budget provides $3.7 billion for education spending, which 
includes the budgets of ministries responsible for the pre-K to 
12 and post-secondary education, along with boards of 
education and other government entities that provide job skills 
training and other educational programming. That $3.7 billion 
allocation represents a 2.8 per cent increase in education 
spending compared to last year. It also means that education 
spending under our government has grown by more than 32 per 
cent since 2009, the year the province began to set education 
property tax mill rates. 
 
This budget includes nearly $1.87 billion in total school 
division operating funding, an increase of 2.9 per cent. That 
includes nearly $960 million for teachers’ salaries, which 
includes increases based on the recent settlement, and it 
includes 965,000 for the initial operating year of the teachers’ 
self-regulating professional body. 
 
This budget includes more than $661 million for post-secondary 
operating funding. That includes operating increases of 1 per 
cent for universities, affiliated and regional colleges, and 2 per 
cent for technical institutes and federated colleges. 
 
Spending on social services and assistance to help provide for 
those most vulnerable in our society, including seniors and 
people with disabilities, will grow by about 3.2 per cent this 
year to a total of $1.2 billion. This means that under our 
government, spending on social services and assistance has 
grown by more than 34 per cent since 2008. 
 
This budget continues our government’s unprecedented 
investments on behalf of Saskatchewan people who are most 
vulnerable. 
 
[15:00] 
 
For example, it provides more than 200 million, an increase of 
almost 27 million or 15 per cent, for the Saskatchewan assured 
income for disabilities program, the SAID program. This fulfills 
our platform commitment to increase benefits each year for four 
years and also responds to strong program demand. 



March 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6605 

This budget provides more than $159 million for the 
Saskatchewan assistance program, the SAP program, up 4.4 per 
cent as a result of cost-per-case increases and program uptake. 
 
This budget provides more than 160 million to assist people 
with complex and emerging needs. It provides more than 62 
million, an increase of more than 5 per cent, for out-of-home 
care for children in need of protection. And for the eighth 
consecutive budget, we will increase the monthly benefit under 
the seniors’ income plan. A $10 a month increase on July 1st, 
2015 will mean that since 2007, seniors’ income plan benefits 
will have tripled to $270 a month after being frozen at just $90 
for the previous 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the many, many examples 
of how we are making much needed investments in the areas of 
health, education, and social services to improve our quality of 
life and keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
As we announced in 2014-15, Saskatchewan has moved to a 
single summary budget and financial reporting, consistent with 
the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor. Over the year 
we have transitioned a number of our reports, including first 
and third quarter summary reports for the first time ever. We 
indicated last year the transition will take time and that our 
work is continuing. 
 
One new change in this budget is the separate presentation of 
the pension adjustment to account for the pension expense on 
an accrual basis. This new presentation highlights and explains 
the adjustment. 
 
In this budget, spending on the broad themes of health, 
education, and social services and assistance accounts for nearly 
three-quarters of all government expense. Spending in these 
areas is forecast at $10.4 billion in 2015-16, up 1.9 per cent 
from last year, but that is an increase of nearly 68 per cent since 
2007-08. Over $4.3 billion more being spent on health, 
education, and social services, that’s where the money went. 
 
This year we will continue to fully fund agricultural business 
risk management programs like AgriStability, AgriInvest, and 
crop insurance. In fact the Minister of Agriculture recently 
announced enhancement to the 2015 crop insurance coverage, 
lowering producer premiums while increasing coverage levels. 
Overall, while this budget required our government to control 
operating spending, this budget maintains funding levels that 
ensure government ministries and third party sectors can 
continue to sustain important programs for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
So there you have it, the 2015-16 Saskatchewan budget: a 
budget that keeps taxes low; a budget that controls operational 
spending; a budget that continues to make much needed 
investment in schools, highways, and hospitals; a budget that 
will help Saskatchewan businesses create new jobs and ensure 
our young people have the training they need to fill those jobs; 
a budget that is balanced; a budget that will keep Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt this is a challenging budget, but 
the good news is Saskatchewan has never been in a better 
position to meet this challenge. More people live here than ever 

before. Our unemployment rate continues to be the lowest in 
Canada. Exports are at an all-time high. Businesses continue to 
show tremendous confidence in Saskatchewan’s future through 
major capital investments. But what gives me the most 
confidence is our people, Saskatchewan people: cautious yet 
confident, humble yet self assured, hard working and 
compassionate, and always optimistic about our province’s 
future. 
 
So as I conclude my final budget speech, that is why I can say 
with confidence that Saskatchewan will meet these challenges: 
because Saskatchewan is strong and our best days are still 
ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 
Lloydminster: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, it’s my honour to briefly respond to the 
budget tabled today and hopefully provide the rest of the story 
here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, I really would like to welcome all the people from across 
Saskatchewan that have joined us here today in their Legislative 
Assembly and to thank them for not only joining us here today 
but for what they do every day in building the strength that we 
all cherish in this province that we so love. We have community 
leaders from every corner of this province, municipal leaders, 
business leaders, leaders in education and health care, working 
men and women, so many good friends and family also. 
 
Our perspective on this budget has been informed by listening, 
by focusing on what really matters to the people and families 
across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve just listened to the 
budget here today. This year this government is planning to 
spend more than in any year previous, more than $14 billion. 
The provincial budget shows that Saskatchewan can afford to 
fix seniors’ care, build a better education system, and make life 
more affordable for Saskatchewan families, but they aren’t 
going to. This government won’t pass the benefit of higher 
revenues on to hard-working middle-class families.  
 
As they have for years, this government is planning to spend it 
as fast as it comes in. And, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that, 
they’re asking families to pay just a little more and to get just a 
little less. This government hasn’t chosen to cut waste. Instead 
we see them holding back on the things that matter to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
There are a few things that stand out as bad calls for us as the 
opposition. The seniors’ care crisis is being ignored. The 
funding that’s announced in this budget won’t even address the 



6606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2015 

so-called urgent issues identified by the health regions over a 
year ago. The needs in crumbling hospitals are being ignored. 
There’s lots of numbers being announced, but there’s only $28 
million set aside to repair health care buildings, and that’s a tiny 
fraction of what’s needed. 
 
The government is actually kicking 6,000 middle-class seniors 
off the seniors’ drug plan. The graduate retention program is 
being walked back on students. Parents will no longer get the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement once their kids are over 
the age of 12, and everyone in this room can identify with the 
costs of raising a 12- or 13- or 14-year-old. 
 
Once promised and desperately needed, child care spaces are 
not going to happen, and the problems in our schools, 
particularly class sizes and the ratios of teachers and 
educational assistants to students with additional needs, is not 
going to get any better in this budget. This government is 
actually slashing English as an additional language supports on 
top of that, straining classrooms even further. 
 
The government is still refusing to put a smart procurement 
policy in place. That means that Saskatchewan taxpayers are not 
getting the best value and that Saskatchewan companies are too 
often losing out on local work to corporations from Ontario, 
Quebec, and all across the United States and beyond. You 
know, just think of the long-term care project, the P3 in Swift 
Current. It’s a P3. It’s being built with Alberta rebar, Ontario 
mechanical, and Quebec steel. We’re not maximizing the 
economic benefit we could here in this province. 
 
It’s also disappointing to see the Growth and Financial Security 
Fund, the so-called rainy day fund, being depleted through a 
period of high revenues. In 2009-10 this account had $1.35 
billion in it. This year the government will drain another $255 
million from it, and we’ll be down to just $200 million at the 
end of the year, all of these dollars being drained at a time of 
high revenues. 
 
We could be so much better. After a decade of resource wealth, 
we could have better schools with smaller class sizes. We could 
be covering ambulance fees rather than having the highest 
ambulance fees in the country. We could have excellent, 
well-staffed seniors’ care homes that serve good food and take 
care, good care of people. We could have long-term savings, a 
heritage fund, a long-lasting benefit for future generations. We 
could have policies in place that promote and recognize the 
value of local business, entrepreneurs, and economic diversity. 
 
Instead we see this government continue on a path of high 
spending but with low return for Saskatchewan families. This 
budget is about misplaced priorities instead of focusing on what 
really matters: opportunity for young people, affordability for 
families, and security for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan families and the people of 
this province deserve better, the official opposition won’t be 
supporting this budget. And while I’ll have more to say on this 
budget tomorrow, a more detailed analysis and critique, it’s 
been my honour to join debate here today. At this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that debate be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be resumed 
on Thursday, March 19, 2015. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be resumed 
on Thursday, March 19, 2015. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I place the question on the 
adjournment, I want to first say thank you to our guests who 
have joined us here today and for your co-operation in 
observing the rules of the Assembly. I now would like to extend 
an invitation to our guests to join the members for tea in the 
Legislative Library to your right as you leave the Assembly and 
in room 218 to the left. I would also ask that you allow the 
cabinet ministers and the MLAs to exit before you do. 
 
At this time I will place the question. The Government House 
Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:15.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Community-Training Residence Program 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6592 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6592 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6592 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Miller Comprehensive High School Makerspace Program 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6592 
 Seizing an Opportunity 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6593 
 Preschool Program Treats Symptoms of Autism 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6593 
 Budget Suggestions 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6593 
 Community Connections Celebrates Cultures 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6593 
 Moose Jaw Students Perform at Carnegie Hall 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6594 
 Population Growth in Saskatchewan 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6594 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Seniors’ Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6594 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6594 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6595 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6597 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6597 
 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6597 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6598 
 Government Usage of Consultants 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6598 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6598 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6599 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6599 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6599 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6600 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6600 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6600 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6605 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6606 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


