
























































Hansard: March 16, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 16, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6561 
 March 16, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce someone who is a 
frequent visitor to the legislature here and a good friend to the 
working people in Saskatchewan. I’m talking about Gunnar 
Passmore, Building Trades Council, specifically the sheet metal 
workers. Good to see you here again, and we sure appreciate 
you coming out and keeping track of us. Thank you so much. I 
ask all members to give him a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the 
House today. As most of the members here will know from Mr. 
Passmore’s visits here, he is a constituent of Indian 
Head-Milestone and has traditionally put up a sign for his 
preferred candidate. And I know we’re going to be having an 
election next year, and I’d encourage the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone to go out and see if we can get a different kind 
of sign up this year. In any event, he has been a strong advocate 
for his membership, and I want to certainly welcome him to the 
House today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my genuine pleasure to introduce two constituents from 
Meadow Lake, came down, two genuine pillars of our 
community and our city: Dr. Merv Johnson and his wife, 
Blanche, who made the trip down. It’s good to see you, and I’ll 
look forward to chatting after question period. So I’d like 
everyone to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for 
education here in Saskatchewan. And we know that education is 
one of the most vital services this government provides to its 
citizens, and this government has failed to deliver a long-term 
plan and vision and the necessary resources to prioritize the 
delivery of educational excellence. And we know that this 
government has failed to develop a real plan to close the 
Aboriginal education gap and to support English as additional 
language for those students, support community schools and 
their communities and students. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from 
Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney 
Avenue by actions of that government, and the fact that 
government won’t respond to ensure safety on Dewdney 
Avenue inundating that route, a residential route with 
heavy-haul truck traffic. And we’ve put forward proposals 
supported by the city councillor directly to government, which 
there’s been no action by that government. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty and skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la 



6562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

Ronge area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 
petition for real action on climate change. The individuals who 
have signed this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in all of Canada, and that slashing 
programs such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for 
Houses energy-efficiency program sets the province on a 
backward course. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon, 
Edam, Esterhazy, and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Hometown Hockey in Regina 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I, along with the member from Regina South and 
thousands of Regina residents, had the pleasure to celebrate our 
hockey heritage here in Regina. 
 
Regina’s Hometown Hockey made a stop to broadcast from the 
Queen City live Sunday evening before the Philadelphia Flyers 
and Ottawa Senators game. Celebrating the city’s iconic hockey 
story, in tribute to some of the great players who make Regina 
their home, this stop was the 22nd of 25 stops on the 
Canada-wide tour. 
 
The free-of-charge hockey weekend featured activities, 
contestants, prizes, interactive games, and live entertainment at 
downtown Victoria Park in City Square plaza. This event drew 
in many families and young aspiring hockey stars. To end off 
this special event on Sunday, host Canadian icon Ron MacLean, 
special guest Mike Sillinger, and former Leafs captain Wendel 
Clark broadcasted live from the Sportsnet Mobile Studio for the 
pre-game show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, events like this show us just how vibrant our city 
is, especially when you throw in a few hockey legends and 
Canadians icons into the mix. I’d ask all members of this 
Legislative Assembly to join me in congratulating all the hard 
work and volunteers that made the Rogers Hometown Hockey 
Tour such an amazing success, and a big thank you to everyone 
who came out to support Hockey Day in Canada in Regina. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Social Work Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to bring attention to Social Work Week, a week that 
recognizes the important contributions of the professional social 
workers who practise their vocation daily in our province. This 
year’s theme is Social Work: Profession of Choice, and it’s an 
apt theme, Mr. Speaker, because social work really is a 
profession of choice. 
 
Social workers do very important work all across 
Saskatchewan, from helping families to stay together, to 
working with seniors in care, to provide services to troubled 
youth in our schools. Social workers help to strengthen the 
bonds that hold our society together. Social workers are also 
called on to make tough choices in the course of their work. 
Day in and day out they are called upon to make the right 
choices for vulnerable people that are in need of protection and 
guidance. These choices have a lasting impact on lives of 
people they serve, and all of the social workers I know carry out 
these duties with a strong sense of responsibility and 
professionalism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this 
year’s Social Work Week and also in thanking all of our 
province’s social workers for the important work they do every 
day to make our province a healthier, stronger, and more 
equitable place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Positive Economic News 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
announce some great news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] has just released its latest 
provincial economic update, the Provincial Outlook report, and 
it says that “Real economic growth to accelerate despite lower 
oil prices” in Saskatchewan. 
 
Due to the strengths in the non-energy sectors, namely the rise 
in potash production and the expected positive growth in 
agriculture, Saskatchewan’s real GDP [gross domestic product] 
is expected to grow in 2015 and 2016 despite lower oil prices. 
RBC’s growth forecast for Saskatchewan’s real GDP in 2015 is 
2.1 per cent as well as 2.1 per cent in 2016. Mr. Speaker, 
because of our diversified economy, Saskatchewan’s outlook 
for the next two years is good. 
 
In February of this year, our province had the lowest 
unemployment rate in the country at 5 per cent, which is well 
below the national average of 6.8. Compared to February last 
year, employment is up in Saskatchewan with notable increases 
of 1.6 per cent in Saskatoon and point five per cent in Regina. 
We will not be looking at a recession, unlike our neighbours to 
the west, because Saskatchewan’s diversified economy has 
offset any weakness in the energy sector. 
 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6563 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to this government’s prudent spending, our 
focused growth plan, and our work in diversifying the economy, 
we are looking at a positive future for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Brain Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize Brain Awareness Week. Marked 
every year since 1996, Brain Awareness Week raises the profile 
of brain injuries and brain health on a global scale. 
 
One in three Canadians will be affected by a brain injury or 
disease at some point in their life. These injuries and disorders 
can take a tremendous toll on both the individuals impacted 
directly and their families too. The pain and sadness felt by the 
loved ones of the victims of degenerative brain diseases like 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s can be particularly difficult and 
isolating. 
 
Although we are still many years away from a cure for most 
brain injuries and diseases, research shows that prevention is a 
crucial step to reducing the incidence of brain injury. Acquired 
brain injuries from automobile, sports, and workplace accidents 
affect far too many young people in our province. Fastening a 
seatbelt, wearing a helmet or hard hat, and being safe at work 
are all easy, common sense things that everyone can do to help 
prevent brain injuries. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 
organizers and activists who are working so hard this week and 
every week to raise awareness about brain health in our 
province and also ask all members to take steps to prevent brain 
injuries and diseases in their own families and communities. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Juno Nominees Supported by Creative Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate the Saskatchewan nominees at the Juno Awards 
held yesterday. Jess Moskaluke was nominated for 
Breakthrough Artist of the Year and Country Album of the 
Year. Shooting Guns was nominated for metal/hard album of 
the year. And The Deep Dark Woods was nominated for roots 
tradition of the year. While they all play different styles of 
music, they do have one thing in common. They all received 
support from Creative Saskatchewan. 
 
Creative Saskatchewan supports not only music but all of 
creative industry within Saskatchewan. With funding from 
Creative Saskatchewan, these groups have been able to further 
their careers. But don’t take my word for it, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a quote from Jess Moskaluke’s manager, Mike Denney: 
 

The funding provided by Creative Saskatchewan grants 
was crucial to assist Jess in breaking into the Canadian 
market as well as helping her attain international exposure 

in the United States, Australia, and hopefully into Europe 
in 2015. 
 
In closing, Jess would not be where she is in her career 
today without the support and funding she received from 
Creative Saskatchewan to expand her career. 

 
Mr. Speaker, total funding for SaskMusic in 2014 was 
$552,176. That’s a 56 per cent increase from 2010 alone. That 
means great support for our musicians. We congratulate them 
on their success. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Social Work Week 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to announce that March 15th to 21st is Social Work 
Week in Saskatchewan. It was established by the Canadian 
Association of Social Workers in March 1990 to recognize the 
contribution of social workers across the country. 
 
Each year a different theme is selected to serve as a focus for 
activities within the profession and promotion of the role of 
social work with the public. This year’s theme is Social Work: 
Profession of Choice. 
 
Social Work Week is a wonderful opportunity to highlight 
social work as a profession as well as the many contributions 
social workers make in the fields of mental health, addictions, 
child protection, and community development. Social workers 
are diverse, and they work in public and private practice, in our 
health and education systems, through community-based 
organizations or filling policy, planning, and administrative 
roles. Mr. Speaker, Social Work Week is an opportunity to 
highlight social workers and their unique professional skill sets, 
commitment to social justice, and passion for helping others. 
 
I ask everyone to join me in celebrating Social Work Week and 
taking the time to recognize social workers across the province 
for their work in supporting some of our most valuable and 
vulnerable citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Long-Term Care Facilities Opened 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] argued that they have the best 
interests of rural Saskatchewan at heart. A simple review of the 
record shows a very different story. Our government’s record is 
clear. Two weeks ago we celebrated the grand opening of the 
Radville long-term care centre. This past weekend in my 
constituency, we celebrated the grand opening of the new 
Kipling integrated long-term care centre. This 45-bed, two-unit 
project also has four rooms available for couples. A tour of the 
facility gave those attending the opportunity to notice the 
spacious rooms, and how well natural lighting is used in this 
building. For many residents of Kipling who thought this day 
would never come, the grand opening was truly a grand 



6564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

celebration. 
 
Once the provincial government pledged $18 million to the 
project, it didn’t take community leaders, local individuals, and 
companies long to step up to the plate to contribute the 
necessary 7.1 million, or 28 per cent of the funds needed to 
complete the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this design-build facility is an excellent fit for the 
community, medical personnel, and residents who call it home. 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in thanking the Kipling District 
Health Foundation, the town of Kipling, and rural 
municipalities and individuals for their hard work and 
dedication to this project. 
 
I also want to extend a special thank you to the contractors who 
brought this project to fruition ahead of schedule and under 
budget. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative  
 
Mr. Broten: — We’ve been told that this government is still 
taking health care workers off the front lines, away from patient 
care, and forcing them into kaizen basics training where they’re 
forced to memorize Japanese terminology and fold paper 
airplanes. 
 
The latest numbers we have show that 23,000 health care 
workers have already been forced into this training, and the 
remaining 22,000 health care workers are expected to take it as 
well. Will the Premier tell us how much exactly will it cost in 
total to take over 45,000 health care workers away from their 
jobs for this kind of training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The total cost for 
lean is $40.5 million, Mr. Speaker, over four years. And the 
savings already accrued are about $112 million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier thinks that the $40 
million contract with the one US [United States] consultant is 
the extent of the expenses related to this training, he is 
absolutely dreaming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve obtained a one pager that was given out at the kaizen 
basics training from a health care worker who had to take this 
training just last week. This worker thought that it was pathetic 
and that it was a waste of time and money. This government is 
still forcing nurses and other health care professionals to 
memorize words like heijunka, jidoka, muda, and poka-yoke. 
And folding paper airplanes is still very much part of the kaizen 
basic lean training that we see promoted by this government. 
 
So a straightforward question for the Premier: why is the Sask 
Party government still insisting that our health care workers 
learn Japanese words, go to training sessions where they fold 

paper airplanes? What is the reason for this, and how much is it 
costing to send 45,000 health care workers to be taken away 
from their jobs for this bizarre training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered the 
question with respect to the costs of lean. That answer remains 
unchanged and is the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. While the 
contract with the one particular consultant is wrapping up, 
we’re going to continue with lean throughout the system with 
continuous improvement, Mr. Speaker, because it’s delivering 
results. It’s improving the patient care. We’ve had several 
examples by the Health minister in the House. We’ve had 
several examples given by the Minister of Health, Rural Health 
and Remote Health, Mr. Speaker. I’ve provided examples. The 
regions have. The quality care council has done that as well. 
And there are savings, Mr. Speaker, so we’ll continue with the 
program so long as there are those savings and so long as there 
are improvements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to talk about numbers of 
health care workers, we’re happy to talk about that as well, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s 2,600 more nurses practising in the 
province than there were when his party was in power, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 400 more doctors practising today in the 
province of Saskatchewan than there were when his party was 
in power, Mr. Speaker. There are more health care facilities 
being maintained, Mr. Speaker, receiving capital investment. 
There are hospitals being opened. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another very important point. Rather than 
seeing, as we did under the NDP, under the member’s party 
when they were in office, the closure of long-term care beds, 
the closure of long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
building them anew: 13 in rural Saskatchewan, facilities coming 
in urban Saskatchewan as well, hospitals in Moose Jaw, the 
Sask Hospital, the children’s hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any day of the week we’ll put our health care 
record against members opposite record from the past or their 
plan for the future. And we’ll talk more about that in a moment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can huff and puff, but 
he did not answer the question. Why is it necessary to have 
Japanese terminology for the health care workers in these 
training sessions? What is the total cost, including the staff 
costs and replacement costs, for 45,000 workers to take this 
training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already answered 
questions on the cost. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he answered it. 
He’s not addressing the costs, the staffing costs associated with 
this. The Deputy Premier beside him says, well what do you 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6565 

have against professional development? Nothing against 
professional development, Mr. Speaker, but this isn’t 
professional development. Forcing workers, Mr. Speaker, to 
learn Japanese words and fold paper airplanes is doing nothing 
to improve the quality of care here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Internal documents, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve received raise 
major concerns about this John Black lean approach. Here’s a 
quote, Mr. Speaker. I’ll refresh members’ memory: 
 

Memorization and activities that are not meaningful and in 
some cases are insulting, all of which are part of JBA’s 
approach, are not only not educationally sound and cause 
skepticism, alienation, and frustration. 

 
With regard to the kaizen basic training, the administrator 
specifically criticized the “lack of relevance” and the “rigid 
approach.” But despite that scathing criticism, Mr. Speaker, we 
have the Premier and we have that government sticking to the 
plan, rolling out with John Black like never before. You know, 
sure it’s condensed it a little bit, and it altered the video a little 
bit that they see, Mr. Speaker, but it is absolutely continuing 
with the bizarre and with the insulting aspects of these kaizen 
basics. 
 
How can the Premier possibly justify sending 45,000 health 
care workers to memorize Japanese words, to fold paper 
airplanes? Why is this going on, and what is the total cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat beside the Deputy 
Premier now for a very long time, and I know exactly what he 
sounds like. It would be hard for people in Saskatoon not to 
know how he sounds like. He doesn’t sound anything like what 
the Leader of the Opposition just portrayed in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’re going to take with more than a grain 
of salt any facts that are presented to this House by the Leader 
of the Opposition, especially on a day when he went out into the 
rotunda earlier before question period and presented his budget 
demands, Mr. Speaker, and some of them related to health care. 
Mr. Speaker, he didn’t just present his demands. To be fair, he 
also said, here’s how we’ll pay for those. And he highlighted 
some savings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done the math. And there’s more to come, 
but the preliminary math on what the Leader of the Opposition 
just said is that there are two . . . he’s going to spend, he’ll 
spend an additional $261 million in this budget, according to his 
demands, on operating alone, 1.6 billion in capital this year 
alone in operating, and his savings that he identified, 96 million, 
Mr. Speaker. We’d have a massive deficit on the operating side. 
We’d have a capital deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with respect to health care, we know what it would be like 
to go back to the NDP days of health care. We know what that 
was like. When they weren’t funding training seats for nurses, 
then there was a shortage. They weren’t funding training seats 
for doctors and then there was a shortage. They closed 
long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. They refused to build a 
hospital in Moose Jaw. They refused to build the Sask Hospital 
and invest in capital and human resources in health care and 

seek continuous improvement. They refused to do anything 
about the longest wait times for surgery in the history of our 
province and in the country.  
 
All that’s changed. We’re not going back to the days of the 
NDP.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there are huge savings that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers could achieve if we stopped with the 
wasteful pet projects that we see from this government, Mr. 
Speaker, if we started to see some common sense and some 
smart decisions being made. 
 
One area to start, Mr. Speaker, would be to end the John Black 
training that we see going on. They said, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going to scale back the Japanese. They were going to have 
some common sense. We have, Mr. Speaker, workshops, these 
John Black workshops going on just last week where the same 
Japanese is being used, Mr. Speaker, with the same 
terminology, the same dismissive and offensive approach to 
health care workers. 
 
And we know the effect that it’s having on health care workers. 
Just 8 per cent of nurses say that the JBA [John Black and 
Associates] version of lean, Mr. Speaker, has improved morale 
and has improved the working situation. Meanwhile, Mr. 
Speaker, 60 per cent of nurses say that engagement has 
plummeted as a result of the John Black version of lean. And 
it’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, because they’re taking highly 
trained health professionals, taking them away from the front 
lines, forcing them to go into training sessions away from 
patients, and then insulting their intelligence with bizarre 
training. And that’s an assessment from senior administrators 
within the health system. 
 
These horrible results in the surveys, Mr. Speaker, should’ve 
been a wake-up call to this government and to this Premier. It 
should have stopped with the nonsense, started to use some 
common sense, and saved a ton of money. 
 
My question to the Premier: why didn’t he listen to that 
wake-up call, and why won’t he answer how much taxpayers 
are paying for 45,000 health care workers to go through this 
lean kaizen basics nonsense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already answered the 
question with respect to cost of the lean project in health care; 
moreover the contract that he’s referring to is over on the 31st 
of March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, we’re discussing where there might be 
opportunities for savings in the upcoming budget, and the 
Leader of the Opposition just referenced it in his question, Mr. 
Speaker. He was asked actually at his scrum about that 
question. The question was, what’s waste? There aren’t going to 
be a lot of increases anywhere in this budget, so what are you 
cutting?  
 
Here was his answer, and this is a quote: “Well it was this 



6566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

government that eliminated the film employment tax credit. It 
would be great to have the industry here to make up for any 
temporary dip that might be there with oil.” He said, any dip 
that might be there with oil — $700 million short in terms of 
revenue shortfall because of the oil price. Mr. Speaker, families 
in this province now out of a job because of the layoffs in this 
sector.  
 
Mr. Speaker, his answer to the question today, well how would 
you make up that shortfall? He’d reinstate the film employment 
tax credit which, by the way, it’s a grant. We have a grant 
today. It’s not at the level it was, but we still have a grant. Mr. 
Speaker, no wonder the NDP don’t want their Leader of the 
Opposition talking about his alternatives or, worse, talking 
about the economy or his plan for the budget because what we 
get then, when he does, is nonsense. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the waste should be cut by this 
government, like the John Black version of lean that we see. 
And we should start to see some smarter approaches when it 
comes to the economy, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to fixing 
the procurement policy, when it comes to supporting 
Saskatchewan industry, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to stopping 
the huge increase we have seen in the use of consultants by this 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the same time this government is 
shovelling incredible amounts of money out the door for things 
like the John Black version of lean. It couldn’t even tell us how 
much they’re paying for eight officials when it comes to lean 
travel. They said it would take 177 hours to calculate that, Mr. 
Speaker. This Premier can’t tell you the full cost of how much 
this lean project is costing because they’re not even tracking it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s an example of what the highly trained health 
professionals are told at the John Black kaizen training, Mr. 
Speaker. They are told when they do, are forced to do these 
seminars, health care workers are told that when there is an 
empty box of supplies, “It signals that it needs to be 
replenished.” Well no kidding, Mr. Speaker. As if 
highly-trained health professionals did not know that an empty 
box of supplies meant that it needed to be replenished. The 
nonsense from this government, Mr. Speaker, keeps mounting 
day after day when it comes to this project, and sadly so too do 
the expenses related to this project. 
 
Does the Premier see that the kaizen, the John Black version of 
lean, Mr. Speaker, is not only a huge waste of time and money, 
but it’s a massive insult to the intelligence of hard-working and 
trained health care professionals here in Saskatchewan? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, in regard to the 
language of lean training, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to front-line 
professionals who have said, you know, at first they were a bit 
apprehensive, but once they had been trained in the methods 

and the phraseology they wouldn’t really understand any other 
way to communicate as effectively and efficiently as they can 
with that language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier has spoken very in depth as to the savings and the 
benefits of lean, Mr. Speaker. But in regard to the eight officials 
that the member opposite is speaking about, I just want to put 
on record that admittedly 177 hours for eight official lean 
expense travel, to uncover those numbers, Mr. Speaker, what 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale failed to mention was it 
covered five years of materials, contained extensive amounts of 
personal information that would have to be removed as required 
by the freedom of information and privacy Act, and also that 
member failed to mention that the privacy department worked 
with the NDP to reduce that request to just $75. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Why do 45,000 health care workers have to learn kaizen basics 
training where they learn Japanese terminology and where they 
fold paper airplanes? Why is that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it has been stated the 
John Black contract is over at the end of this month. There is 
ample opportunity, with the experts and the lean leaders that 
have been trained, to further Saskatchewanize lean in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The scope of lean that has gone over 
health care was virtually unattainable, when you talk to experts 
in the field, unattainable through any other source. 
 
Evidently there has been some problems and some issues up to 
this point. We’re moving away from that contract. We’re 
engaging the professionals within our Saskatchewan health 
system that have been trained by lean, Mr. Speaker, lean 
leaders. I think there’s around 600 at this point. Further training 
needs to be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the team-building exercises, 
the language, Mr. Speaker, admittedly there are some that really 
aren’t as engaging of the system, Mr. Speaker. But there’s 
many, many of the front-line workers and the lean leaders that 
have been engaged that see and appreciate the effects and the 
efficiencies of lean, and they’re telling us, Mr. Speaker, don’t 
go back. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Hyperbaric Therapy and Moose Jaw Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Last week the second Health minister said, 
“. . . the existing hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw has been 
used about 20 examples a year for the last five years, so 
admittedly valuable but very low usage.” Well the truth is that 
the hyperbaric chamber is used for as many as 330 treatments 
per year. Despite being regularly used to treat patients, this 
government is ending that service because the John Black lean 
process shrunk the size of the new Moose Jaw Hospital and 
there’s no room for the hyperbaric chamber. 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6567 

Now that this government has accurate information about the 
usage of this vital service, will the Health minister finally agree 
to keep providing public hyperbaric treatment in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to 
clarify what the member opposite stated, there’s been 20 
patients, under 20 patients per year, and admittedly some of 
them have had a few different treatments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at the hyperbaric treatment, Mr. Speaker, granted 
there is benefits, definite benefits, as we have been hearing from 
the experts at hyperbaric treatment. But they too admit that it is 
secondary treatment. It’s follow-up treatment to a primary 
trauma, whether it’s CO2 poisoning or whatever the case may 
be, Mr. Speaker, that is secondary to the primary high-flow 
oxygen treatment that’s needed right at the source, right at the 
time, very close after the time of the trauma, Mr. Speaker. As a 
government, we are looking at options for this project, 
including community-based options, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will say that when it comes in regard to the Moose Jaw 
Hospital, you know, the members opposite really aren’t, don’t 
seem very excited about the project. Although they had two 
cabinet ministers that couldn’t get the project done, we have 
two aptly suited MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
that have got the project done, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward 
to more questions to talk further about the project. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Dr. David Amies who spent many years 
providing hyperbaric treatment in the Moose Jaw Hospital says, 
“It’s disappointing . . . [that we] can take a sophisticated 
instrument like this out of our community, which was . . . 
[raised] through efforts of the community, and it’ll be junked.” 
 
The Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association is 
also incredibly frustrated, because they helped establish the 
hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw. Even in its peak year in 
2010-11 it cost the government just $6,600 to operate the 
hyperbaric chamber that whole year. That’s it. Yet it saves the 
government a tremendous amount of money because this 
treatment reduces the need for amputations and helps people 
heal more quickly. 
 
To the minister: why won’t this government reverse its decision 
and keep this vital public service in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as I just stated, we do 
recognize the value of hyperbaric treatment. We are open to 
options. We are looking at options but also including 
community-based options that might be presented throughout 
the community, Mr. Speaker, including the Moose Jaw 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was pointed out earlier, two cabinet ministers 

from Moose Jaw — as well as a premier, I guess, from Moose 
Jaw that never got the hospital built — these two members from 
Moose Jaw did, Mr. Speaker. One of the former members, 
current mayor of Moose Jaw, have to say: 
 

“There (are) comments of energy efficiency, better use of 
resources within the new facility, a new facility 
maximizing the lean processes,” she said. “We’ll see how 
it works out but I’m sure the planning will go into it and 
it’ll be a successful project.” 

 
That was then NDP MLA Deb Higgins, now mayor of Moose 
Jaw, said in 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — If the Premier and his two Health ministers 
won’t listen to common sense here at home, perhaps this will 
change their minds. We know how utterly obsessed this 
government has become with the Virginia Mason Hospital in 
Seattle. The Sask Party government has sent over 800 of our 
health care workers to visit that hospital as part of the John 
Black lean field trips to the United States. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Virginia Mason Hospital has a hyperbaric 
chamber. Now that the Health minister knows that, will he 
finally change his mind and commit to keep this valuable public 
service in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 
member opposite heard my last two answers, so I’ll repeat 
them. We are looking at options for hyperbaric treatment in the 
province, including community-based options that would 
possibly include Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and other areas of 
the province, any groups that would be interested in looking at 
it. 
 
Here’s another quote for them, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The “patient-friendly” hospital is being built using lean 
principles and will incorporate flexible care whereby 
required services will come to patients rather than having 
patients moved unnecessarily throughout the hospital . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was again by a former deputy premier, Deb 
Higgins, and now mayor of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. We are 
very committed to this project, Mr. Speaker. We have to keep in 
mind as well the development of this project, the lean principles 
around this hospital have allowed for the installation of MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging] that will serve area patients 
around Moose Jaw and the south part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, by the thousands, not just 20. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 
Government Usage of Consultants 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 
Central Services: can she confirm that her ministry undertook 



6568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

no analysis comparing the use of consultants versus the use of 
government employees? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Thank you. I would like to thank the 
member opposite for that question. Actually there was . . . The 
Ministry of Central Services has some analysis when looking at 
the IT [information technology] consultants that we do use. We 
do have different programs in place that are quite old, so we do 
need specialized IT consultants for that. We don’t have 
consultants on our staff right now, and it would be . . . it 
wouldn’t make any sense in order to hire these consultants full 
time if we’re just hiring for specific projects. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’d certainly welcome 
that being tabled. The independent Provincial Auditor was 
highly critical of this government for massively increasing the 
amount of money it’s spending on consultants, overall 
government increasing the use of consultants by 228 per cent. 
In the Ministry of Central Services alone, the use of consultants 
has jumped by 168 per cent, and 70 per cent of the time, the 
auditor says, this government isn’t even properly tracking what 
those consultants are doing. 
 
We put in a freedom of information request for any analysis 
comparing the use of consultants versus the use of government 
employees which the government, which the ministry has 
undertaken over the last four years. And the government said 
there has been no such analysis, none, which again is very 
different from what the minister is saying here today. So to the 
minister: why is that the case? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, our annual number of 
consultants is down 33 per cent from theirs. And we have never 
had as many as 100 IT consultants, as that government had, on 
the IT file. And further, given the hiring constraints, I have 
instructed that when IT consultants’ contracts come up for 
renewal, an evaluation and determination of whether they are 
required is done to ensure base services are maintained. Mr. 
Speaker, since December the Ministry of Central Services has 
terminated 12 IT contracts for a total contract value of 2.1 
million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — A new report commissioned by the 
Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan, Sask 
Wheat, Sask Pulse, and SaskBarley shows that the big rail 
companies are overcharging grain producers. Over the last 
seven years, grain producers have been overcharged to the tune 
of at least $2 billion. To the Agriculture minister: does the 
government agree with this assessment, and what are you going 
to do about it? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well you know, we’ve heard this 
allegation made, and we’re looking into it and will act 
accordingly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen time and time again 
how terribly hesitant this Sask Party government is to stand up 
to the big rail companies and to fight for Saskatchewan farmers. 
And we’ve seen that same hesitancy from the federal 
Conservatives. 
 
To the Agriculture minister: does he agree with me that 2 
billion taken from the pockets of farmers and put into the 
coffers of the big rail companies as a result of overcharging is 
absolutely outrageous? And will he push the federal 
Conservatives for a full-costing review and the appropriate 
adjustment to the maximum revenue entitlement so that 
Saskatchewan farmers don’t keep losing out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well I’m going to start informing the 
member about some of the actions we’ve taken starting as early 
as May 2013, long before the NDP were even aware that this 
issue might exist sometime in the future. 
 
We started work on that with the Ministry of Highways and 
Agriculture officials, met with CP [Canadian Pacific]; June 
2013, began work on a New West Partnership port capacity 
study; July 24th, 2013, Ministry of Agriculture officials met 
with Mark Hemmes of Quorum consulting; early October 2013, 
Minister of Highways and Deputy Minister of Highways met 
with CP in Vancouver on grain transportation issues; October 
25th, ’13, Highways, Economy, and Agriculture met to talk 
about what was happening with the movement of commodities 
to port at that time; November 7th, 2013, Minister of 
Agriculture sent letters to federal government, railroads, grain 
companies, and all other stakeholders regarding the record crop 
and the importance of an efficient transportation system; 
November 7th, 2013, Minister of Agriculture . . . Ah, I’m out of 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I didn’t know a person could hold their breath 
that long. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to questions 666 to 669. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 666 through 669. 
 
[14:15] 
 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6569 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 172 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to speak to Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. 
I had an opportunity last week to put some remarks on the 
record, and this bill will be moving to committee today where I 
look forward to having the opportunity to ask the minister some 
direct questions and look forward to his responses. So with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 172, The 
Naturopathy Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 172, The Naturopathy Act be committed 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 174 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 
Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon of Bill No. 
174, The Registered Teachers Act. My comments will be brief 
at this point in time. I do look forward to following up directly 
with the minister in committee. We know that this aims to have 
an arm’s-length structure that would deal with some 
disciplinary processes and some aspects of certification, and 
certainly we want to make sure that we’re engaging the minister 
to understand all potential consequences of that decision. 
 

Certainly we’ve listened to the input from the education sector 
on this front: the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association], LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents], the STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] — that’s an important voice on these 
respective matters — from the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations as well, Mr. Speaker. And so we’ll incorporate 
some of those questions when we come forward with the 
minister. 
 
I know one thing that many are wanting to make sure is clear is 
that the scope of this is well understood and that that scope 
doesn’t creep just by way of this government choosing that all 
of a sudden this encompasses a whole bunch of other aspects, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think of professional development as one thing, and I 
hear the Deputy Premier shouting across today. And this is a 
concerning aspect when we talk about professional 
development because professional development in the 
education sector is critical to making sure that teachers and that 
education workers can serve communities and improve 
outcomes and be as effective as they can be. And what the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t need, what parents don’t need, 
what students don’t need, what teachers don’t need is this 
government dictating a whole round of indoctrination as we’ve 
seen in health care where they now, as I understand, are going 
to actually have taken in over 40,000 workers for this process of 
understanding some of these Japanese terms and then paper 
airplane folding, Mr. Speaker, on the whim of this government. 
 
So when we look at a committee like this and the certification 
aspects, it’s important for us to make sure that scope doesn’t 
creep on the whim of this government into all this sort of 
useless exercises that we see this government wasting dollars on 
in health care, Mr. Speaker, because we know that professional 
development is something critically important to the education 
sector. Certainly it’s important that teachers have an important 
place on this committee, and certainly we can talk about the 
composition. There seems to strike some balance on that front, 
although certainly we want to engage in a bit more consultation 
on that front as well. 
 
We know when it comes to education, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government’s record is a poor one. It’s one that, as presiding 
over a period of a real boom, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
failed to get the job done for students across Saskatchewan. 
They’ve left students without the supports they deserve, without 
the one-on-one attention that they deserve. They’ve stripped 
classrooms and schools of the professional services that are 
needed. There’s been an absolute disrespect towards the 
hard-working teachers and educational workers in this province. 
We have class sizes that are having an negative impact on far 
too many Saskatchewan students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know there’s a better way forward than that, and it’s 
disappointing that this government’s record when it comes to 
education is a failed one and that far too often when this 
government engages in the education file, they simply ram 
forward with their own ideological agenda instead of listening 
and working with a sector that certainly has the long-term 
interests of Saskatchewan front and centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

So we’ll engage in this discussion, making sure that we fully 
understand about the consequences of this mechanism. 
Certainly there’s, you know, it’s important that the ed partners 
have engaged in this process, and we appreciate and thank them 
for doing so. 
 
With that being said, I will be following up in committee for 
Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 174, The 
Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 175 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The bill that 
I’m speaking to at this point in time is simply Bill No. 175, The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act. It relates 
directly to the Bill 174 that I just put comments on. 
 
We’ll follow up in committee with the minister on this front, 
but any chance I have to stand up for Saskatchewan students 
and for education in this province, I will, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly it needs to be pointed out that this government’s 
record when it comes to education and the treatment of our 
students is a failed one, Mr. Speaker, and they deserve so much 
better. The approach of this government does have long-lasting 
negative impacts, Mr. Speaker, both for the potential of each 
and every one of those students across Saskatchewan, but for us 
as a province as a whole, socially, economically, culturally. 
Certainly we’ll continue to champion the needs in education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I say, this is related directly to Bill No. 174. We will follow 
up in committee with the minister. And so at this point in time, 
that’ll conclude my remarks as it relates to Bill No. 175, The 

Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 175, The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 176 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
I just want to start out, I know one of my colleagues and a 
number of members opposite attended, and we had traffic safety 
hearings. We went around the province hearing issues and 
suggestions, recommendations from different, whether they 
were individuals, organizations, professionals that gave reports 
and submitted those I guess reports to the traffic safety hearings 
that went around the province. And from that, the government 
accepted and went forward on some of the recommendations 
and chose to move forward on some of them. And it came into 
law of course to protect . . . It was about safety. 
 
When we went around doing the hearings, I know that there 
were some good recommendations made. Both sides agreed that 
we needed to protect our Saskatchewan residents and, you 
know, the government formed the Act, and it came in to be and 
it had . . . [inaudible] . . . But obviously there’s I guess 
individuals brought forward some areas where they felt we 
missed an opportunity or government missed an opportunity, 
didn’t understand some of the consequences that were going to 
be affecting the business sector out there when it goes to 
impounding vehicles. And at the end of the day it was about 
safety, to make sure. 
 
We’ve seen the high cost of fatalities when it comes to, you 
know, excess speeding, handheld devices being operated while 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6571 

people are operating motor vehicles and stuff. Having said that, 
I know the government came forward. They’ve had business 
people come forward with some concerns, and I think some of 
us seen it, you know, within the media. 
 
The government decided to make amendments. And how 
they’re going to amend that, I guess in one way it’s bringing in 
this amendment they’re trying to do, from what I can see from 
the minister’s comments, where they’re looking at an 
opportunity to be harsher on the actual drivers. 
 
I think this has to do with the business and it has to do with you 
operating a vehicle. You’re an employee and you’re operating a 
business that is, you know, owned by a business. It might be a 
family business. It could be a big corporation. And you get a 
number of different violations, and there’s an opportunity there 
for police to impound the vehicle, lay . . . I guess with the rules 
and saying harsher penalties to make it clear how dangerous 
this is. It’s about safety. 
 
There was an opportunity to impound vehicles up to seven days, 
and that has been some hardship. I guess government’s looking 
at that, and I know we’re going to have opportunity to ask 
questions. But I also know that the committee went around 
when they heard . . . There was different recommendations that 
were made. 
 
And I know that we’ll have an opportunity to ask the minister 
and some of the officials in committee as to some of those 
recommendations that were brought forward and some of the 
issues still facing Saskatchewan residents. And I know, you 
know, in one of the communities — and I’ll be bringing some 
of those — concerns raised were about safety for residents who 
are travelling some of the roads and the highways, whether 
they’re rural, north, somewhere in Saskatchewan. There are still 
some issues that need to be addressed, and I know that in 
committee we’ll get an opportunity to bring some of those 
concerns that were raised and ask the minister and the officials 
some of them. 
 
But I guess as far as the amendment that’s going on here, it’s 
going to allow now the police to lay a charge. And there’s a 
provision in here too: if you’re the driver of a vehicle and you 
fall in the guidelines where they can actually remove your 
driver’s licence from you for three days, not only will they do 
the vehicle impound for seven days; they actually can give and 
take your driver’s from you, a suspension, for three days. I 
think it gives a little more harsher penalty for those, that will 
remind how serious the violation is and how serious 
Saskatchewan people and the government and ourselves as a 
committee heard the concerns. And sometimes it’s good to see 
when government and opposition works together to come up 
with a way to find a tool that will protect Saskatchewan 
residents, whether it’s families travelling on our highways, 
seniors, it doesn’t matter. You’re working . . . It protects. 
 
So at that point I see this as an opportunity. As the opposition 
there was two of us on that committee. We supported the 
vehicle impoundment. We’ve shown that it definitely helps to 
lessen fatalities in our province. In other provinces the numbers 
were clear. There is a provision so we did support that. Now we 
know that there’s going to be a provision for an owner or a 
driver to appeal the decision of the impound for seven days, that 

they can go before the traffic safety board I believe. And we’re 
going to have to go in committee. We can ask more: who will 
be hearing that, and how that process goes through. And you 
know, we’ll ask some more questions about that. 
 
So if one vehicle is impounded and you’re the owner of a 
business and your employee has done that for whatever the time 
and it warrants impounding, the police officer or justice and 
then the process that’s there to deal with it can say, we’ll 
impound your vehicle for seven days. There’s now an 
amendment to have an appeal so that the owner can appeal that 
decision to the traffic safety board. We want to get some of 
those details out, and in committee we can do that. And at this 
point, I know we’ll have more questions about it. 
 
[14:30] 
 
But the other area we’re talking about was the three days where 
you would . . . Actually the employee will lose his vehicle or 
her vehicle. They’ll lose their driver’s licence for three days, up 
to three days, if they’re caught and if they’re violating. So I 
think it sends a harsher penalty, message, and I think people 
will take it serious. And it gives the law enforcement a tool to 
assist them to make sure that these individuals that are violating 
and creating, you know, concerns for Saskatchewan residents 
out there on the highways, whether, like I said, they’re 
speeding, hand-held devices, and they’re putting and 
jeopardizing other people’s safety, then there’s an opportunity 
to act on it. 
 
So initially I know in committee we’re going to have an 
opportunity to ask some questions and we do have . . . And I 
know it’s about safety, and I know there’s individuals out there 
that I have talked to and I will talk to again following up that 
have some issues that they would like to see where is the 
ministry dealing with the hearings and some of those issues that 
were raised. And we’re going to get an opportunity to ask some 
of those questions, and I will ask those questions in committee. 
 
So at this time I have no further questions on this amendment, 
and we’ll wait to deal with it in committee, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister for Crown Investments that Bill No. 
176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2014 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 



6572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 177 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 
Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 177, An Act respecting Insurance and 
Insurers and making consequential amendments to other Acts 
and regulations. Mr. Speaker, I’m holding up this piece of 
legislation because I think it has 300, about 300 pages, and 
there are a whole number of issues that are to be dealt with. 
And I’ll spend some time going through a number of them but I 
think we need to give a bit of a background. 
 
In Saskatchewan, as the province, we have the jurisdiction to 
regulate insurance. But for the public, there are other places 
where insurance is regulated — more importantly, maybe at the 
national level. And so what this insurance Act does is fits in 
with a national scheme. 
 
Now it’s my understanding from what the minister has said in 
his second reading speech and with others who have explained 
some of this bill or the purpose behind the bill . . . Plus in my 
previous role as attorney general, I know we started the revision 
of this piece of legislation which I think has been probably 
almost a total career task for one or two of the civil service 
lawyers. So, Mr. Speaker, what we have here today is the work 
of many people. But I think in a lot of ways we have to say 
thank you to Mr. Jim Hall, who is a lawyer at Saskatchewan 
Justice, and he has been regulating the insurance industry but 
also working on making and drafting a new piece of legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation relates to a number of issues 
that are consumer protection issues for Saskatchewan residents. 
It relates to the licensing of insurers that’s done in the province. 
It relates to insurance contracts, such as they are, and it relates 
to a number of other issues that are related to insurance, 
including actuaries and actual insurance corporations. 
 
But I think I need to start off by saying that the most common 
contact with insurance companies in Saskatchewan relates to 
their contact with SGI, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, or 
SGI Canada. It relates to their contact with the medical care 
insurance and other health insurance-related ones which are 
either administered through the province or through the 
Saskatchewan Blue Cross and Group Medical Services. And I’d 
have to say probably that would be the majority of the kinds of 
insurance contracts that people deal with. 
 
Well I’d like to inform you and inform the House that this bill 
doesn’t apply to them. It doesn’t apply to SGI. It doesn’t apply 
to GMS [Group Medical Services]. It doesn’t apply to Blue 
Cross. And it is, I think, a concern of some people in the 
insurance business that some of the rules that are in this Act, 
which I think are going to be quite good, don’t apply across the 
board. And there is no sort of discussion about that in the 
minister’s second reading speech. There’s a recognition, I think, 

that those types of insurance companies have their own 
insurance. But I think practically it may be a time that we 
should look at how the principles of this Act apply to all 
insurance in Saskatchewan so that we have basically fair rules 
for consumers, fair rules for companies, and that they apply 
right across the board. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have this legislation, but it applies to a 
fairly narrow group. It doesn’t directly apply to nationally or 
federally regulated insurance companies either. 
 
So we’re in a spot where we have this legislation, and it covers 
a whole number of areas. I think practically when we look at the 
legislation itself, you can see that the initial part deals with 
definitions of terms, definitions that are going to be applicable 
throughout the legislation. But it basically though does make 
sure that some of these terms and some of these perspectives are 
limited only to those provincially regulated insurance agents, 
insurance people. 
 
Now there are some, I think, positive things. I know that in 
discussions with various people in the insurance industry, 
everybody is looking forward to this legislation because it does 
modernize or it does do some things that will help the insurance 
industry itself. One example is that insurance agents will be 
allowed to be adjusters. They’ll be allowed to be adjusters in 
smaller claims, which means then that your insurance agent in a 
smaller community, if there’s some kind of damage that’s 
$15,000 or less, they will be able to go and say, okay, you can 
replace that which has been stolen or that which has been 
damaged. And they don’t end up having to bring in an adjuster 
and add that extra cost. 
 
It also has some exemptions in this legislation around health 
benefit plans that are provided by employers or by unions. And 
that’s, I mean, I think it’s accepted and people want that to 
happen. 
 
It also has some exemptions around salary continuance plans. 
So I guess these would be like disability plans or plans where 
salary continues when somebody has some other requirements. 
Also it deals with some of the issues that have been national 
and provincial issues, but more national issues around the 
solvency requirements for corporations must include provisions 
that make sure that the insurance for employees will be paid out 
— in other words, that they have a priority in the whole 
insolvency of corporations. 
 
So we end up . . . The bill itself has 11 parts, and that first part 
deals with many of the definitions. There are some, I think, 
some technical parts to that that I may want to ask some 
questions when we get into committee. 
 
It also raises the question around the technical aspects of 
whether, when we are in committee, we may want to consider 
as a committee that we bring in witnesses or people who could 
appear before the committee to raise some very specific issues. 
Because when the legislation has been drafted, we know that 
they’ve built on the Saskatchewan legislation with assistance 
looking at other pieces of legislation across Canada, but 
primarily in Albert and in British Columbia. And some of the 
ways that they do things in Alberta, according to the people 
who are here in Saskatchewan, don’t work quite as well as what 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6573 

we do in Saskatchewan. So the question comes whether we 
should adopt the Alberta provisions or whether we should 
actually figure out a way to draft and use the provisions that we 
have here. 
 
That raises the question of whether the minister will be willing 
to look at some amendments as we move forward in this, and 
my sense is that, given the size of the legislation, there may 
even be amendments that he is already willing to bring forward 
to correct any little things that need to be fixed. But I think 
there are some areas where we’ll want to look at how the 
legislation is drafted. 
 
The second part of the legislation, which is 69 sections long, 
deals with the licensing of insurers, and it sets out all of the 
rules around how insurers must be set up to basically provide 
fairness to the consumers in Saskatchewan. Practically it 
authorizes the appropriate capital requirements and the kinds of 
financial statements that are necessary, gives powers to the 
superintendent of insurance to regulate those companies, and it 
requires that the companies keep records around the classes of 
insurance that it provides. 
 
There are not very many insurers that are licensed in 
Saskatchewan in the sense that they’re based in Saskatchewan, 
and so there’s a next section which relates to provincial 
companies itself. I think at this point there are two provincial 
insurance companies, but it sets out the regulations for that. It 
also sets out how other companies that are going to sell 
insurance in Saskatchewan will register in Saskatchewan to 
provide insurance. So part III is provincially incorporated 
insurance companies. 
 
Part IV relates to fraternal societies, and this is insurers that are 
not maybe seen as traditional insurance companies. That 
includes the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Knights of 
Columbus, and other organizations like that, that through 
membership in the organization, they jointly provide life 
insurance, accident insurance, sickness insurance for their 
members. This whole section or this whole part of the 
legislation, part IV deals with these fraternal societies, and so it 
also then has to address issues like annual meetings and the 
constitutions and bylaws and rules and other things like that that 
allow for these organizations to provide the services to their 
members. 
 
I think everybody will be pleased to have these rules laid out in 
a relatively straightforward fashion and have them in one place 
where they can be reviewed and discussed. Now practically this 
may be another area where it would be interesting for the 
committee to have some expert witnesses who could explain 
whether these rules fit with their fraternal societies or whether 
there are some adjustments that need to be made, so we can 
look at that as well. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Part V deals with insurance intermediaries and insurance 
councils. This is an area where there have been some fairly 
interesting changes, and I think that we need to understand what 
the changes are and why they’ve been made. 
 
One of them relates to having somebody who is either a 

managing general agent or a third party administrator inserted 
into the process, and this I think is to deal with insurance agents 
who operate within a larger organization. But one of the 
provisions of the legislation that may need to be amended I 
think relates to the fact that you need to have an address for 
service for every single person or an address of their 
intermediary, and there’s some quite convoluted steps that have 
been added into this that I don’t think are necessary and don’t 
really add any protection to the public. 
 
I know that through the licensing agency or insurance brokers 
much of this information would be there already, but it sounds 
like this legislation is going to try to duplicate that, and I think 
we may need to ask some questions, have some clarification 
about why there is this duplication. My sense in looking at it is 
that it relates to the fact that they’ve maybe pulled in some 
legislation from other provinces without thinking through 
clearly how it’s going to apply in Saskatchewan, but that’s an 
area where I think we can maybe get some further clarification 
as we move forward in the committee process. And once again 
it may be an area where we would want some expert witnesses 
to come and be part of our committee process. 
 
When you look at all of the parts or all of the areas in part V, it 
does fairly dramatically restructures insurance councils and 
redefines how they operate as well. It also, you know, 
consolidates hail insurance in with general insurance. It creates 
some other organizations that will I suppose over the longer 
term provide the kind of consumer protection that we want, but 
I think we need to understand fully what this means. And we 
also need to understand fully how it all is brought to bear in our 
Saskatchewan situation. 
 
Another interesting factor in this whole area relates to the term 
“broker,” “insurance broker.” The legislation is going to make it 
very clear that an insurance broker has to sell more than one 
line of insurance. If you’re only selling SGI insurance, or if 
you’re only selling Wawanesa insurance, you’re not a broker. 
You’re an agent for that company, but you’re not a broker. 
 
Now we as consumers of insurance like to go to a broker 
because we’ve got a choice, and we end up having some advice 
from a broker as to which is the best product that’s there. I think 
that most people are going to be pleased with that strengthening 
of the definition of “broker,” but it may mean that they’ll have 
to change a few signs around the businesses in Saskatchewan 
because a lot of people that hold themselves out as brokers 
really don’t have more than one product and therefore shouldn’t 
be using that term. 
 
Now part VI in the legislation deals with unsolicited insurance, 
reinsurance, and special brokers. Now the unsolicited insurance 
issues relate to sort of the cold calls that you get on the 
telephone or on the Internet, or I suppose it would relate to 
some of the insurance kinds of things that are put out or touted 
on a television program or something like that. There’s a good 
attempt here to protect the consumers around that unsolicited 
insurance. And I think part of what we’ll have to do is 
understand what the protections are, but I think it’s a good thing 
to do, and it builds on the experience of what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The whole area of reinsurance relates to the ability of insurance 



6574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2015 

providers in Saskatchewan to then spread that insurance risk 
across companies around the world. There are some very large 
insurance companies that really only operate in the reinsurance 
business, and we need to make sure that what we’re doing here 
in Saskatchewan fits in with that world market. And so we’ll be 
asking some questions around that, but I think practically the 
rules in this area should be rules that are the same as what we 
have right across Canada in other provincial and territorial 
jurisdictions and as well as the federal jurisdiction. 
 
Now the new part VII of the legislation relates to market 
conduct. And this is I think a new part to the legislation that 
builds on work that’s been done in the insurance industry 
around, what are the standards for insurance brokers or 
insurance agents in providing advice around insurance? This is I 
think a good provision. It will I think build on what’s happened 
already in Saskatchewan. It’ll build on what’s happened in 
other provinces, and it provides some consumer protection 
provisions that will I think be helpful for Saskatchewan 
residents. But once again we have to make sure that what kinds 
of provisions are brought forward are fair both to the purchasers 
of insurance but also to the agents and the brokers who are 
involved in the business as well as the companies. 
 
It does relate to some of the kinds of issues that we often get 
calls about in our constituency offices where people have not 
had a resolution of an insurance problem working with the 
agents or with some other groups, and they want to see if there 
isn’t some way that we as members of the legislature can help 
them. I’m hoping that the fair practice market conduct kind of 
rules that are developed by the insurance industry will go a long 
way to addressing many of those kinds of problems. 
 
The next part of the legislation relates to contracts of insurance, 
and it sets out a whole array of the types of contracts of 
insurance to make sure that they are properly described and that 
they’re properly regulated. 
 
And as you can see from the legislation, this is the longest part. 
It’s got 212 sections in that area, and it goes through all kinds of 
issues that are related to very specific contracts, whether it’s 
crop insurance or hail insurance contracts or whether it’s life 
insurance contracts or accidents and sickness insurance 
contracts, as well as automobile insurance, other than SGI 
coverage. So this, in a lot of ways, will be the very practical 
part of the legislation that protects the consumers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the importance of having this in the legislation I think 
can’t be underestimated. But it also goes back to the very first 
point I made which is maybe these rules should also be set up in 
a way so that they apply to SGI and that the provisions around 
accident and sickness insurance apply to GMS and the 
Saskatchewan Blue Cross so that we have one set of rules for 
insurance in the province. And that will be I think part of some 
of the questions that we’ll ask just so that we can understand 
why that next step wasn’t taken when we started looking at this 
legislation. I note that I think it’s about five decades, the 
minister said, since we’ve done some major review of insurance 
legislation, and this may be the time we get within our lifetimes 
as legislators to deal with this. 
 
So anyway that whole part, part VIII, around the contracts of 

insurance has got a number of questions, a number of issues 
that we’ll have the officials explain those ones where we have 
some concerns. It’s also another area where it may make sense 
to have expert witnesses to identify things that could be made 
better before we actually finally pass the legislation that we’ll 
see as we move forward. 
 
So the next part is part IX which is the enforcement provision, 
which is getting towards the end of the legislation. But this sets 
out the powers that are given to the superintendent of insurance 
around the scrutiny of the regulatory process, and I think it 
obviously strengthens those powers but does it in a reasonable 
fashion. 
 
I think that we haven’t had any sort of direct comments about 
some parts of this, but I know that there have been some issues 
around a couple of changes that are proposed in the legislation. 
One of those changes relates to an area of insurance which is 
actually quite obscure in one sense, but it does affect people 
who get into a jam on being able to pay for life insurance that is 
a whole life policy, and one of the things that this legislation 
does is it eliminates the ability of people to sell those whole life 
policies to someone else. 
 
Perhaps I can explain briefly what this is. If you’re a person 
who has a whole life policy and you maybe have three or four, 
five years left to fully pay it up and you run into a financial 
situation, there are companies now in Saskatchewan who you 
can go to and say, well I have this policy that’s going to pay my 
family $300,000 when I die. It has a certain cash value right 
now to me because I’ve been making these payments of 
probably . . . maybe say for example $100,000, but I can’t make 
the payments any more. If I stop making the payments, then 
basically the insurance company just cancels the policy and 
that’s it. 
 
What’s happened is there are companies in Saskatchewan that 
will go to you and say, well, how about you let us pay your 
premiums on the basis that we get . . . you assign the assurance 
to us when you die, but right now we’ll give you, say $60,000 
or $70,000 against the cash value of that policy right now. And 
then you have your money; we then have your policy. We’ll 
pay the other five years, and we might have to wait 25 years till 
you die, but when you die, we’ll get the $300,000. 
 
[15:00] 
 
This legislation totally eliminates that possibility. I’m not 
necessarily certain whether that’s a bad thing, but it does 
eliminate the possibility of a company coming in and providing 
that kind of a service, and we have a number of companies in 
Saskatchewan that do that right now. The basis of their business 
or this piece of their business will be gone with this legislation. 
 
So I think we’ll need to understand why the choice was made to 
eliminate this possibility in Saskatchewan. And I mean I think 
there are probably some reasonable explanations about that, but 
it is clearly something that people have raised with us as an 
opposition about the bill that we’re dealing with today. 
 
So the last part of the legislation, part X sets out the general 
powers of the superintendent of insurance and the appeal 
processes and things like that. Those I think are fairly standard 



March 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6575 

and don’t necessarily require much comment now. 
 
And then part XI of the legislation deals with all the 
consequential amendments to other pieces of legislation where 
there are references to the present insurance Act, and that’s to 
be expected when we’re dealing with a large piece of legislation 
like this. 
 
So we have legislation that I think has worked to protect the 
consumers and set out how insurance businesses are run in a 
fair way for everybody in Saskatchewan. It hasn’t been 
necessarily really a long period of consultation to deal with this, 
but I think there’s been quite a bit of consultation to try to 
understand what’s there. 
 
I think the actual wording maybe has adopted a little bit too 
much from Alberta and BC [British Columbia] without really 
thinking through the consequences, practical consequences for 
some of our agencies and brokers in Saskatchewan. I think that 
it would be a step to show how this legislation could be 
amended to include SGI Canada, Group Medical Services, and 
Saskatchewan Blue Cross because those types of insurance, 
which compete in the general insurance industry in 
Saskatchewan, could just as well be included in this legislation 
as well. 
 
I think though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the work in a very 
complicated area has been done pretty well. There still are some 
questions that arise. I’m thankful that the legislation has been 
brought forward so that we can deal with it, and I look forward 
to seeing whether the minister has some amendments in 
committee, and there may be some amendments that we will 
propose after we’ve had some of our questions answered. 
 
But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further 
comments. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 
Minister of Justice that Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:04.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6561 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6561 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6561 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6561 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6561 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6561 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6562 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Hometown Hockey in Regina 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6562 
 Social Work Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6562 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6563 
 Positive Economic News 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6562 
 Brain Awareness Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6563 
 Juno Nominees Supported by Creative Saskatchewan 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6563 
 Long-Term Care Facilities Opened 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6563 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative  
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6564 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6564 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6566 
 Hyperbaric Therapy and Moose Jaw Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6566 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6567 
 Government Usage of Consultants 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6567 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6568 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6568 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6568 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6568 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6569 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6569 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6569 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6570 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6570 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6570 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6570 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6571 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6572 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6575 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


