






















































Hansard: November 17, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 84A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7693 
 November 17, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I would like to table the 
Legislative Library annual report for the period of April 1, 2014 
to March 31st 2015. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce some special guests from Winnipeg. Seated in your 
gallery we have Robyn Stewart, executive director; Melissa 
Kaminsky, event manager; Johnny Marlow, submissions 
specialist; and also J.P. Ellson from Creative Saskatchewan. 
 
The guests here are from the Western Canadian Music Alliance 
and joined me in the Saskatchewan Gallery this morning to 
announce BreakOut West 2016 in Regina . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Hang on, hang on. This four-day event is 
comprised of a three-day music conference; a three-night, 
multi-genre music festival; the Western Canadian Music 
Industry Awards brunch; the Western Canadian Music Awards 
gala. 
 
BreakOut West and the Western Canadian Music Awards are 
the primary events hosted by the Western Canadian Music 
Alliance. The Western Canadian Music Alliance was formed by 
the Music Industry Associations of British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, the Northwest Territories, and the 
Yukon territory. We’re happy to partner with them once again. I 
look forward to hosting this great event next year, and please 
join me in welcoming these guests to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
the minister opposite to welcome all these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. And certainly the Western Canadian 
Music Awards are an institution in Western Canada, and one 
that’s very important to the music industry as a whole. So we 
want to thank you for all the work you’re doing and welcome to 
Saskatchewan. Also welcome to Mr. Ellson from Creative 
Saskatchewan who’s doing fine work in his capacity there to 
ensure that Creative Saskatchewan and the creative industries 
are well supported here in Saskatchewan. So welcome to all of 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members, I’d like to introduce members 
joining us from the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 
Association. There are a number of them there, but I will only 

introduce by name the executive members. There is association 
president Kirby Benning from Regina, vice-president Lloyd 
Zwack from Prince Albert, and secretary-treasurer Brian 
Belitsky from Yorkton. I’m wondering if I can get all of the 
members to stand up so we know who they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the good fortune to work with these 
representatives through the Labour Relations and Workplace 
Safety file. I can tell you that they are a strong voice and 
advocate for their members. The Saskatchewan Professional 
Fire Fighters Association represents brave service people in 
communities across our province. I thank them for the work that 
they do in ensuring our safety. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d like to join in on the welcome to the 
firefighters who are with us today, Mr. Speaker, and also 
recognize the executive of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 
Fighters Association: Kirby Benning, Lloyd Zwack, and Brian 
Belitsky. 
 
But we know, Mr. Speaker, we have leaders within the 
firefighting association from across the province, leaders from 
locals, from cities throughout Saskatchewan. And on behalf of 
the opposition, but on behalf of Saskatchewan people and our 
constituents, I would want to give a heartfelt thank you to these 
firefighters, Mr. Speaker, for the work that they do day in and 
day out to make sure that our properties are secure, to make 
sure that our lives are protected, whether it is responding to a 
fire or responding to any other emergency that we might have 
happen to us through the course of life, Mr. Speaker. So thank 
you for your service. Thank you for communicating with the 
legislature in terms of what your priorities are, and we really 
appreciate your presence here in the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of this honourable 
Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce guests seated in your 
gallery. Joining us here today are two individuals with Regina 
Movember, Nikkoli Hubic and Adam Kletchko. I was pleased 
to join with them and with the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health this morning for a ceremonial flag raising of the 
Movember flag out in front of the Legislative Building, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask that all members extend a very warm welcome to 
these two gentlemen who do so much to promote men’s health 
issues in the Regina area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join in, in welcoming Nikkoli and Adam to their 
legislature. You know, on our side we’ve got some good stuff 
happening too, on moustache stuff. This is so important, the 
work that we do in terms of men’s health and mental health. 
Yes, so we’re doing our best. And I know this is a movement 
right across Canada and North America, so thank you for being 
here. We’ve got a lot of work to do to do the work that’s out 



7694 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

there, but we appreciate you leading the cause. Thank you so 
much. I’d ask all members to join us in welcoming them to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I am really delighted to welcome two very special people 
who drove in from Wadena today: my aunt Vi Braaten, known 
in my family for her wonderful brown sugar fudge. I know 
we’re not supposed to talk about somebody’s age, but Aunt Vi 
just turned 91. She’s been at the legislature twice, the first time 
when I was sworn in and she wanted to come again today. So I 
thank you for coming. 
 
And my cousin Gloria Braaten, who is a chartered professional 
accountant and a certified internal accountant, she worked in 
Alberta for four decades and decided to come back after there 
was a change in government in Alberta. So we welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce the Yorkton Regional High School grade 10 class of 
Mr. Perry Ostapowich. With Perry today is Kendelle Marr, 
another teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as is customary, Mr. Ostapowich is very good to 
getting the kids to contact the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] to speak about specific issues and just to get used to 
contacting. We had a really good conversation downstairs about 
pertinent issues of today. But some that did contact me, so I’ll 
give them a shout-out, is Jacquie Derbowka, Tyson Neumann, 
Matthew Balysky, Matthew Breitkreuz, and Brett Kemp. So I’d 
ask all members to welcome these young students to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today it’s my privilege to introduce to you and through you to 
the members of the legislature, 14 grade 10 to 12 students from 
the Melville Comprehensive School. Accompanying them today 
is Stuart Wilson and Rachelle Matthews. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to join the member for Yorkton today 
in recognizing Perry Ostapowich. A lot of members will 
remember Perry; he’s been bringing classes in here for many, 
many years. In fact he used to bring the Melville class in, and at 
one time Stuart Wilson and Perry Ostapowich would bring a 
class in together. And now one’s in Melville and one’s in 
Yorkton. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce a very special person 
in my life, and probably one of the last times — it will be the 
last time — I’ll get to introduce a school group in here. But 
especially I want to introduce my granddaughter, Mackenzie. 
Some of you on Saturday night that were at a supper out there 

will recognize Mackenzie, and very special to me. I might also 
mention that my son Grant and Mackenzie both attend 
Regional. One gets paid and one doesn’t. You can probably 
figure that out, right, Mackenzie? So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming my 
granddaughter and the school groups that are here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize three friends in 
a couple of galleries. First and foremost, in your gallery I’d like 
to recognize Doug Richardson who, as many know, is a former 
chief of staff to Prime Minister Turner. But more than that, 
Doug has worked tirelessly on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan in various capacities and on behalf of the great 
country of Canada, and so in special thanks to Doug for taking 
time to join us today in his legislature. 
 
In addition to that I’d like to recognize Mr. Chris Stoicheff who 
is over in the west gallery. Many of you will know that up until 
recently he was responsible for government relations at the 
University of Saskatchewan and because of certain industrial 
relations policies, he finds himself out of work, as his father’s 
been promoted to, and rightfully so, to the president. We’re 
delighted to have Chris here. 
 
Chris is a future nation builder. He has worked not simply in 
Canada and not simply in the province of Saskatchewan, 
including for this government, but he’s served time in 
Washington where he has contributed mightily to the debate 
and deliberations regarding key public policy issues. And 
finally I’d also like to welcome Sandi Urban-Hall to her 
legislature as well. 
 
And so to all three, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these three key individuals who have helped 
contribute so much to the province of Saskatchewan. Help join 
me in welcoming all three to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just briefly to 
join with the member opposite and to welcome Doug 
Richardson, Chris Stoicheff, and particularly Sandi Urban-Hall, 
a dedicated school board trustee for many, many years and 
somebody who provided leadership to the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association, also the Canadian School Boards 
Association, and somebody that certainly devotes herself to the 
betterment of students and education in this province. So it’s a 
pleasure to welcome Sandi Urban-Hall to her Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with my colleagues in welcoming Sandi Urban-Hall to her 
Legislative Assembly. Sandy is also the president of Equal 
Voice Saskatchewan. So thank you very much for your 
leadership and your participation. 
 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7695 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 
we know that this government is not doing enough to create 
safe spaces in our schools for sexually diverse students or 
students who are bullied because of their sexual identity or 
sexual orientation, and we know that gay-straight alliances play 
a pivotal role in providing inclusive, anti-oppressive learning 
environments and offer a reprieve from bullying and assault. 
And we know this government must act so that students have 
simple, easy-to-understand information about gender and 
sexuality alliances in their schools and how to form GSAs and 
who they should talk to in order to form GSAs. I’d like to read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 
action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 
Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the rights of 
Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 
in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 
and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 
their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present a petition asking for this government to support a new 
long-term care facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have done their part to build this province, 
and northern Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 
2009 Croft report, the long-term care stats in our health region 
is at a code red level. Seniors from northern communities need 
immediate attention from this government and many residents 
cannot afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility for 
Creighton and Denare Beach and area. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It’s signed by the good people of Denare Beach, Creighton, and 
Sturgeon Landing. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
rise to present a petition, and the petition is in reference to 

cellphone coverage in northwestern Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. This 
would provide support to our northern industries as well as 
mitigate safety concerns associated with living in the 
remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned time and time again, the 
people that have signed this petition are from all throughout 
Saskatchewan, and on this particular page they are primarily 
from Dore Lake. And I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of improved autism 
services here in Saskatchewan. The petitioners point out that, 
despite some pockets of really great work like Little Tots 
program in Saskatoon, that this government’s rhetoric on autism 
supports does not match the reality on the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
This petition has more than 500 signatures from people around 
the province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
provide families who have children diagnosed with autism 
spectrum disorder with individualized funding of a 
minimum of $22,000 per year per child age zero to six and 
a minimum of $6,000 per year for children age 7 to 18 in 
order to access adequate treatment services for their 
children through either the public or the private sector. 

 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, there’s more than 500 signatures on this 
petition, and they’re from people from around the province. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Saskatoon, and I so 
submit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



7696 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

Diwali Celebration Held in Regina 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday I had the 
honour to attend the India Canada Association of 
Saskatchewan’s Diwali supper gala. It was an exceptional event 
that was well attended by people from here in Regina and 
across our province, including the members for Coronation Park 
and Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
The Conexus Arts Centre was lit up to embody this festival of 
lights. The Indian food was incredible; the dance was 
impressive. Diwali is the festival of lights and it celebrates the 
victory of light over darkness. In today’s world, where there are 
certainly moments of darkness and tragedy, this message is as 
important as ever. 
 
Diwali is about overcoming ignorance with knowledge and 
overcoming despair with hope. For many generations the India 
Canada Association of Saskatchewan and Indo-Canadians in 
Saskatchewan have worked to promote these values and help 
build and shape our province. Saskatchewan and India have 
much to celebrate with strong ties on so many fronts. The 
enriched richness and contributions brought to Saskatchewan by 
Indo-Canadians is something we should all value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
everyone including Nish and his organizing committee who 
worked to make this year’s Diwali supper gala a success and 
also in thanking the India Canada Association of Saskatchewan, 
president Sood, and its board for their decades of service that 
continues to make our province stronger through diversity. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

2015 Nation Builders and Community 
Recognition Awards 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
congratulate the Ukrainian Canadian Congress’s 
Saskatchewan’s Provincial Council Award recipients. On 
November 8th I had the pleasure of attending the awards 
ceremony to bring greetings on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Each year the council honours individuals for their 
contributions to the development of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
Since its inception in 1995, the program has recognized 214 
honourees. Today I would like to congratulate the recipients of 
the 2015 awards. 
 
First the Nation Builders Awards, which recognizes those who 
have played an exemplary role in the Ukrainian Canadian 
community, were presented to Diane Boyko, Ostap Skrypnyk, 
and Steve Senyk. 
 
Next the Community Recognition Awards, which recognizes 
contributions in cultural preservation and development, 
volunteerism, and youth achievement, were bestowed upon 
Helen Danylchuk, posthumously; Elmer Malec; Kenneth 
Mazur; Rose Wasylenka; Russel Pankiw; Marnie Howlett; and 
Brighton Stefanyshyn. 
 

And last but not least, the 2015 Newsmaker of the Year Award 
was presented to David Dutchak. David’s work on facilitating 
the Ambulances for Ukraine project, which has seen four fully 
equipped ambulances delivered to Ukrainian hospitals, has 
earned him the prestigious award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating this 
year’s recipients. Thank you for your hard work and dedication 
to the Ukrainian-Canadian community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

LeBoldus Golden Suns Win 4A Provincial Football 
Championships 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday I had 
the pleasure of presenting the Bud Weaver Memorial Trophy 
for the 4A provincial football championships to the LeBoldus 
Golden Suns. This is the fourth year in a row that the team from 
Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School in Regina has captured the 
4A championship. LeBoldus is the first team to four-peat since 
Regina’s Balfour Tech triumphed six years in a row from 1960 
to 1965. This year LeBoldus beat Saskatoon’s Holy Cross 
Crusaders 52 to 20 in the final game at Mosaic Stadium. 
 
Saturday’s game was a tough end to yet another very successful 
season for the Crusaders, who have captured five consecutive 
Saskatoon city titles. Holy Cross scored first in the final contest, 
posting a single point on the opening kickoff, but LeBoldus 
took a 3 to 1 lead with a field goal on their first drive of the 
game and never trailed again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Semba Mbasela rushed 15 times for 130 yards and 
scored a rushing and a receiving touchdown for the Suns in just 
two quarters of work. Winning quarterback Brayden Kuski 
completed 10 of 18 pass attempts for 282 yards, four 
touchdowns, and an interception. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Head Coach John 
Foord, his coaching staff, the players, and all those involved in 
the Suns program for another excellent season and capturing 
their fourth straight provincial title. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Opening of the Estevan Bypass 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Tuesday I, on behalf of the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure, was honoured to participate in the grand opening 
of the Estevan bypass. This bypass is 13 kilometres long and 
runs north of Estevan from the intersections of Highway 39 and 
the Shand Road to Highway 39 west of the city. This project 
will greatly improve traffic safety and road conditions within 
Estevan while reducing congestion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 truck traffic in the Estevan area has 
increased by more than 90 per cent, leading to congestion on 
Highway 39 through the city. With the bypass complete, 
heavy-truck traffic and commuters who travel through the 
Estevan area now have a much safer and more efficient route 
through the area. 
 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7697 

Our government invested $28.5 million in this $45.5 million 
project as part of our ongoing commitment to building the 
infrastructure Saskatchewan needs to continue to grow and 
remain strong. The other $17 million in costs were covered by 
the federal government through the Building Canada Fund. 
Highway 39 connects directly with a major American border 
crossing at North Portal and is part of the National Highway 
System. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a record $5.2 billion has been invested in 
transportation infrastructure in this province since 2008. 
Projects like the Estevan bypass are examples of how our 
government is continuing to invest to meet Saskatchewan’s 
infrastructure needs within a balanced budget. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Raising the Movember Flag 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to recognize the raising of the Movember flag 
outside the legislature. Earlier today our Movember Team 
Stewart, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, “leader,” the Minister of 
Agriculture, and myself had the pleasure of attending the flag 
raising. In attendance were Movember Regina members Nikkoli 
Hubic, Carey Smith, and Adam Kletchko. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many Mo Bros around the world, I decided to 
grow a moustache this month. I’m doing it because men are 
often reluctant to take prompt action in health. Mr. Speaker, 
they shouldn’t be. Movember is about more than growing facial 
hair. It’s about growing awareness, awareness of health issues 
that shouldn’t go unchecked. Issues like prostate cancer, 
testicular cancer, poor mental health, and physical inactivity. 
 
Since 2003 the Movember movement has rallied people around 
the world and raised nearly $700 million to fund men’s health 
programming. While it doesn’t always look good, the 
Movember movement is doing great things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know with everyone’s help, we have the power 
to change the face of men’s health. I ask all members to join me 
in thanking those that are supporting the movement to 
encourage men to take steps towards better health. And to the 
members from Movember Regina and across the country, thank 
you for supporting this important fundraising movement. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Contest to Choose Provincial Fossil Launched 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum has launched a contest to choose a 
provincial fossil. The RSM [Royal Saskatchewan Museum] will 
be setting up an exhibit where candidates for this contest will be 
displayed. From mid-November until May, the public can visit 
the RSM to see the provincial fossil exhibit where they will 
learn more about fossil candidates. 
 

In the spring of 2016, voting will open province wide online 
with the new Saskatchewan provincial fossil to be announced in 
May. To engage students, class 7 classrooms from across the 
province are invited to enter the Saskatchewan Provincial Fossil 
Video Contest. Students participating in the contest will learn 
about the fossils on the provincial fossil candidate list, choose 
the only one they think that would best represent Saskatchewan, 
and create a video to argue their case. 
 
The class with the winning video entry will receive a special 
gift and a visit to their classroom or school by a Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum paleontologist. In connection with the 
video contest, the RSM has developed an inquiry lesson plan 
for teachers to help students explore their knowledge of rocks, 
minerals, and fossils. Classroom research about Saskatchewan 
paleontology is supported by French and English resources on 
the museum website. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that students and the public as a whole will 
cast their vote to designate a provincial fossil. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Cyclist Excels in Fundraising and Music  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to tell you about a 
constituent of mine who finished riding his bike on a 
1600-kilometre trip from Tuktoyaktuk to Whitehorse in May of 
this year, playing bass workshops along the way and raising 
money for the United Way. Felipe kept his family, friends, and 
fans up to date through his bass and bike tour through a great 
blog. 
 
In his May 3rd update he writes: 
 

Eyes are burning and I’m aware of how dangerous and 
painful it can be. Snow-blind. So using toilet paper and a 
scarf, I built snow goggles. They seem to work quite good. 
First thing in the morning I am riding over the clouds, 
feeling epic and even yelling at the sky. Brakes don’t work 
anymore and so I’ve used my boots to make the bike stop 
— not the safest way, but it works. It’s so beautiful around 
here and I really enjoy that I am the only one around. It’s 
like having my own castle to play with. There are bear 
tracks all over the place, so I keep the fire running all 
night. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was Felipe Gomez’s third bike tour, including 
one last year from Saskatoon to St. John’s. This is impressive 
enough, but upon his return this year, Felipe was notified that 
his latest album, Dance of the Fox, was nominated for the Best 
International Indigenous Release 2015 by the Indigenous Music 
Awards. And at the ceremony in September, Felipe walked 
away with the award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Felipe Gomez on winning Best International Indigenous 
Release and thank him for the amazing lengths he’s gone to 
raise money for the United Way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



7698 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Promotion of Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — We know that the Premier met with United 
States Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia to promote carbon 
capture. And now that he’s finally heard the truth, Senator 
Manchin isn’t too happy with the misinformation from this 
government. He says the glowing performance results touted by 
the Sask Party are “. . . nothing . . . [but] marketing spin and 
hyperbole with the true results reflecting a very troubled 
project.” 
 
I think it’s a huge problem that the Premier and the SaskPower 
minister have woven such a tangled web that even a coal-loving 
senator from West Virginia says the glowing performance 
results they’ve touted are nothing but spin and hyperbole. Mr. 
Speaker, this speaks directly to the Premier’s credibility. What 
does the Premier have to say to the senator from West Virginia? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question. It’s the same question they asked 
yesterday of the minister, but I’m happy to answer it again. Mr. 
Speaker, we did meet with the senator when we were down in 
Washington, as we met with a number of US [United States] 
senators who have since taken us up on the invitation to come 
and have a look at what’s going on at Boundary dam 3. And 
there is certainly agreement amongst a number of senators that 
it is groundbreaking work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s true that the senator in question may be going 
off of headlines that have been generated by the New 
Democrats throughout this debate, Mr. Speaker, and so he may 
have concerns with respect to the project. There’ll be 
arrangements made for me to discuss this on the telephone with 
the senator in the coming days. There is a letter that has gone 
today to the senator that highlights, Mr. Speaker, exactly what 
the project can do, what it is doing now, as well in the start-up 
phase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know we’ll get into a debate about this groundbreaking 
technology. We have many, many quotes from the International 
Energy Agency to other senators who understand that in the 
commissioning year there’s going to be difficulties. But this 
technology is working and certainly working in the restart phase 
now. It’s going to continue to work, and it’ll provide us a way 
to continue to use coal in a responsible way in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I hope that members opposite aren’t now instigating calls 
to others that are interested in the technology, talking it down. I 
hope they’re not doing that, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well he just said from his chair, he said, please, 
Brad. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have information that that might 
be the case. And I hope it isn’t. I hope they’ll let SaskPower 
explain exactly what’s happening today with this technology. 
This is important technology in terms of the provincial 

economy, in terms of our power mix, Mr. Speaker, and we need 
to make sure we’re presenting what is in the best interests of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the problem. The sales 
lines that we’ve been getting from the Premier and Sask Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, don’t reflect the reality of what has 
actually been happening over the past year in any way, shape, 
or form. And that’s why Senator Manchin is unhappy with the 
lines that they’ve been told from this Premier and from this 
government. 
 
It’s not just Senator Manchin that was given false information. 
The Premier’s multi-million dollar American lobbyist has 
arranged about two dozen meetings with elected representatives 
in the United States, where the Premier went and hyped carbon 
capture. We, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, have 
paid a mountain of money to have all of those meetings 
arranged, and in those meetings, the information given to 
elected representatives was nothing but marketing spin and 
hyperbole. 
 
Are we now paying the multi-million dollar US lobbyists to 
reach out to all those people and let them know that they were 
given false information? Is the Premier reaching out personally 
to clear this up, or is he just hoping, is he just hoping that they 
won’t see the disturbing news about the reality of this troubled 
project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter that 
went to the senator today indicates that, and I’m quoting, “Since 
commercial operations began on October 1, 2014, SaskPower 
has captured and sold approximately 400 000 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide.” It goes on to say, “We’re proud of this achievement; 
however work is now under way to increase the amount of CO2 
captured so that we can meet the project specifications.” Mr. 
Speaker, SaskPower, it goes on to say, “SaskPower was 
optimistic that it would capture more CO2 in the facility’s first 
year. But all of the issues in Canada have a solution and the 
project continues to progress.” Mr. Speaker, it goes on to point 
out that the plant has been restarted and currently, in the first 
few days, it’s meeting the targets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a debate about what are we going to do with 
the future of coal in the province of Saskatchewan. The federal 
government has passed regulations that say very clearly that 
coal in its conventional form as it was burning in older plants, 
the likes of which we have in our province, will be offside in 
just a few years unless we clean them up. This technology will 
bring this coal-burning facility to be four times cleaner than 
natural gas, Mr. Speaker. That’s what will be achieved here. 
 
We think that’s worth the effort so that coal can be part of the 
mix in a sustainable way. We think that’s worth the effort, Mr. 
Speaker, for the hundreds of jobs that are at stake, IBEW 
[International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers], SaskPower 
jobs at this particular project. We believe it’s important to 
succeed because of the hundreds of mining jobs in southeast 
Saskatchewan. We think it’s worth this effort. We’re going to 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7699 

continue with this effort. 
 
And I’m going to ask the Leader of the Opposition again — 
he’s full of criticism — what is his position? Does he believe 
that coal has a future in this province? Because you either clean 
it up or shut it down. What’s his position? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a debate about 
misinformation that has been spread by this government, Mr. 
Speaker, that has hurt Saskatchewan’s credibility in a huge way. 
Senator Manchin, Mr. Speaker, is a proponent of coal, is in 
favour of coal, and that’s why he’s upset, that what he was told 
by the Premier, what he’s been told by this government does 
not match reality, Mr. Speaker. The Premier goes down, sells a 
shiny auto with a good coat of paint. But under the hood, it is 
not working, Mr. Speaker, and that’s where the frustration is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a quote right here from the SaskPower 
minister that was said yesterday: “We’re going to have to be 
very clear with people coming to look at this facility in the 
future that there’s problems associated with it.” He also says 
this, Mr. Speaker, that finally changes to their carbon capture 
presentation will happen to ensure that “it reflects the realities.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had 260 groups come see Boundary 
dam. They’ve spent a year travelling the world, hyping this 
project. And now, and now finally, they’re going to share 
information that actually reflects reality, Mr. Speaker, according 
to the SaskPower minister. Well I would say it is about time. 
But that does not undo, that does not undo all of the damage 
that has already been done by the misinformation that this 
government has spread for over a year. 
 
My question to the Premier: what is he going to do about that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be 
clarifying for all of those who’ve come to the site exactly where 
it’s at with respect to current performance, that it did capture 
400 000 tonnes in this commission year, Mr. Speaker, which is 
400 000 more tonnes of CO2 that are captured and sequestered 
than the members opposite would have ever done in 
government because their record on greenhouse gases was 
perhaps the worst in the country, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
level of increasing greenhouse gases and the lack of an action 
plan. So they’re all full of questions and criticism today. 
 
The question for them remains — just four months away from 
the election, on a day where a poll came out that has them at 25 
per cent, which is six points lower than they were under Mr. 
Lingenfelter — the question is begged of them today, what is 
their position with respect to coal? Because if you don’t clean it 
up, if you don’t try to do what we’re going to do successfully in 
the province of Saskatchewan, you have to shut it down. Those 
are the only two choices. 
 
People in southeast Saskatchewan, people across this province 
want to know from that Leader of the Opposition, from the 
NDP [New Democratic Party], what is their position. Will they 
attempt to clean it up or will they shut it down? Will they lay 

off those hundreds of employees at Boundary dam 3, 4, and 5? 
Will they shut down the mining industry, hundreds of jobs in 
mining? Or are they, are they going to support an effort to clean 
it up, Mr. Speaker? There are two choices: clean it up or shut it 
down. I ask again to the member, months ahead of an election 
in this province, what is his position? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the Premier 
might feel a little hot and bothered about these, this line of 
questioning, Mr. Speaker, because he’s been going all over the 
world telling a story that doesn’t match up with the reality, Mr. 
Speaker, telling a story that doesn’t match up with the leaked 
documents from SaskPower. You know, they’ve had 260 
groups come on tour. 
 
The government has travelled to foreign countries, and the 
former Deputy Premier says that’s impressive. Mr. Speaker, 
when you’re not actually telling them the folks, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not all that impressive. It’s actually quite embarrassing. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when they’ve travelled the world, 
they’ve gone to countries — China, Peru, Germany, Poland, the 
UK [United Kingdom], Holland, Norway, Korea, the 
Philippines, Belgium, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and all over the 
United States, Mr. Speaker — and the Premier has himself had 
many meetings arranged by his multi-million dollar US 
lobbyist, that’s a whole lot of people, that’s a whole lot of 
governments, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a whole lot of businesses 
that have been given false information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that they’ll clarify the 
record for those that they have spoken to, Mr. Speaker, about 
the shortcomings and the problems. My question to the Premier: 
will he be writing to every individual that he’s met with to tell 
them the true state of this troubled project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, actually the good news is 
they’re writing to us. Mr. Speaker, we got a letter just today, 
written a few days ago, from an important energy . . . the 
International Energy Agency from a Dr. — and I hope I get this 
name right — Thambimuthu. He’s a chemical engineering 
graduate at the University of Birmingham, University of 
Cambridge, and McGill University. Now he’s not in, doesn’t 
have a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in English — these are the 
experts that the members opposite put up with respect to 
science projects — but pretty well qualified. 
 
Here’s what he said in a letter today: “We have seen . . .” and 
this is after all the information’s out. This is after all of the 
debate over the last little while: “We have seen so many CCS 
demonstration projects not proceed in recent years, so I cannot 
commend you enough for staying the course in a difficult 
journey.” This is science now, the International Energy Agency. 
He goes on to say, “The project is groundbreaking and its 
global significance cannot be underestimated. With the crucial 



7700 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

COP 21 negotiations soon to start in Paris, your project 
represents a beacon of light on the world stage,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what the International Energy Agency is saying. Even 
after . . . Well they’re all laughing, you see, Mr. Speaker. Do 
you know why they’re laughing? The bottom line is they want 
this project to fail. They equate it with their political success, 
that this project would fail, Mr. Speaker. That’s becoming 
increasingly transparent as this debate proceeds. 
 
I’ll tell you what. We’ll take the advice and the counsel of the 
International Energy Agency, of the scientists in this area who 
know all of the first-year commissioning issues, we’ll take their 
advice over the advice of the NDP and their Ph.D.s in English 
experts they present in the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we want is respect for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, respect for Saskatchewan ratepayers, 
Mr. Speaker, and the respect and the right approach for our 
Crown corporations in this province, something that we are not 
getting with the misinformation spread by this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, I asked the Premier if he would clarify, as he said he 
was going to clarify the record. The SaskPower minister said 
they’re going to have to start actually revising presentations and 
telling the whole story and the accurate story when people come 
to visit. I asked the Premier if he was going to write to these 
individuals. No commitment from him on that, Mr. Speaker. 
Happy to allow misinformation to stay out there. 
 
I think it’s incredibly embarrassing that the Premier, that the 
SaskPower minister have been giving false information about 
this project. It’s embarrassing now that a US senator now says 
that the US government shouldn’t have trusted the Sask Party 
government’s hype about this. 
 
But do you know what I think is most disgusting about this, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we, the people of Saskatchewan who are 
footing the bill for this project, footing this bill for all the travel, 
footing the bill for the US lobbyist to set up meetings for the 
Premier, I think it’s disgusting that Saskatchewan people 
weren’t given the right information all along, that for over a 
year the Premier, the SaskPower minister knew the true state of 
affairs and they didn’t share that. The only way Saskatchewan 
people found out about it was through leaked documents, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is shameful for democracy and shameful for 
the people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Premier: he said earlier on they’re going to 
clarify the record. Is he going to write to all the people that he’s 
met with and tell them the true state of affairs with this troubled 
project, yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear in this debate where 
the NDP, I think, stands in this province when it comes to 
generating electricity. Mr. Speaker, there is, the energy industry 
around the world categorizes energy into two categories when it 
comes to generating electricity: baseload and peaking. 

Baseload is generated from hydro or natural gas or coal or 
something like nuclear perhaps as well. Peaking is generated by 
the use of renewables that aren’t constant, Mr. Speaker, like 
wind energy. Obviously it’s not windy all the time. Solar 
energy, obviously the sun isn’t out all the time. Those types of 
things. 
 
And so it comes down to a question. Here in Saskatchewan I 
think it’s really quite simple. If you’re going to shut down 
baseload generation, which is coal here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, you can’t replace it with peaking energy because 
peaking energy does not generate all the time, Mr. Speaker. 
And as a result of that, you have to have a choice here in 
Saskatchewan. Are you going to continue the use of baseload 
generation generated by coal or are you going to do something 
else? 
 
And I think that’s what this debate highlights, Mr. Speaker. 
That something else is a choice that this government made. We 
believe that the CCS is the right technology for the province of 
Saskatchewan. We would like to know, and I think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that billion-dollar response does 
not do anything for justice when it comes to transparency for 
Saskatchewan people and the answers that they are owed. And I 
asked the Premier again; he said he was going to clarify the 
record. No commitment to actually reach out to the people that 
he’s been meeting with all over the world, all over the world, 
telling them a story that doesn’t match up with reality. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, it’s only when they are caught through 
leaked documents that they say, oh we have to adjust things a 
little bit. No remorse, no change of course, just more of the 
same spin and sales lines that we have been hearing all along. 
Meanwhile Saskatchewan ratepayers are on the hook for the 
mismanagement that we’re seeing from this government when 
comes to SaskPower time and time again. 
 
We should be able to trust our Premier and our minister when 
they go about telling stories, Mr. Speaker. We should trust that 
they’re giving an accurate representation of what reality is, that 
they’re not shredding our reputation as a province, that they’re 
not embarrassing Saskatchewan. But this whole mess, Mr. 
Speaker, undermines the credibility of the Premier in a huge 
way because they’ve been telling a story that isn’t accurate. 
And when given the opportunity to clear the record, to share 
what has actually taken place, a refusal and he stays seated in 
his chair, Mr. Speaker. That’s not right for Saskatchewan 
people. That’s not right for our province. 
 
I think the Premier, I know he has an opportunity to set this 
right, and I think that the Saskatchewan people deserve that as 
do all observers. We have an opportunity for the Crown and 
Central Agencies, the committee of this legislature, to convene 
and get to the bottom of this mess, to figure out what’s been 
going on, to call witnesses. My question to the Premier: will he 
finally agree to do that today? 
 
[14:15] 
 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7701 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are 
arrangements being made for this committee to sit, and we’ll be 
happy to have that discussion, Mr. Speaker. And I think anyone 
that’s watching the proceedings this afternoon would 
understand very clearly that the position of our government is 
that we believe that carbon capture technology is the right thing 
for Saskatchewan if we want to continue to use coal in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that’s really the only choice that 
there is in terms of baseload generation here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we need to know, as we get closer and closer to the next 
election which is only a few months away, Mr. Speaker — this 
is going to be an important debating part, I believe, of that 
election campaign — do the members opposite want to shut the 
coal industry down here in Saskatchewan, or do they want to 
continue to use it? And if they do want to shut it down, which 
appears to be the case, Mr. Speaker, what are their plans to 
replace that coal-generated electricity with? 
 
And they know very well, the member from Nutana knows 
very, very well on this subject that you cannot replace baseload 
generation with peaking capacity generation that is generated 
from renewable sources. She knows that very well, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think the people of Saskatchewan will 
understand that as this debate continues, Mr. Speaker. What is 
your position? 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Firefighters and Workers’ Compensation Legislation 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association is here 
today to push for much needed changes. Firefighters are at a 
greater risk for contracting many types of cancers, so they want 
this government to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act to 
include more types of cancers, recognize occupational diseases 
for firefighters. 
 
They also want the government to take a lead role in firefighter 
health and safety by developing legislation and regulations that 
ensure they have appropriate access to early detection and 
treatment. Other provinces have already done so, and this 
opposition wants Saskatchewan to do so as well. Will the 
Labour minister commit to doing this today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education and 
Labour Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the firefighters for the 
good work that they do. They are people that routinely put their 
lives at risk. They put their health at risk on behalf of the safety 
and well-being of all of us. For that, we thank them very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that has in the past added 
esophageal cancer to the list of presumptive cancers that are 
treated and, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that this government 
will continue to look at. 

I can tell the members opposite and I can tell the firefighters 
that are here today, the committee of review is currently 
reviewing the workers’ compensation legislation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will look at those recommendations, and we may 
well do something that would be appropriate in advance of or in 
support of the things that will come out of that review, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan professional 
firefighters also want post-traumatic stress disorder added to the 
list of illnesses presumed to be work related for firefighters 
under The Workers’ Compensation Act, and the opposition fully 
supports that change as well. 
 
The government can’t argue that it doesn’t have the money to 
fund this additional coverage. This year the Workers’ 
Compensation Board paid out $141 million in excess 
investment income to employers. That’s more than enough 
money in the workers’ compensation system to provide for 
proper coverage for firefighters who face workplace injuries 
and illnesses. So why won’t the Labour minister just commit to 
these changes today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
had this file during his term in government. He knows that we 
don’t interfere with the direct operations of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. We don’t go in and tell them what they 
should or should not pay out. What we do, Mr. Speaker, is we 
create a legislative framework around which they work. We 
would do that through a process of review, coordination, and 
some consultation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve met earlier with the firefighters. They’ve 
raised the issues of cancers that should be treated in a 
presumptive manner and, Mr. Speaker, they’ve raised the issue 
of post-traumatic stress disorder. 
 
We have forwarded those things to the Workers’ Compensation 
with a request that they review them and that they be considered 
in consultation and in concert with the committee of review. 
That process is under way, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to 
that process completing because, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
workers that are here, we value the hard work, we value the 
commitment that they do, and we want to ensure that we do 
everything for their health and their safety, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
Finance minister claimed that the Sask Party is not clawing 
back money that it has already committed, but we know that 
that is not accurate. So will the Advanced Education minister 
tell us exactly how much money is being clawed back from our 
post-secondary institutions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



7702 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no secret in the province right now that the 
province is forecasting a deficit of approximately $292 million 
on an annualized basis. And when faced with an operational 
deficit, Mr. Speaker, there’s really only three choices a 
household or a business or a government has at their disposal. 
You could increase revenues, you can reduce expenditures, or 
you can borrow money to cover that operational deficit, Mr. 
Speaker, or a combination thereof. 
 
When we knew, because of the forest fire situation last spring 
and summer and because of the price of oil, that we were faced 
with an annualized deficit forecast at $292 million, we asked 
ministers and ministries to try to find savings in their ministries 
and across Crown corporations. There was not a directive that 
went out to that effect. 
 
The Minister of Advanced Education has gone to his 
institutions in the post-secondary education sector, Mr. Speaker, 
and has been able to secure one-half of 1 per cent of their 
operating grant being reduced, that they’re offering back. It 
totals $1.4 million on a $292 million deficit, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that’s prudent and pragmatic on the part of the Advanced 
Education minister and this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — So to provide some context for that, Mr. 
Speaker, the costs at the University of Regina escalated about 
4.5 per cent this year. This government gave them an increase 
of just 1 per cent, and then in the summer the Sask Party 
chopped that in half. Here’s what President Timmons said at a 
recent U of R [University of Regina] town hall: “We got a call 
in the summer that said we would have to return money to the 
government.” She also said, “Coming to the university halfway 
through the year to recover money does not seem fair.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he was asked about this last week. The 
Finance minister’s got something very different to say about it 
this week. I guess the question is, in this case to the Minister of 
Advanced Education, does he know what the Finance minister 
is saying on his behalf and can they come clean to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, there’s 
only three choices that government has with respect to dealing 
with an operational deficit. 
 
Now perhaps because the members opposite will not put their 
position on the line with respect to what they would do with a 
deficit, an operational deficit, perhaps we should take some 
lessons from them as to what they would do when faced with 
economic challenges when they were in government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We could follow the NDP lead. We could follow the NDP lead, 
Mr. Speaker, and raise taxes 21 times, raise the provincial sales 
tax four times to balance the budget like the NDP did, Mr. 
Speaker. We could follow the NDP lead when they were in 
government and close 52 hospitals and fire 400 nurses to 
balance the budget when they were in government like the NDP 

did, Mr. Speaker. Or we could close 176 schools across the 
province, an average of one a month during the 16 years they 
were in office, to balance the budget when faced with economic 
challenges, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we could eliminate 1,200 
long-term care beds to balance the budget like the NDP did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re not going to follow that path. We’re taking a pragmatic 
and prudent approach to balancing this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

BreakOut West 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We were 
pleased to announce this morning that BreakOut West 2016, a 
four-day event held by the Western Canadian Music Alliance, 
will be hosted in Regina next year. We’re excited to secure this 
event as it brings in not only a regional audience . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The bid fee is 
$200,000, with $125,000 being supplied by the provincial 
government as follows: Creative Saskatchewan, $80,000; 
Tourism Saskatchewan, $45,000. The provincial government 
has joined with partners who . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Does the government front bench want to 
come to order, please? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
provincial government has joined with its partners who 
contributed the remaining $75,000 to secure this opportunity. 
They include the city of Regina, the Regina Hotel Association, 
private sector sponsors. 
 
This four-day event is comprised of a three-day music 
conference, a three-night multi-genre music festival, the 
Western Canadian Music Industry Awards brunch, and Western 
Canadian Music Awards gala. BreakOut West and the Western 
Canadian Music Awards are the primary events hosted by the 
Western Canadian Music Alliance which is an organization 
created by the music industry associations of British Columbia, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Northwest Territories, and 
the Yukon Territory. 
 
Music industry associations work to promote and celebrate 
Western Canadian music. Each year the event is held in a 
different Western Canadian region on a rotational basis, with 
Regina, Saskatchewan being selected for this year’s event. This 
event was hosted in Regina in 2012, and we’re pleased to have 
it return next year. It will be a great opportunity to have local 
artists as well as Western Canadian artists showcase their talent 
and hard work right here in Saskatchewan. Also an opportunity 
for artists to network, build relationships with industry 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7703 

professionals, and perform in front of a major audience. 
 
We’re excited to have this opportunity for our local artists and 
industry professionals, as the music sector in Saskatchewan has 
an enormous amount of talent. Our province is proud to support 
our creative industries, and this event is just another way we 
can help artists develop further and reach a wider audience. 
This event is a showcase for up-and-coming or emerging 
musical talent from the four Western provinces and territories. 
The event is seen as an important stepping stone for many 
young musicians as they develop their craft and expand their 
audiences. 
 
It is expected in 2016 the event in Regina will attract 65 bands 
with approximately 300 artists; 350 music industry leaders; 
delegates from around the world; show attendance of 
$12,000-plus across multiple local venues such as Artful 
Dodger, Casino Regina, Capitol Jazz Club & Tapas Bar, 
O’Hanlon’s Irish Pub, Victoria’s Tavern, McNally’s Tavern; a 
convention audience of 500-plus music industry leaders and 
delegates at a downtown convention hotel. 
 
The impact on the local creative sector is not the only benefit of 
this event. The economic impact is quite significant as well, 
many positive benefits of hosting BreakOut West. For instance, 
economic benefits for the Regina event in 2012 included 
$502,000-plus in regional gross domestic product; $357,816 in 
new wages and salaries, including in the GDP [gross domestic 
product] in the region; 19 new private sector positions within 
the province; $734,686 in provincial gross domestic product. 
 
We expect a great event, based on past experience here in the 
city, and look forward to hosting artists and delegates from 
across the country and all over the world. And with that, thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
like to thank the minister for providing his comments in 
advance so that we had an opportunity to understand what is 
being announced. 
 
BreakOut West is a great event, and it’s very exciting to see it 
come back to Regina. I think it’s important to note that the very 
first Western Canadian Music Awards were here in Regina in 
2003, Mr. Speaker. So I’m glad to see Saskatchewan is carrying 
on that tradition that was started already 12 years ago, and it’s 
really important to see that this event keeps coming back 
through Saskatchewan. 
 
I know from experience that many of the people in the music 
industry in Saskatchewan derive great benefit from these types 
of gatherings, and not just musicians, Mr. Speaker, but certainly 
organizers of events like for example the Ness Creek Music 
Festival, I know, who attends every year. And it’s a networking 
opportunity and a chance to grow and learn from other 
professionals in the music industry in Western Canada. 
 
So again, kudos to the agencies and the funding that’s being 
provided to support this event. I mean that’s critical for any of 
these events to take place so kudos on that, and we really look 

forward to BreakOut West in 2016 here in Regina. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) 
Amendment Act, 2015 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015, and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 



7704 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2015 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 
Amendment Act, 2015 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I request leave, Mr. Speaker, I request 
leave for consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 
Measures) Amendment Act, 2015, and that the bill be now read 
the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 

Amendment Act, 2015 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 186, 
The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015, and that the bill be now read the third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill now be read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 186, The Municipal 
Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the Opposition House Leader’s point 
of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Under 



November 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7705 

rule 52, any documents quoted by a minister of the Crown in 
debates or in response to a question during proceedings shall be 
tabled upon request. The Premier quoted from two such 
documents that we’d like to request at this time, and we look 
forward to them being tabled forthwith. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The point of order is well taken, and I request 
that the Premier table those two documents. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 1,036 to 1,042. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,036 through 1,042. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Greystone has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Norris: — Great. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce two more guests, one sitting in 
your gallery, Mr. Curtis Kimpton. Curtis has served admirably. 
He’s a dear friend. He’s the past president of Kinsmen Canada. 
He contributes mightily in Saskatoon, across the province, and 
has made many national contributions. He’s a dear, dear friend 
who has stuck with me through many a twist and turn, and so 
I’d like my first introduction to help welcome Curtis Kimpton 
to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
And secondly, to another dear friend, and that is Mr. Evatt 
Merchant who is here, who understands this Assembly in ways 
that few of us could as his grandmother served in this 
Assembly. Both are true and loyal friends and I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming both Curtis and Evatt to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d be remiss 
if I didn’t join the member from Saskatoon Greystone in 
welcoming Evatt Merchant to his Legislative Assembly. I know 
he resides out of the city now but he used to live quite close to 
the legislature. And I’ve known Evatt for many, many years, 
Mr. Speaker, and know him to be a keen observer of the 
political state of affairs in this province and certainly a generous 
person into the bargain. So I’d very much like to join with the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone in welcoming Evatt 
Merchant to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7693 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7693 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7694 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7694 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7694 
  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7694, 7705 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7694 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7694 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7705 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7695 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7695 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7695 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7695 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7695 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Diwali Celebration Held in Regina 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7696 
 2015 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7696 
 LeBoldus Golden Suns Win 4A Provincial Football Championships  
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7696 
 Opening of the Estevan Bypass 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7696 
 Raising the Movember Flag 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7697 
 Contest to Choose Provincial Fossil Launched 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7697 
 Saskatoon Cyclist Excels in Fundraising and Music  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7697 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Promotion of Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7698 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7698 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7700 
 Firefighters and Workers’ Compensation Legislation 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7701 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7701 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7701 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7702 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 BreakOut West 2016 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7702 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7703 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7703 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7704 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7703 
 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7704 



 

 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7704 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7704 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7705 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7705 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


