
























































Hansard: November 09, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 81A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7649 
 November 9, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
Assembly for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to my 
colleagues. We are joined today by a very, very special group of 
visitors that it is my humbling honour to be able to introduce to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you just began the proceedings today with a 
prayer. You did so because in this country we have the freedom 
of religion. We are welcoming this group here today in part 
because we also have the freedom of assembly, and the seats in 
this Assembly remind us that we have one other basic core 
freedom in this province of ours and in this country, and that is 
the freedom to choose whom we wish, whom we want to 
represent us in rooms like this across the country and in the 
Parliament of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we only have these freedoms if there are women 
and men of uncommon courage and bravery and a willingness 
to step forward in defence of those freedoms, to be willing to be 
vigilant and to protect those freedoms here and abroad. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to introduce 
representatives of a number of groups invited here who are so 
inclined, who are so committed to mark two important 
milestones in the history of our country and of our province: 
number one, the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second 
World War, and the 90th anniversary of the founding of The 
Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
With us today in the west gallery are representatives from The 
Royal Canadian Legion branches; Ladies’ Auxiliaries and 
command offices from Regina, Fillmore, Tompkins, Neville, 
and Grenfell; the Saskatchewan War Memorial Committee; the 
Royal United Services Institute; the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] Veterans’ Association; the Air Force 
Association of Canada; 15 Wing Moose Jaw; the commanding 
officers and honorary colonels of Saskatchewan reserve units; 
the Department of National Defence, Saskatchewan domestic 
operations; the Royal Regina Rifles and their association of 
veterans; the Saskatchewan Dragoons; the 10th Field Regiment, 
Royal Canadian Artillery; the Naval Association of Canada; the 
Navy League of Canada, Saskatchewan division; and 
representatives of HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] 

Queen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan citizens have served 
our province, and they have served our country. They have 
protected our freedoms, fighting for the values that Winston 
Churchill said are expressed in single words, and then Churchill 
went on to list those words: freedom, justice, honour, duty, 
mercy, and hope. Those are the values that our veterans 
defended, and they have done so in astonishing numbers from 
our province. 
 
In the Second World War, 42 per cent of Saskatchewan’s male 
population, 42 per cent between the ages of 18 and 45 enlisted. 
They fought bravely in every theatre — on land and on the sea 
and in the air. And we must not forget those among them who 
made the supreme sacrifice. We must never forget those among 
them who gave all. More than 3,800 from the province of 
Saskatchewan did not return from the Second World War. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must also never forget the important role of 
The Royal Canadian Legion. Across our country, in 
communities across our province, they have played this role 
now for nearly a century. It might be easy to be complacent or 
to take the Legion for granted, but we must guard against doing 
that, Mr. Speaker. The Legion has been there for those who 
have returned from battle wounded in body and in spirit and in 
mind. It has supported and assisted veterans and performed the 
important public service of remembrance, of making sure that 
we all take time around this point in the year, but all through the 
year, to remember those who have made the ultimate sacrifice 
and those who are among us and are so very worthy of 
remembrance and recognition as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, standing here in my place and here in this 
Assembly, we are reminded today of the values for which the 
veterans were prepared to fight, for which The Royal Canadian 
Legion works still today, and we are grateful to them. We have 
frankly only inadequate words to offer, but we offer them 
sincerely and with a full heart, and those words are simply, 
thank you very much. I would ask all members of the Assembly 
to join me in welcoming this special group to their Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
humble honour to join briefly with the Premier here today to 
welcome these leaders within our province, within our country 
to their Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. It’s a humble 
honour and often it’s hard to even find the appropriate words to 
welcome and to thank and to show the gratitude that we must 
for these men and women who serve our country, serve our 
province, and build our communities to be stronger places. 
 
We have all branches of the Canadian Forces represented here 
today. We have the Ladies’ Auxiliary. We have The Royal 
Canadian Legion and the 173 branches that they represent 
across Saskatchewan with us here today. We have the RCMP. 
We have organizations supporting service-men and -women 
across Saskatchewan who are with us here today as a small 
representation of the legions of Saskatchewan people who 
support the service of men and women from this province to our 



7650 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

country and to our world. 
 
Ninety years of The Royal Canadian Legion is a remarkable 
anniversary. It’s important to note that Regina’s Legion was the 
first — the Regina Legion as Legion no. 1 — and that these 
legions, as was noted well by the Premier, play an instrumental 
role in supporting those that have served, recognizing that 
service goes beyond any one soldier or any one serviceperson, 
any one woman or man. It impacts every member of that family 
and the community itself, and that’s where the Legion plays 
such an instrumental role. 
 
It’s also a day today, and I know we’re going to have rightfully 
some speeches on the floor which I look forward to 
participating in. We’re going to have recognition of 70 years 
since the end of the Second World War. And certainly 
Saskatchewan, as was noted by the Premier, played an 
enormous part of that operation. 
 
I know that service and sacrifice runs deep across 
Saskatchewan. It cuts across political divides and extends to 
communities in every corner of this province. Certainly that’s 
part of my family’s story and history as well. Today I carry my 
grandfather’s soldier’s pay book which he carried with him 
throughout his training in England, landing on the beaches of 
Normandy, and finally being wounded, being shot in Germany 
in the battle of Moyland Wood. 
 
Words aren’t enough to extend to these fine men and women, 
but that’s what we have to offer them here today. And certainly 
I’m proud to join with the Premier to welcome and to thank, to 
recognize and to remember these leaders here today. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
Assembly for an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
those members of the Assembly for leave. To you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce the Scholarship of 
Honour recipients that are seated in your gallery here today. 
First of all, I would mention them, and I would ask them to 
wave as we acknowledge them. 
 
First we have William England. William is from Ottawa, 
Ontario. Mr. Speaker, William served in Libya and he now 
attends the Briercrest College and Seminary in Caronport where 
he is studying his Master of Divinity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with us today we have Mr. Dean Springstead. 
Dean is from Regina, Saskatchewan. He served in Kabul, and 
he’s now enrolled at the Algonquin College in Ottawa where he 
is studying his introduction of project management diploma in 

engineering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have Mr. Michael Bell from Ottawa, 
Ontario, originally from Regina. Mr. Speaker, Michael served 
in northern Africa and is now attending the University of 
Ottawa where he is studying his Executive M.B.A. [Master of 
Business Administration]. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have Halsey Naismith. 
She’s accompanied by her mother, Belinda Naismith, and she is 
the daughter of deceased Canadian Forces member Kevin 
Naismith, Mr. Speaker. She’s the third in her family to receive 
this scholarship. She’s now in Moose Jaw attending Sask 
Polytechnic where she is studying her business certificate. Mr. 
Speaker, these four individuals are in attendance with us here 
today. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge the others, bringing a total of 18 
recipients of the Scholarship of Honour today. We have Ryan 
Shudra, Ariella Mirabai, Kevin Felts, Cole Janett, Scott 
Anthony, Homer Sayer, Frederic Allard, Stephen Waddington, 
Guy Waloschuk, Owen Herold, Laurie Dyck, Claire Maxwell, 
Shantel Follett, who is the wife of injured Canadian Forces 
member Stephen Follett. And we have Kristopher Reynolds, the 
son of injured Canadian Forces member Shaughn Andrew 
Wittman. 
 
The Scholarship of Honour, Mr. Speaker, is a way to express 
our gratitude for the commitment and the service that these 
people and their family have dedicated to their community, to 
their province, and to their nation. This morning’s event 
recognized 18 recipients. As I mentioned, four are in attendance 
with us here today, and I’d like to thank them for making the 
trip to be here with us today. These courageous individuals have 
laid their lives on the line to protect our country and to protect 
our freedom. 
 
$735,000 worth of scholarships have been given out since 2009. 
This represents 147 individuals. Mr. Speaker, the Scholarship of 
Honour is a small acknowledgement on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan of these individuals’ service. And we are forever 
thankful for your sacrifices. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these honoured guests to this 
Legislative Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I’d just join with the minister 
and say two things to these individuals here who are 
representative of that larger group that have won the 
Scholarship of Honour, but certainly to those who have served. 
 
We say, thank you very much. I couldn’t agree with the 
minister more. This is but a small means to express something 
of our gratitude as citizens in this great country for the service 
that you have provided to us to . . . [inaudible] . . . those 
freedoms, those rights that we cherish so deeply, with your 
putting your lives in harm’s way and indeed, in the case of the 
Naismith family, making that ultimate sacrifice. So nothing that 
we can do as Canadian citizens and the province of 
Saskatchewan can bring that loved one back. But what we can 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7651 

do is remember. What we can do is to strive to show that 
appreciation, to build on that legacy that you have as 
individuals given so much to secure. So again on behalf of the 
official opposition, congratulations and thank you so very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it is my great 
pleasure to introduce two members of the Royal Regina Rifles 
who have joined us in the west gallery today. 
 
I’ll just ask them to stand for a moment as I mention their name. 
We have, first of all, Lieutenant Colonel Vic Sattler. Lieutenant 
Colonel Sattler is the commanding officer of the Rifles, and 
accompanying him today is Master Warrant Officer Shane Zess 
who serves as the regimental sergeant major. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to introduce 
two members of the Saskatchewan Dragoons who are based in 
Moose Jaw. First is Sergeant Al Pociuk, the regimental sergeant 
major, and second is my wonderful wife, Jocelyn, who serves as 
the Sask Dragoons honorary lieutenant colonel and whose 
constant love and support make everything that I do here 
possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in welcoming 
these very proud members of Canada’s Armed Forces to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 
the Legislative Assembly, seated in the west gallery, Dan 
Cooper. Dan is the Saskatchewan Party candidate for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Dan is a very busy gentleman. He’s been out door knocking and 
meeting all the residents of Regina Lakeview. We’re very proud 
of Dan, for your hard work. Dan is also a great volunteer within 
the community and he’s also a community pastor. So that 
provides him with a good understanding and compassionate 
care of what is needed for a good member of the Legislative 
Assembly. So I’d encourage everyone here to welcome and 
have a chance to maybe meet and speak with Dan later on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise today and introduce some very important 
constituents that have travelled all the way from Dore Lake to 
be here today. The people that have joined us in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, are Garry Smith, Shirley Feszyk, Ken Steinhauer, 
and Val Popov. And I would ask all members to welcome these 
very special guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege today to introduce guests from READ Saskatoon. 
They’re with us today because they are the recipients of 
Saskatchewan’s 2015 Council of the Federation Literacy 
Award. I would like to recognize READ Saskatoon board Chair 
Erin Kuan, READ Saskatoon executive director Sheryl Harrow, 
READ Saskatoon program manager and trainer Desiree Tirk. 
As well, they are joined by Belinda Harrow and Pat 
Faulconbridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, literacy is the foundational element for a strong 
community, and these well-deserving recipients are part of an 
organization that has served thousands of adults and families 
with literacy services over the past 35 years. They have shown 
an extraordinary level of dedication and commitment to serving 
their community. Saskatchewan’s future depends on all citizens 
taking their place in a knowledge-based economy and 
participating fully in our province. READ Saskatoon is helping 
us accomplish that goal. We are grateful for the work that they 
do and are pleased that they could be with us today. I would ask 
that all members help in welcoming them to their Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join the Minister Responsible for Education for 
recognizing the good work READ Saskatoon does, you know. 
And they’re actually just down the street from me on 22nd 
Street, and we see the good work. I’ve been to many of their 
events and I know they work so tirelessly to improve literacy in 
our community, and they’re very well deserving of this award. 
So hats off to you folks, and hats off to the good work you do 
and the people . . . I can see the impact in our communities 
every day. Thank you so much. I ask all members in the House 
here today to thank them for this award. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
make a brief welcome to the group at the very back row there. 
These are fine civil servants here in Regina, working for the 
city of Regina, working, I believe, in the community planning 
division, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we can all appreciate and 
recognize the leadership of civil servants within our province, 
and I’d like all members within this Assembly to thank and 
recognize these community planners. 
 
And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s my real pleasure here 
today to welcome someone pretty special in my life — in fact 
three people pretty special in my life. It’s nice to have my 
mother, Faye, here today, Faye Wotherspoon here today. I 
know she was interested in the motions that are on the floor 
here today. And it was her father that served with the Regina 
Rifles in the Second World War, and I know that service is 
certainly incredibly important to her and our family. 
 
Also my sister, Chantel LaHaye who is a public health nurse 
here in Regina and spent significant time with my grandfather, 
who was a very quiet, humble person, who didn’t share much 
about the war with very many, who sat down and detailed some 
extraordinary experiences with my sister. And I’m so thankful 
that she was able to capture and document some of that 



7652 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

information. And I’m pleased to welcome her son, my nephew, 
my fishing partner, Dominic LaHaye, to his Assembly. And 
yes, just let your dad know he’s improving as a fisherman. But 
please welcome, join with me in welcoming all of these people 
close to me to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in our Saskatchewan schools. 
And we know that this province lags behind others in securing 
the rights of gender- and sexually diverse students, and this 
government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students or students being bullied 
because of their sexual identity or sexual orientation. And we 
know these sexually diverse or gender-diverse students are four 
times more likely than their heterosexual peers to attempt 
suicide. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have done their part to build this province. 
Northern Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 
Croft report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a 
code red level. Seniors from our northern communities need 
immediate attention from this government, and many residents 
cannot afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in 
Creighton-Denare Beach area. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton and Denare 
Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I rise in my place to present a petition as it relates to 
cellphone coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To ensure that the provincial government improves cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake-Dore Lake to provide similar quality 
of cell coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. 
[Mr. Speaker], this would provide greater support to our 
northern industries as well as mitigate safety concerns 
associated with living in the remote North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have been presenting petitions here daily 
and the petitions have been signed from people all throughout 
Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, the 
people that have signed the petition are primarily from Dore 
Lake. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. The petitioners point out that there is a seniors’ care crisis 
here in Saskatchewan that is happening in large measure due to 
short-staffing or chronic understaffing in our long-term care 
facilities. I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 
seniors’ care facilities; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens in Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the high cost of 
post-secondary education. In the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7653 

Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition in support of better schools. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by a number of residents of 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Honouring The Royal Canadian Legion  
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize two very significant anniversaries this Remembrance 
week. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of World 
War II where, after nearly seven years of fighting, saw the 
Allies come to victory over the Axis. This month is also the 
90th anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
In November 1925, 12 veteran organizations met in Winnipeg 
for the Unity Conference. This resulted in the Legion being 
formed, and by July 1926 it was self-supporting. The Legion 
has since grown in Canada to become a symbol of national 
pride. The Royal Canadian Legion is Canada’s largest veteran 
support and community service organization. It is a 
member-based organization with over 300,000 members in 
more than 1,400 branches across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the largest veterans’ and community support 
organization in Canada, the Legion advocates on behalf of 
veterans, serving military persons, and RCMP members, both 
past and present. They also provide essential support to the 
families of service members and their communities. 
 
As I look around this Chamber, I see how the Legion’s red 
poppy campaign has become a significant part of our 
Remembrance Day tradition. It’s important initiatives such as 
this that remind us how important our veterans are, and we 
thank the Legion for the dedication and efforts on behalf of 
veterans. 
 
I would ask members of this Assembly to join me in 
recognizing both the 70th anniversary of the end of World War 
II and the 90th anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion, and 
I’ll have more to say later. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in this 
Assembly humbly honoured to thank the women and men who 
served our nation in the pursuit of a free and just world. Joined 
with us today are several members from the Saskatchewan 
Command of The Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
 

Through its many branches across the country and our province, 
the Legion serves veterans and their families. Their work 
reminds us of the many individuals who bravely served and 
continue to serve our communities and our nation. Their work 
reminds us that the sacrifices made by veterans do not end when 
they return from service, and their work reminds us that the 
sacrifices of service extend to past veterans. No family or 
community is left untouched by a soldier’s service. 
 
Each year on November 11th we come together to stand at 
cenotaphs, observe ceremonies, and collectively remember the 
sacrifices of those who have served. However we must not 
forget to remember all throughout the year. In this regard, 
Legion members serve as leaders and mentors. Their actions 
continually promote remembrance. 
 
I ask members of this Assembly to join with me in extending 
our gratitude to service members past and present, and I ask you 
to join with me to thank the Legion and its members in their 
unyielding efforts to support veterans and promote 
remembrance. May we never forget the sacrifices made in the 
name of peace. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan has a strong tradition of men and women serving 
in the Canadian Armed Forces. These courageous people have 
laid down their lives on the line to protect our country and our 
freedom, and today we thank them through the Scholarship of 
Honour. 
 
This scholarship, which was first announced in 2009, gives 
returning soldiers and family members of injured or fallen 
individuals a chance to pursue post-secondary studies. The 
scholarship is $5,000 and is available to all candidates who 
apply. It is a token of our gratitude for the men and women who 
protect our country. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only province to offer this type of 
scholarship, and today there have been 147 Scholarship of 
Honour recipients, worth 735,000. 
 
Today we celebrate 18 of these heroes, four of which are in the 
House today: William England, Dean Springstead, Michael 
Bell, and Halsey Naismith, daughter of late Canadian Forces 
member Kevin Naismith. They were all were honoured at the 
ceremony here in the Legislative early today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of these courageous men and women, we 
live in a country where we are all free to pursue our dreams. I 
would ask all members to join me in thanking the returning 
soldiers and family members who have sacrificed so much. And 
for that, we are eternally grateful. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 



7654 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

Challenges to Democracy Conference 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity 
to attend a very special conference at the University of 
Saskatchewan this weekend, November 6th and 7th. The 
Conference in Honour of Allan Blakeney: Law, Public 
Administration, and Challenges to Democracy was both timely 
and insightful with presentations that celebrated Premier 
Blakeney’s legacy. The conference was wide ranging with 
thought-provoking topics and stimulating conversations in the 
halls, perhaps due the recent federal election and the upcoming 
provincial election. 
 
Some of our province’s brightest academics, civil servants, and 
leaders — including Greg Marchildon, Roy Romanow, Dwight 
Newman, and John Courtney — made their case on the big 
questions facing Saskatchewan today. What role should the 
government play in growing the economy? How do we balance 
rights and freedoms? How do we best develop our resources? 
What does meaningful consultation and accommodation of 
Indigenous peoples look like? 
 
The conference also played host to several well-known 
Canadian academics, including Alex Himelfarb, the former 
Clerk of the Privy Council of Canada; Simone Chambers of the 
University of California; and Nelson Wiseman from University 
of Toronto. 
 
Special thanks go to the sponsors of the conference: the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] College of Law, the political 
studies departments of St. Thomas More College and the U of 
S, and the Broadbent Institute. Special thanks as well go to 
David McGrane, Roy Romanow, John Whyte, and Russ Isinger 
for organizing the conference. I ask all members to join me in 
thanking everyone whose work made this event a success in 
remembering the legacy of one of our province’s greatest 
leaders, Allan Blakeney. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Hudson Bay Community School Grand Opening 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday I 
had the pleasure of joining the Minister of Education, along 
with students, teachers, and community members in Hudson 
Bay, to celebrate the grand opening of the new Hudson Bay 
Community School. 
 
It has been nearly 50 years since the last school was built in 
Hudson Bay, and this new state-of-the-art facility will serve the 
needs of our students for years to come. The new school has 
room for more than 400 students and includes a 36-space child 
care centre. I was extremely proud to see the level of 
community support for this new facility. The community of 
Hudson Bay rallied to add some great features, including a 
mezzanine on the gymnasium, an expansion to the practical and 
applied arts wing, and a student lounge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government committed more than 27 million 
towards the completion of this incredible new facility. This is 
yet another example of how our government is working 
collaboratively with the communities to invest in the most 

precious resource — the students. 
 
I ask all members to join me, the North East School Division, 
and the residents of Hudson Bay area in celebrating the grand 
opening of the new Hudson Bay Community School. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Saskatoon Hilltops Win Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday 
afternoon was a perfect fall setting in Saskatoon for football as 
some 7,000 fans witnessed a very exciting game. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m proud to rise in the House today and congratulate the 
Saskatoon Hilltops on winning the national championship this 
past weekend. The Canadian Junior Football League title match 
saw the Saskatoon Hilltops take on the Okanagan Sun in 
Saskatoon to compete for the Canadian Bowl. Defending their 
title and their brand new turf, the Hilltops beat the Okanagan 
Sun 38 to 24. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hilltops pride themselves on being a 
second-half team and they demonstrated that Saturday. At 
halftime the Hilltops were trailing the Sun 20 to 17, but they put 
together an impressive second half and scored 21 points for the 
win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the Hilltops’ 18th national title and fifth 
Canadian Bowl in the past six years. When asked to comment 
on the game, Head Coach Tom Sargeant said, and I quote: 
 

These guys never stopped believing at any time, any point. 
There’s no situation that was too big for us. We 
understood every situation we were in, and they just did 
what they needed to do. That’s why they’re national 
champs. 

 
The Peter Dalla Riva Offensive Player Award was presented to 
Logan Fischer, who led the Hilltops on the ground and air as he 
rushed 23 times for 102 yards, caught seven passes for 107 
yards, and two touchdowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in joining me in congratulating 
the players, coaches, parents, alumni, and fans of the Saskatoon 
Hilltops as they celebrate their much-deserved win. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Donates to Air Rescue Society 

 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2015 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities mid-term 
convention was held last Thursday and Friday right here in 
Regina. Nearly 750 people from municipalities across 
Saskatchewan gathered and addressed many of the most 
pressing issues faced by SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight one element of the 
convention that really stands out. SARM members once again 
demonstrated true Saskatchewan generosity by another 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7655 

donation to STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air 
ambulance, bringing their total donation to almost $1.3 million. 
 
STARS is an important part of rural health. Because of the 
vastness of our province, STARS provides that critical 
ambulance link to ensure that regardless of where someone 
needs assistance, they can get it in the most rapid way possible. 
 
Over the past four years, SARM has donated to STARS on a 
yearly basis, and this donation was $300,000. STARS gave a 
report to SARM delegates where they described the state of the 
air ambulance program in the province and recognized SARM 
as a million-dollar donor, a huge achievement. 
 
I would ask members of this assembly to join me in 
congratulating President Ray Orb, the board, the members, and 
the staff in organizing another successful SARM conference 
and to acknowledge their members’ generous donation to 
STARS air ambulance. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Cost of Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We learned last week that the Sask 
Party’s rhetoric about highways, like many other things, just 
doesn’t match reality. Eight years ago, 600 kilometres of 
highway was graded, paved, and resurfaced. This year the Sask 
Party cut that by 120 kilometres. On Thursday the Highways 
minister was unable to provide a decent explanation about the 
Sask Party’s cuts to actual roadwork. Does the Premier have a 
better explanation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we do have an 
explanation as to what we’re spending on highways. First of all, 
we’re spending $1 billion more in the last eight years than the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] did in the previous 16 years. Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing more multi-year projects. We are doing 
bigger projects. We’ve been affected by unprecedented flooding 
in the last several years and had to do emergency repairs. On 
top of that, we do regular maintenance and repairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to update one of the numbers I gave last week on 
culvert replacements, which doesn’t sound very interesting but 
is very important to the structural integrity of our roads, Mr. 
Speaker. Between 2008 and 2015, those repairs increased by 
3,600 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, despite ramping up 
spending significantly, as we’ve heard here, they’ve actually cut 
the number of actual kilometres being fixed each year. They’re 
paying way more but they’re paving way less — 120 fewer 
kilometres this year compared to just eight years ago. You 
know, Saskatchewan drivers and taxpayers know that there are 
a whole lot of roads that aren’t being fixed these days, and we 
deserve a proper explanation for why this government is paying 

more and paving less. 
 
And you know, we see the same tired answer from the minister 
today to the questions to the Premier. Last week, as she did 
today, the Highways minister claimed that it’s because they’re 
spending so much more on culverts. Does the Premier stand by 
that explanation, or does he recognize that answer for the 
hogwash that it is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, happy to have an 
intelligent debate about this topic. Mr. Speaker, I used culverts 
as just one example. As I said, it goes to the structural integrity 
of the highway system. But I also had a whole bunch of 
examples if the members opposite were listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference is that we are actually rebuilding 
our roads. We have increased the primary weight system in our 
province by 61 per cent when coming into office, Mr. Speaker. 
That primary weight system is very important to our province. 
It accommodates increased traffic, not just increased regular 
vehicle traffic but truck traffic, Mr. Speaker. As members 
opposite would know, we’re an export-dependent province and 
without that network it definitely restricts the amount of 
movement that we have of our products, Mr. Speaker. Sixty-one 
per cent improvement of our primary weight system, Mr. 
Speaker — I don’t think that’s any small thing in our province 
and very necessary to the future growth of our province as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, all that boasting rings 
pretty hollow for Saskatchewan people that are traversing roads 
and those that know the reality across Saskatchewan. The 
Highways minister said there was over a 3,000 per cent increase 
in culvert work that . . . apparently that’s what’s taking the toll 
on the Highways budget. 
 
But let’s just look at the facts. In 2009 $45 million was spent on 
culverts and bridges. Last year $37 million was spent on 
culverts and bridges. Now that’s pretty stable. In fact it’s $8 
million less, Mr. Speaker, and a small fraction of the total 
Highways budget. So it certainly can’t be an adequate 
explanation as to why there’s 120 kilometres less of paving here 
this year, of highway this year. 
 
So either the Highways minister just, you know, has her facts 
dead wrong about culverts being the culprit for paying more 
and paving less, or perhaps the minister doesn’t want to give us 
the real answer. So to the Premier: which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the 
member opposite brings up the amount of money that we’ve 
spent on culverts. And it is relatively stable and a far cry from 
the $9.6 million that the NDP spent in their last year, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a 380 per cent increase in funding to those 
particular projects. 
 



7656 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just culverts. I use that as one 
example because the people of this province, and particularly 
the members opposite, need to understand that it’s Ministry of 
Highways and Infrastructure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is more than just culverts. We’ve spent 
$45.5 million in the Estevan truck route, $60 million on 
Highway 7 twinning, $9 million on Highway 7 passing lanes, 
$17 million on Highway 10 passing lanes, $45 million on 
Highway 16 twinning, $62 million on Highway 11 twinning, 
$98 million for the south Circle Drive bridge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have an investment in the commuter bridge in the city of 
Saskatoon. That doesn’t even take into account the money that 
we’re going to be spending on the Regina bypass which is a 
huge effort, undertaking for this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
again, so very important for the exporting companies in our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can boast all 
she wants, but I think those on Highway 4 or 354 or 220 or 322 
or 924 or 36 or 43 or 47 or many other highways across 
Saskatchewan know the reality of the ruts and rubble being left 
by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the facts are clear. Just eight years ago . . . 120 kilometres 
less are being fixed up than just eight years ago despite that 
government spending a whole lot more. The Highways minister 
claimed that they’re spending so much more on culverts, but we 
know that that’s simply not the case either. More and more 
these days, we’re seeing just how badly this government is 
struggling when it comes to matching its rhetoric with the 
reality here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Why won’t the Premier just admit that the main reason he is 
paying more but paving less is because he’s gutted the 
Highways ministry and hired a whole bunch of pricey external 
consultants? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out last week, 
consultants are necessary for the detailed and specialized 
projects that we’re doing. The member from Athabasca, the 
actual Highways critic, was actually in agreement with that, Mr. 
Speaker. I can read his quote into the record yet again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s more expensive to fix roads right the first 
time. The NDP would put some patching on an old, beat-up 
TMS [thin membrane surface] road. It would look good for a 
year or two and then it would fall apart again. Mr. Speaker, 
their approach to fixing roads in this province is like 
re-shingling a house with a rotten foundation. Mr. Speaker, we 
are rebuilding the house. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Condition of Highway to Dore Lake 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that rhetoric is going to be cold 

comfort to the people of Dore Lake who have driven all the way 
to Regina to join us here today, Mr. Speaker. They are 
incredibly frustrated by the Sask Party’s approach to forestry, 
but more in particular into highways, Mr. Speaker. They are 
annoyed to hear that the government is paying more, but paving 
less. They see forest resources being trucked out of northern 
Saskatchewan, and to add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, the 
logging trucks are smashing the road up on their way out. Mr. 
Speaker, what does the Premier have to say to these residents of 
Dore Lake who have driven all the way here to Regina to have 
their concerns heard by this government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. Highway 24, which is the Dore Lake 
road, we’ve been investing in repairing that road, Mr. Speaker, 
with upkeep and maintenance. As an example in the year 
2012-13 we spent about $365,000 on that road. Mr. Speaker, in 
the ’15-16 budget we’ve spent a million dollars on that road in 
repairs and maintenance, and we will continue that maintenance 
going into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of Dore 
Lake are here today. They are here for concerns on forestry but 
more so the safety of their highway. Somebody is not listening 
on that side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Dore Lake residents 
know that Highway 924 can’t handle the logging trucks that 
regularly use it. So like many northern highways, 924 is 
constantly being beaten up. And that just doesn’t mean 
discomfort for the people of Dore Lake driving up and down 
Highway 924; it means that their safety and lives are put at risk. 
 
Northern highways are used to transport valuable natural 
resources out of northern Saskatchewan, yet this government 
refuses to properly upgrade these highways. So again, peoples’ 
lives and safety are being put as a result of your negligence. 
That is not acceptable and it needs to stop. So why doesn’t the 
Premier take this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker we are taking this 
seriously. We’re taking the safety of the residents of the North 
seriously, and we are taking the investment into those roads 
seriously. Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the logging 
companies in question. The speed limit on that particular road is 
about 80 kilometres an hour. We’ve requested of the logging 
companies to slow that down to about 70, which will help with 
the roads getting beat up a little bit less. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve asked them to pull their trucks off the roads before 
freeze-up so that we can do some maintenance so that the road’s 
in good condition before winter. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on highway spending overall in the North, 
this year’s budget, ’15-16, saw a 52 per cent increase over just 
last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, which was a massive increase 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7657 

over the NDP’s last budget for northern highways. Mr. Speaker, 
we are investing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Minister of 
Highways to name one highway in northern Saskatchewan that 
she’s upgraded since the Sask Party’s been in government, Mr. 
Speaker. And the answer, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I’m 
getting now — total silence. 
 
The people of Dore Lake have driven a long way to get here to 
Regina. Mr. Speaker, every day these residents see resources 
being extracted from their area and they’re concerned about the 
sustainability of that work as well, Mr. Speaker. They are 
frustrated about how forestry is being handled in that area, but 
they’re equally frustrated to see that none of the benefits as a 
result of that forestry is being put back into investments into the 
highways. 
 
They’re determined to have this government hear their concerns 
and they’re frustrated about forestry, but more so about roads. 
They’re frustrated about the lack of respect on these highways. 
They are frustrated that the matter of life and death is on edge 
here when things could go wrong with these rough, beaten-up 
roads. So once again, Mr. Speaker, the frustration is very loud 
and clear. They are frustrated about the lack of a logging buffer 
around their lakes and their community. 
 
My question to the Premier: will the Premier agree to meet with 
these constituents to hear all of these very serious concerns, or 
will he keep ignoring them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we are investing 
in the North. We put additional resources into Highway 924 this 
year and we are working with the logging companies to make 
sure that those roads stay in good as condition as possible while 
we’re doing regular maintenance. And, Mr. Speaker, I would be 
happy to meet with the people who came down from Dore Lake 
this afternoon after question period. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Dore Lake 
invited the Minister of Highways. This is the reason why we’re 
inviting the Premier today to meet with them. And when they 
first invited the Minister of Highways, she refused to attend, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m not surprised that the Premier won’t meet with them 
because what we’ve seen from the Sask Party throughout this 
session is an increasingly dismissive and arrogant approach. 
Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric doesn’t even come close to matching 
what the real challenges are. 
 
This government brags about investing in highways. We don’t 
see that in northern Saskatchewan. But we do know that they’re 
fixing 20 per cent less roads than were fixed eight years ago 
with greater cost. And, Mr. Speaker, people like my 
constituents from Dore Lake who have come down to Regina 

today are bearing the brunt of this government’s wasteful 
spending and neglect what matters the most. 
 
Again to the Premier: after years of record revenues — record 
revenues — why is he still failing to get the job done when it 
comes to fixing highways throughout all of Saskatchewan, 
including northern Saskatchewan, including Dore Lake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have pointed 
out, the member opposite was Highways minister at one time. 
He should remember what his budgets were compared to what 
ours are, Mr. Speaker. We had a 52 per cent increase in 
northern highway infrastructure just year over year, Mr. 
Speaker, which is a massive increase over the NDP’s last year 
in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for all the bluster from the member opposite about us not 
taking highways seriously, I don’t think that the people of this 
province believe that statement, Mr. Speaker. And you know 
who didn’t take highways seriously, Mr. Speaker? The NDP. 
They didn’t take them seriously when they were in government, 
and they certainly don’t take them seriously when they’re in 
opposition. Before every Throne Speech, before every budget, 
they send out press releases listing their top priorities, Mr. 
Speaker. Highways has not been mentioned once in any single 
one of those press releases. If it was a top priority, make it a 
priority. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Future of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has gotten very 
agitated and defensive when we’ve asked simple questions 
about the $1.5 billion carbon capture experiment. He has 
insisted that we either have to choose between pouring billions 
of dollars into an experiment or lose jobs. But of course we all 
know that’s a false choice, but that hasn’t stopped their 
indignant bluster. It’s quite fascinating though. 
 
At the end of last week, the SaskPower minister refused to 
commit to add carbon capture technology to the other units at 
Boundary dam. The SaskPower minister said, “I think the jury 
is certainly still way out on that yet.” 
 
So my question is for the Premier. If the Sask Party has so 
much faith in this technology, then why are they still refusing to 
commit to further use of this technology? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the timetable for BD4 
[Boundary dam 4] and BD5 [Boundary dam 5] is some years 
out yet before a decision would have to be made relative to 
whether there is going to be carbon capture attached to those 
facilities or not. The emission standards, 2019 is when the 
regulations come in around that, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 
that, we’re expecting out of Ottawa there may be additional 
emission standards as well that may have to be taken into 



7658 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

account with respect to any kind of carbon capture and storage 
facilities that are used in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would just say that it would be interesting to know from 
the member opposite whether or not the NDP are in favour of 
the use of carbon capture and storage or not. If you look at 
statements that were made early on by the then minister of 
SaskPower, the member from Regina Lakeview: “The 
possibility of coal generation with near zero emissions, along 
with enhanced oil recovery and permanent sequestration of 
CO2, has tremendous potential for both the provincial economy 
and the environment.” 
 
Mr. Minister, we support that view, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the House because we believe this is a very important project 
for the people of Saskatchewan so that we can continue to 
generate electricity from the use of coal, Mr. Speaker, here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We wonder whether that’s still 
the NDP’s position today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower minister’s 
own briefing note entitled “10-year electricity supply plan” 
says, “A decision on the future of Boundary dam units 4 and 5 
is required in 2016.” But now the SaskPower minister says, “I 
think the jury is certainly still way out on that yet.” And he’s 
even saying that here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister said they likely won’t even make a decision by 
2016 despite his own briefing material saying a decision is 
required by then. So again to the Premier: if he’s so confident in 
carbon capture, then why is the decision about units 4 and 5 at 
Boundary dam being pushed back? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — You know, the inconsistencies from this 
member, Mr. Speaker, are astounding. On one hand they don’t 
want to spend money on carbon capture, but now they want to 
spend money on carbon capture if you listen to the members 
today. It’s November 9th of 2015. It’s not 2016 yet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would say that there’s also a very other important date 
coming up in 2016, Mr. Speaker. April 4th of 2016, the people 
of Saskatchewan will have the opportunity to judge our 
performance on this side of the House against all of the 
inconsistencies coming from the other side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. And I dare say there’s a reason why you have the 
small caucus that you do, and after April 4th, you’ll probably 
even have a smaller one. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — You have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Premier’s going to be laughing it up in Paris when they ask him 
these same questions. The minister’s own 2015 House briefing 
binder says: 
 

Emission regulations restrict how much carbon dioxide a 

50-year-old coal unit can produce. Units 4 and 5 of 
Boundary dam power station will reach that milestone at 
the end of this decade; therefore they will have to make a 
decision by 2016 year end. 

 
But now the SaskPower minister says, the jury is way out on 
this, so he’s pushing back that deadline. Will the Premier just 
admit that his government is getting skittish about carbon 
capture because his $1.5 billion experiment is not even close to 
meeting expectations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has within its 
operations a number of different sources of electrical 
generation, whether it’s hydro, whether it’s natural gas, whether 
it’s coal, whether it’s all of the suite of renewables that are in 
use, Mr. Speaker. And so at any given time SaskPower can 
make the decisions about whether they want to add additional 
renewable capacity here in Saskatchewan, which I think they 
will be doing very, very shortly, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s 
an important thing as well. 
 
So SaskPower has the ability to look at the mix of generation 
sources both now and well into the future, Mr. Speaker, and at 
some point in the future they will be making a decision and a 
recommendation to the Government of Saskatchewan around 
the continued use of coal here in Saskatchewan. And at that 
point the Government of Saskatchewan will make a decision 
whether or not we’re going to continue with the operations and 
add on carbon capture and sequestration at BD4 and BD5, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think it will be an important issue going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
It will be something that we’ll be talking about a great deal in 
the election campaign and I would dare say that the member 
opposite wouldn’t want to go and provide her views on coal to 
the people of the Estevan area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well we agree on one thing, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s the importance of a power mix. But what we’re talking 
about today is the future of Boundary 4 and 5, and there’s no 
answers from this minister. 
 
Newly released numbers show the average monthly capture rate 
when the capture plant was online dropped by 21 per cent 
between 2014 and 2015. The trend line over the last year shows 
a very disturbing decline in the performance of this 
government’s $1.5 billion carbon capture plant. And of course 
none of that matches the Premier’s rhetoric about how the plant 
was exceeding expectations and running optimally. But with 
such poor performance, it’s no wonder the minister is suddenly 
saying the jury is out on whether they will use carbon capture 
on the other units at Boundary dam. So to the minister: if you’re 
not going to retrofit units 4 and 5 at Boundary dam, what is the 
backup plan to meet our energy needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in the early stages of 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7659 

development around this, the NDP and the member from 
Lakeview, when he was the then minister responsible for 
SaskPower, were very much in favour of all of this in terms of 
carbon capture and storage. But more recently the NDP seem to 
have changed their tune. As reported on April 16th of 2015, and 
I quote, Mr. Speaker: “Environment critic Cathy Sproule said 
the motion [supporting carbon capture and storage] was ‘just 
politics’ . . . adding the NDP’s opposition to the $1.4 billion 
project has never been a secret.” 
 
Well I think that’s why people in Saskatchewan are confused 
about the NDP’s stance in terms of this, Mr. Speaker, and I 
certainly would understand why and I think everybody 
understands why, given the rhetoric around this, Mr. Speaker. 
In addition to that, in addition to saying that the NDP were not 
in favour of carbon capture and storage, it was interesting last 
week in debate that the member said that the oil industry may 
be at risk here in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The member opposite said in debate last 
week that when you talk about the oil industry, she was 
wondering whether the oil industry would ever continue to exist 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Well I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will be very, very 
interested in their views on these subjects during the election 
campaign. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — If this government decides not to retrofit units 
4 and 5 at Boundary dam, then it’s going to need to bring other 
power sources online, and such decisions cannot be made 
overnight. But on Thursday the member for Walsh Acres 
argued that the choice is between either coal or “magic pixie 
dust” — coal or magic pixie dust. That’s as ridiculous as the 
Premier saying we have to choose between a billion-dollar 
boondoggle or job losses. But we deserve an answer from the 
SaskPower minister. If carbon capture isn’t viable, what’s your 
backup plan to meet our electricity needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would just urge the member 
opposite to be patient. We have said that there will be some 
decisions around additional capture facilities perhaps in 2016 or 
perhaps even later than that, Mr. Speaker. And SaskPower has a 
wide suite of opportunities that they can look at in terms of 
generating electricity here in Saskatchewan. We could look at 
additional supplies coming out of Manitoba, which SaskPower 
is looking at right now, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, we 
could add renewable capacity here in Saskatchewan. There is a 
number of thoughts around that that will be coming out very 
soon in terms of adding additional capacity when it comes to 
the renewable fleet here in Saskatchewan. Whether it’s wind, 
whether it’s solar, perhaps geothermal, are options as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 

SaskPower constantly is evaluating, Mr. Speaker, the demand 
that there is here in Saskatchewan, but they’re also matching 
that with the supply that they have, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
comfortable and I think government members are very 
comfortable with the fact that they’ve done a good job in terms 
of making sure that the light stays on here in Saskatchewan, that 
there’s electricity to power all the necessary applications that 
there are here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 
confident that that will continue in the future. I just wish the 
member opposite would be as confident as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I think his own minister has 
called into question his own confidence in this technology. We 
have a VP [vice-president] who’s flying around the world on 
Sask payers’ dollars up to the tune of half a million dollars. We 
have a Premier who’s running off to Paris to tout the wonders 
of carbon capture, and yet we can’t get his own minister to 
commit to whether or not they have chosen that technology to 
go forward, right next door, right in the same facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, in Estevan. 
 
So the Saskatchewan people need to know. We have a minister 
who’s saying the jury’s still out on this technology, so we’ve 
got to find out what’s going on. Either they’re supporting it and 
they think it’s a valuable technology or it’s not. So we want to 
know. And this question maybe is for the Premier: if the Sask 
Party has so much faith in this technology, why, why are you 
refusing to commit to it in Estevan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is leading technology. 
People from around the world that have visited the facility 
agree on that, Mr. Speaker. They agree in terms of the fact that 
this is leading technology. We’ve had some 260 delegations 
from all over the world, representing universities, representing 
the academic community, representing power producing 
companies, representing governments from around the globe, 
have come to Saskatchewan to look at this technology. 
 
And it’s also no secret there’s been some difficulties with this 
project, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the commissioning of it. But I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, that in Alberta they just recently 
commissioned the Shell Quest facility, Mr. Speaker, and they 
have had lots of difficulties with the technology because it’s 
very, very complicated, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the reason 
why, Mr. Speaker, they’ve captured about 200 000 tonnes since 
April in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. In a comparable time frame, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been able to capture about 400 000 tonnes here, 
Mr. Speaker — about double what is happening in Alberta these 
days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is important technology. That’s why the people from 
around the world that are coming to see this agree on that, Mr. 
Speaker. We agree with that. This plant will perform, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re very, very confident of it, and we will be 
putting it before the people of Saskatchewan on April 4th. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 



7660 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to make a motion regarding the absence 
of a member. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to make a motion regarding the absence of a member. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That a leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for her attendance on 
Wednesday, November 4th and Thursday, November 5th, 
2015 at the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians 
special outreach in Toronto, Ontario on behalf of this 
Assembly. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That a leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for her attendance on 
Wednesday, November 4th and Thursday, November 5th, 
2015 at the Commonwealth Women’s Parliamentarian 
Special Outreach in Toronto, Ontario on behalf of this 
legislature. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to move a 
motion of remembrance. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to make a 
motion of remembrance. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Commemorating Canadian Military Anniversaries 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to my colleagues in the legislature. At the end of my remarks I 
will be moving a motion of remembrance. But first off I would 
like to say a few words. I’d really like to welcome our guests 
that are here today representing the military and the Legion. I 
see a number of very, very good friends that we have here 
today, even some people that I served in the military with. And 
also some people that have drove from my own riding to be 
here today. So I really welcome you here and I hope you enjoy 
the proceedings that we go through this afternoon, speaking 

about the Legion and the anniversary of World War II. 
 
The Royal Canadian Legion is a vital organization in our 
communities. Formed 90 years ago, it still continues to 
advocate for the men and women who commit their lives to our 
country. Saskatchewan Command of The Royal Canadian 
Legion has a provincial membership of approximately 13,000 
members, with 174 Legion branches throughout the province. 
Our branches are proud to help our veterans and donate endless 
volunteer hours to this cause. The Legion organizes 
commemorative programs to promote remembrance. The efforts 
of the Legion remain vital to this day. 
 
From Remembrance Day ceremonies to the poppy campaign, 
youth education, local cenotaphs, commemorate activities, the 
Legion helps Canadians honour and remember the sacrifices of 
our servicemen and women. These sacrifices are vivid, 
especially this year, as this year marks the 70th anniversary of 
the end of World War II. This was an effort in which many 
Canadians gave the ultimate sacrifice — their lives — in 
protecting not only the freedom of our country, but many others 
across Europe. 
 
September the 10th, 1939 saw Canada declare war on Germany. 
By December, Canadian soldiers arrived in Britain to contribute 
to the war effort. These contributions were significant. 
Canadian support of the Royal Air Force through trained pilots, 
radar personnel, replacement aircraft, and other supplies was 
instrumental during the Battle of Britain. More than 100 
Canadian pilots flew in fighter operations during the Battle of 
Britain. Two hundred more flew raids, while approximately 
2,000 Canadians served as ground crew. During the entirety of 
the war, 250,000 women and men served in the Royal Air Force 
and the Royal Canadian Air Force. 
 
In World War II, thousands of women played a role on the front 
line of the effort. Over 40,000 served in the Canadian Women’s 
Army Corps, the women’s division of the Royal Canadian Air 
Force, and the Women’s Royal Canadian Naval Service. 
 
The Canadian contribution to the war effort in Europe and the 
Pacific will not be forgotten. So many of our women and men, 
brothers and sisters, parents and grandparents gave the ultimate 
sacrifice in the name of our country during this time. Canadians 
played an important role in the Allied operations. Dieppe, 
Ortona, Juno Beach, and Hong Kong are just a few examples of 
these efforts. 
 
The Legion is instrumental in honouring the thousands of 
women and men that made the utmost sacrifice for our nation, 
not only on the front line but the sacrifice given to the war 
effort as a whole across this country. 
 
The Ladies’ Auxiliary has worked tirelessly to fulfill their 
mandate, proudly serving our veterans and their dependents, 
promoting remembrance, and serving our community. In the 
beginning, in the 1930s, this meant meeting troop trains; 
visiting veterans’ hospitals; knitting, sewing, and fundraising. 
In more recent years, their role has expanded to include 
bursaries for local students who are descendants of veterans, 
sponsoring local students at the Legion track and field camp, 
and supporting local hospitals and other charities. They still 
visit with and look after our veterans. They still volunteer and 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7661 

raise funds for the Legion. And they still promote 
remembrance, most visibly through the role they play in the 
annual poppy campaign leading up to Remembrance Day. 
 
Indeed they work hard to support the Legion and enrich the 
programs and activities of the branch with their dedication and 
commitment. They also deserve a great deal of credit for their 
initiatives to support community development and youth. Their 
efforts are most notable. They remind us that we must never 
forget those who served, came back, and help continue to build 
our nation, and to remember those who never returned home to 
enjoy the freedom for which they so bravely fought. 
 
Thankfully we have not faced a conflict with the magnitude of 
World War II in the last 70 years. However we remember what 
was sacrificed and lost every single year. It is through events 
like this that we as a society can tell the women and men 
who’ve served and who continue to serve that we are thankful. 
We are thankful every single day for their sacrifice, and that we 
as a society will remember that sacrifice always. 
 
In closing, I can say that I’ve been a proud member of the 
Legion for the last 50 years. Mr. Speaker, I’d now like to read 
the motion: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
memorialize the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second 
World War by remembering the brave women and men 
who made the ultimate sacrifice in service to their country; 
and further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
commemorates the 90th anniversary of The Royal 
Canadian Legion by expressing its deepest gratitude to our 
veterans and thank them for their contributions to our 
province and our country; and further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan expresses 
its gratitude to all the women and men who continue to 
serve in the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
memorialize the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second 
World War by remembering the brave men and women 
who made the ultimate sacrifice in service to their country; 
and further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
commemorates the 90th anniversary of The Royal 
Canadian Legion by expressing its deepest gratitude to our 
veterans and thank them for their contributions to our 
province and our country; and further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan expresses 
its gratitude to all the men and women who continue to 
serve in Canada’s Armed Forces. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
humble honour to enter in full support of the motion put 
forward by the hon. member, also recognizing his service to his 
province and country as well. And I’m thankful that he brought 
this forward to the floor of this Assembly here today. And I 
know we have leaders from across Saskatchewan in all 
branches of the Canadian Forces, and those that serve and 
associations that support that are here today, and it’s an honour 
to have them here today as well. 
 
We had the fine remarks from the Premier to open the 
proceedings. We had the debate on the floor of the Assembly, 
and in many ways it’s also a reminder that this is our House of 
democracy and that service allows for that debate that we just 
had in question period. 
 
But a motion like this speaks directly to the humanity of this 
province and the respect we have for the sacrifice and the 
service of many in this province and in this country for the 
betterment of certainly our province, our country, but also our 
world. 
 
The motion addresses two specific aspects here today, and I’d 
like to touch on both of them. Certainly the 90 years of the 
anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion is special. It’s been 
noted that there was a convention in Winnipeg, I believe in 
1925, a unity conference that facilitated the creation and 
formation of the Legion, and in fact there were two prominent 
members from Regina that advanced that initiative. And 
through the legal filings of the paperwork, it’s with honour that 
The Royal Canadian Legion here in Regina, the branch in 
Regina is branch no. 1. 
 
Of course there’s many legions across Saskatchewan. They 
continue to provide incredibly important support to all that have 
served and their families and to our community, and they 
continue to remind us about what remembering is all about. 
And it strikes me when I’ve heard the comment before that 
remembering is a privilege given to the living, and it gives rise 
to the dead. When I think of that quote or that statement, I think 
of the work of the Legion, allowing us to remember that 
service, that sacrifice, and the efforts of many to secure our 
freedom and ensure a just society. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The legion itself has also been instrumental in Regina, and I 
know it’s instrumental all across Saskatchewan in respective 
communities, but I’m a member from Regina and I’m well 
aware of the efforts of Legion no. 1, the Regina branch. And 
that branch has been instrumental in developing the Douglas 
track and field facility which is important to so many young 
people. They were instrumental in the creation of the YWCA 
[Young Women’s Christian Association] building in Regina. 
And as noted by the member opposite, they certainly are critical 
in extending supports in human resources to students and to 
communities all across Saskatchewan to ensure that we never 
forget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s also an honour to recognize the other part of the motion, 
which is the end of the Second World War, a war that was 
challenging for so many, Mr. Speaker, and certainly a war for 
which Saskatchewan was a significant part of in a very proud 



7662 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

way, with over 70,000 men and women from Saskatchewan 
serving in that Second World War from all branches of our 
Armed Forces, from the navy through to the army, the Royal 
Canadian Air Force, and the merchant marine. The member 
opposite noted the historic battles for which members in 
Saskatchewan fought and persevered, some who paid the 
ultimate sacrifice. And we can only be forever thankful, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also recognize that Saskatchewan played an instrumental 
role in training pilots from all over the world, training the 
Allied forces pilots, with over 136,000 pilots being trained in 
Saskatchewan in places like Swift Current and Regina, 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Davidson, Assiniboia, Prince Albert, 
Weyburn, North Battleford, Mossbank, and Estevan. That’s a 
tremendous role that Saskatchewan played in supporting the 
Allied efforts and, I know, incredible relationships that run deep 
back into each of those communities where those that came in 
for training built relationships with families and people and 
communities as well. 
 
We know that the farmers of Saskatchewan produced millions 
of bushels of grain that were sent directly to the front lines to 
feed soldiers, airmen, and sailors. And we know back at home 
here, we know as well that Mennonites and Doukhobors were 
conscripted into alternative wartime service and constructed 
very important public projects, roads, and provincial parks that 
we still enjoy to this day. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, that those in Saskatchewan have 
contributed much to the Second World War, and it’s important 
that we recognize that in this Assembly here today. These 
stories of service run deep across Saskatchewan, and it’s 
important that we remember. And we need to recognize that 
amidst the tragedies and horrors of war, the stories that are alive 
and well in families across Saskatchewan, and certainly across 
Canada and around the world, that there were also stories of 
great kinship, of frivolity, of humanity, and compassion as 
members from within Saskatchewan and our Canadian Forces 
were in some of the darkest moments of their own lives, and 
quite frankly within our world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My own family story, as I’ve shared before, has a history of 
service. My grandfather was a young, 18-year-old farmer when 
he signed up with the Regina Rifles and departed, Mr. Speaker, 
for certainly service that changed his life. And I have here a 
letter I might read into the record from the Allied commander at 
the time that went out to all members: 
 

Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen of the Allied Expeditionary 
Force! 
 
You are about to embark upon the Great Crusade, towards 
which we have striven these many months. The eyes of the 
world are upon you. The hopes and prayers of 
liberty-loving people everywhere march with you. In 
company with our brave Allies and brothers-in-arms on 
other Fronts, you will bring about the destruction of the 
German war machine, the elimination of Nazi tyranny over 
the oppressed peoples of Europe, and the security for 
ourselves in a free world. 

 
Your task will not be an easy one. Your enemy is well 

trained, well equipped and battle-hardened. He will fight 
savagely. 
 
But this is the year 1944! Much has happened since the 
Nazi triumphs of 1940-41. The United Nations have 
inflicted upon the Germans great defeats, in open battle, 
man-to-man. Our air offensive has seriously reduced their 
strength in the air and their capacity to wage war on the 
ground. Our Home Fronts have given us an overwhelming 
superiority in weapons and munitions of war, and placed at 
our disposal great reserves of trained fighting men. The 
tide has turned! The free men of the world are marching 
together to Victory! 
 
I have full confidence in your courage, devotion to duty 
and skill in battle. We will accept nothing less than full 
Victory! 
 
Good Luck! And let us beseech the blessing of Almighty 
God upon this great and noble undertaking. 

 
Signed by, at the time, the commander of the Allied forces, 
Dwight Eisenhower. 
 
Today I have a couple of reminders that I was sorting through 
yesterday: a paybook, Mr. Speaker, that grandpa carried with 
him from the time entering into England; his pocket watch; his 
Bible titled Fight the Good Fight, Mr. Speaker, all with the 
personalized notes within them; and his medals that he received 
when he returned back home, Mr. Speaker. And grandpa was a 
humble man that didn’t share a whole lot of his stories, and the 
same was to be true with his medals, which he kept in a 1940s 
Christmas card box that sat in his sock drawer, Mr. Speaker, 
until the end of his life. 
 
These are special reminders, and difficult to even fathom the 
circumstance of having a young soldier, as my grandfather was 
and so many others, as they entered into this circumstance. I 
don’t share my grandfather’s story because it’s any more unique 
or any more special than anyone else’s, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the 
one that’s been shared with me and one I know, one that I know 
best. 
 
And I know that they had a pretty unique, in fact, a pretty 
remarkable time in England when they first went over and 
trained, Mr. Speaker. For a young farm kid, you know, from 
Saskatchewan, that was quite the place and it created a kinship 
and relationships that I know that he’s described that he never 
had relationships so close the rest of his life, Mr. Speaker, 
through to then entering into an ugly and terrible battle going 
across the English Channel, entering into the beaches of 
Normandy on D-Day, working their way up through France, 
Mr. Speaker, through to Belgium and the Netherlands, and in 
his case into Germany where his service was ended in the battle 
of Moyland Wood on February 18th, 1945. And in his pay 
book, it’s unique. Of course there’s the signatures where he’s 
checked in and had physicals, and on that date it’s signed by a 
captain named Orchard with just a simple word which is 
“wounded in Germany,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might just read briefly into the record, cognizant of time. My 
sister Chantel, who joined us here today, spent some time with 
my grandfather and detailed and documented and put into a 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7663 

story some of the experiences that he shared, Mr. Speaker. And 
as I read through these stories once again — and I’ve read them 
in the past but it’s good to get back into them — just the harsh, 
severe circumstances that they were faced with as they came 
across the waters, Mr. Speaker, and as they landed on those 
beaches — indescribable terror and horror that my grandpa 
described, really, that you just couldn’t be prepared for. He 
speaks of that you never, in his case, never found that you’re 
able to put yourself at ease, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I read more as well in stories that he shared and 
circumstances, you know, he talks about the continual shelling 
and the risk to one’s life and how that manifested itself in 
anxiety and worry at times later in life. Something he hid 
certainly from family, but something that he shares was very 
real at times of big thunderstorms back at home for the rest of 
his life, Mr. Speaker. Until the very end, that would shake him 
to the core. 
 
I have some different anecdotes that I might share: 
 

Within a couple of days we were again boarding the ships, 
only this time we were going to war. It would be the first 
taste of real war for all of us, and the thought of it was 
enough to make a person sick with fear. We were taken out 
to the ships in small boats as before . . . 

 
Maybe I don’t need to read them into the record, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m impacted by some of the words. But as you read those . . . 
The stories are real. And the way he described them, as my 
grandfather was, was straightforward, and I think any one of us 
can only fathom that experience. 
 
You know, I think the points that my grandfather would make is 
that nothing, nothing prepares you for the horrors of war and 
the circumstances that one’s faced with. He’d share stories of 
coming across up through . . . In fact very shortly thereafter 
landing on the beaches and working their way into France, they 
came across a location called Ardenne Abbey. And they said at 
that point they’d basically been running for days and were 
exhausted and were wiped, Mr. Speaker, exhausted emotionally 
as well, and came across this terrible battle. And at the time it 
was Commander Kurt Meyer of the German panzer forces that 
had occupied Ardenne Abbey. And he had illegally executed 
service-men and -women there and was also alleged and then 
convicted of other atrocities at that point. 
 
It was Regina Rifles members and my grandfather’s regiment 
who pushed into Ardenne Abbey, which was a church and was 
occupied by the German forces, and had a horrific battle for 
which they prevailed, although they lost many, many members, 
as they had on the beaches as well. He describes coming in on 
the beaches and seeing those he had trained with dropping all 
around him, having to pass members that he had grown a 
relationship with who had been shot, but knew that the medical 
unit, that there was strict instructions to leave those wounded 
members for the medical unit, saying that that defied the very 
values that you had grown up with, to be leaving your friends 
and your comrades wounded in that environment. 
 
He talks about the terrible battle that extended up into Ardenne 
Abbey and the exhaustion after, and I guess some elation after 
they had secured that location. And then what my grandpa, he 

came back and he would share little bits of these stories, and he 
had shared at one point that after that horrific battle and after 
that exhaustion, they found themselves in that abbey some 
incredible apple wine, Mr. Speaker. And if you can only 
imagine, I think the members of the Regina Rifles, I understood 
they enjoyed that apple wine at that point in time. I think it 
sounded like maybe too much of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it was through his, you know, recognizing afterwards and 
doing a little research, it wasn’t actually apple wine that they 
were enjoying. It was Calvados, Mr. Speaker. It was an apple 
liqueur that packs a pretty good punch to it, Mr. Speaker. I keep 
a bottle for remembrance at times as well, but it’s a bit of a 
reminder of some of the, in times of the darkest hour, some of 
the frivolity that also occurred. 
 
My grandfather goes on to describe that he was a little man 
actually, only 120 pounds at the time, and he was left to carry 
after . . . In his unit he had 10 members. There was only three of 
them left to carry the Bren gun. And he describes this Bren gun, 
which he then had to leave his rifle and carry the Bren gun 
which was almost the same size as him. And he said that he was 
teased and bugged by all the members of the forces for being 
this little man carrying this great big gun. 
 
He describes as well the cold and weather as they advanced, 
Mr. Speaker, and the time at Christmas where they were in 
really rough shape. And they rejected the advice that they had 
where they ended up occupying an old farmhouse, and of 
course it’s dangerous for them to be all in one spot. They did 
that anyways and just after grandfather was up, grandpa was up 
on watch, he went down with the others and they were hit at 
that point with an attack. Their force was able to get out but the 
two members on watch were left out. 
 
I do want to touch just two last pieces before I get going here. 
He notes as well that . . . I thought this was interesting. He 
served with many Aboriginal members. And Saskatchewan at 
that time didn’t have a whole lot of relationships with 
Aboriginal people back at home. But he said during the war, 
discrimination wasn’t noticeable in the army. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And he talks about Jack, who he got to know on one of their 
little respite pieces: 
 

We were all the same, there for the same reasons and no 
one was different from another. Jack and the other 
Aboriginal soldiers fought for Canada the same way the 
rest of us had. But when we returned to Canada, white men 
were praised for their heroism while Aboriginal men were 
excluded from very much social attention. 

 
And pointing out that they didn’t have the vote at that point in 
time as well. And I think these are important reminders for all 
that had served. 
 
I won’t go on with all the items that I described here because I 
am cognizant of the time. I just want to close with one last 
statement, and this was 1994 when he’s sharing this: 
 

This year, 1994, marks the 50th anniversary of D-Day. 



7664 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

Although it was a long time ago, I still remember 
everything about it. When I look back on it now, I 
remember the good times. I remember the people and the 
friendships. I wouldn’t wish another war on anyone, but I 
can honestly say that if I had the choice to start my life 
over, I wouldn’t change a thing. I never want to go 
through war again, but I wouldn’t have missed World War 
II for anything. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of service and sacrifice that cuts 
across Saskatchewan. It’s, in many ways, given us the 
freedoms, the liberties, the protections that we enjoy, the 
democracy that we experience in this Assembly. And on behalf 
of all of us in this Assembly and certainly myself as a member, 
all we can give is a humble and genuine thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. And I certainly support the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the veterans 
and to the distinguished guests, it’s a great honour for me to 
stand today as an elected member to recognize and to pay 
tribute to the 90th anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion 
and to the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II. Not 
often enough in this Assembly do we stop and think about what 
our province would look like and where we would be today if 
there had been a different outcome to this war. 
 
And very importantly to me, I wanted to talk to you about the 
Legion and being the daughter of a veteran. My mom was a war 
bride. She was born in Middlesbrough, England, and they were 
married when dad came home from leave from Holland. So as a 
child, I heard the word “war” very often, or something that 
made me think of the war. Letters from home meant letters 
from England. Ration books, the word was used around the 
table. And we had tea, not coffee, in our house most of the time. 
We had to listen to the Queen’s address on Christmas Day 
sitting around as a family. I don’t know if I remember my 
parents speaking to the members of the Legion as anything 
other than veterans. They are related to a part of my parents’ 
life that I didn’t know anything about, but in the back of my 
mind, they made me think of war and brought emotions that 
range from respect and reverence to uncertainty and awe 
whenever we used the word “legion.” 
 
The Royal Canadian Legion had an impact on my life that I 
can’t really explain, not even today, but I’m going to try a little. 
The Legion my dad belonged to was the Spalding Legion, 
Spalding Royal Canadian Legion. It was nearly a sacred 
institution to my brothers and sisters and I, as it was to the other 
legionnaires’ children. The first Thursday evening of every 
month, from my earliest memory, my dad would go to town to a 
Legion meeting. We weren’t rich. In fact going to town was 
normally quite a big deal, but nobody questioned it, not my 
mom and none of us because dad had to go to a Legion 
meeting. It didn’t matter whether it was storming or whether it 
was cold or if it was seeding or if it was harvest, and as kids we 
could only speculate what they did at those meetings, but we 
knew it must be very important because it involved the brave 
people that were in the war. Only years later did I realize that it 
was a type of therapy. That was their type of counselling. They 
only had each other, and they talked to each other. 

I remember hearing dad and some of the other legionnaires 
talking about needing a Legion hall or a meeting place and 
something about using grain instead of cash to buy the building. 
And I heard them talking about pooling money to make sure 
that all the Legion members’ children had books for school. 
And I remember them helping each other out when it meant 
time to finish combining or to build a barn. I just knew that 
Legion members helped each other. 
 
November the 11th was probably the most important day in our 
house. It was the only time that my brothers and sisters and I 
had a babysitter in the house. Mom would get a new dress, the 
only one of the year, and she wore it for all the special 
occasions the rest of the year. 
 
Dad wore his beret and mom polished the medals. And from my 
earliest memory, mom had to cook a turkey because they 
couldn’t afford catering. So they took their own food to the 
Legion banquet. And I know they did more than eat; they 
indulged in something else because often mom and dad didn’t 
talk for a couple of days after November 11th. 
 
I probably attended the Remembrance Day services earlier than 
I can remember, but my earliest recollections were of very tall 
men marching very straight in uniforms and being ordered by a 
man with a lot more medals than my dad, so he must have been 
very important. I remember thinking that I’d seen that very 
same man talking to dad and he never really listened to him 
without talking back at other times, and I wondered with, in his 
uniform, whether that meant something different. 
 
There were women in the parades as well, and their legs looked 
cold when they were marching. It seemed like November 11th 
was one of the coldest days of the year. When I mentioned it to 
mom, she said women weren’t thinking about that; they had 
other things on their mind. 
 
The kids in the Legion in Spalding, we had a certain clique all 
of our own. They were mainly the families we visited with, and 
they were our friends. 
 
After dinner on Sundays, we’d go to one of the 10 or 12 homes 
that were close to us, and they were all veterans’ homes. The 
adults would laugh and argue and talk and play cards, and we 
knew enough to stay away from them and stay out from under 
their feet. And when it came time for supper, we all gathered 
around because sometimes the dads would talk about war, but 
they never told us any sad stories. They only told us about 
peeling potatoes and getting cigarettes and going on leave. 
 
But it wasn’t all parties and get-togethers that my parents and 
other members of the Legion in town did. They were always at 
the forefront when it came to community activities. Whether it 
was making meals or raising money to pay for the insurance on 
the skating rink or provide some resources to somebody in the 
community, the Legion was there. I realized from very early on 
there were reasons these men and women were so very well 
respected. They were a huge part of our community, and they 
were a backbone of the community. 
 
Looking back now, I realize that my respect for the veterans and 
their spouses and their families came first from my parents. But 
later I realized that nobody gives you respect; you have to earn 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7665 

respect. And that’s what happened with the veterans and the 
legionnaires in our town. I had a different feeling than I had for 
our other neighbours. It was sort of a secretive type of feeling in 
a special way that I couldn’t really understand. Even when I 
grew up, I knew there was always a sense of security knowing 
that they were an extended family. 
 
And not unlike many Canadians, The Royal Canadian Legion 
still is a big part of my life. I can’t imagine what my life 
would’ve been like without it. Not only did it give me a sense 
of place and a deeper understanding and appreciation. It gave 
me a respect for the important role these men and women 
played. 
 
As citizens, we must remember the heroes continue to walk 
amongst us today. Through them we can remember that the 
freedom we enjoy today came at a cost that no one should ever 
forget. Through them we understand the value of hard work and 
the importance of community and how much can be 
accomplished when people give their very, very best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity this weekend to spend time 
with my mom who is over 90 years old. And of course being 
the weekend near November 11th, there was war stories, and 
she talked to me about her memories of D-Day. During the war 
she had to ride a horse and deliver milk. And she knew that the 
invasion was coming, as everyone did. But that morning she 
remembered the skies being black with planes, and she knew 
what was going to happen. I asked her if Dad ever talked to her 
about it and he said no. Your dad’s memories are his memories, 
not mine. 
 
We’re humbled to wear a Legion crest, those of us who were 
never part of a war. And we’re humbled to wear the medals. I 
don’t feel qualified that I should be able to do that, but I think 
we should do it to ensure that the Legion continues on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November the 11th we remember those who 
never came home, those who lost their lives on the beaches in 
France and Holland and Belgium and Germany and Italy, and 
there are crosses to mark their spot on foreign soil. But on 
November the 11th we must remember those who did come 
home, those whose eyes and hearts hold memories that they 
never or seldom shared. They lost something they can never get 
back. They lost their youth and they lost their innocence. 
 
My mind can’t fathom what would happen if today my young 
grandson or granddaughters were called up, if they had to go to 
fight a battle, and if they returned, they would come home 
scarred. Today I think of the families that had to, that lost loved 
ones, and we thank them. And, Mr. Speaker, we will never 
forget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to also join in the celebration of our veterans and those 
that serve our country to this day. I thank the member from 
Wood River for bringing forward this motion, and obviously I 
stand in support of the motion to recognize the great 
contribution of many of our servicemen in the past and women 
of the past, and certainly today that continue to serve their 
country. It’s a great honour. 

And I want to share with you a very quick story. At the height 
of the war, there was a house about maybe 20 miles into the 
bush from my home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. And if you 
can picture the house that’s quite a ways into the bush, every 
night at a defined time my grandma would summon all her 
children, and they would sit around her and they’d say a prayer. 
And it’s almost — my Auntie Rose was telling me the story — 
it was clockwork that she got them all together and they said a 
prayer. And at the time my grandpa would sit off to the side and 
he wouldn’t say nothing, just look out the window. 
 
But during those times, they were praying for my dad who was 
a veteran, who was out fighting the war. And her memories 
were pretty strong. All I knew, that I had to pray and I prayed 
really hard, and thank goodness the prayers were answered 
because he made it home. And I think about that particular 
story. It must have been very difficult for many families that 
didn’t have their loved ones come home. That is indeed the 
ultimate sacrifice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the good news is when my dad made 
it home, he really made a difference to our community and to 
our family. And I can remember I picked him up after one 
Veterans’ Day celebration at the community hall in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and I drove him home. And of course he had a 
few because his buddies were having a few. And he said to me, 
what are you going to do with your life, son? And I said, well 
I’m going to stay in politics for a while. At the time I was a 
member of cabinet. And he said, you’ve got to do something 
with your life, he said. I thought that he’d be pretty happy with 
what I had achieved. And he said, look at your brother Johnny. 
He’s a sergeant in the army. And your brother Wally, he’s a 
warrant officer now. 
 
And I don’t think he liked politicians too much at the time, 
because I thought that was actually not a bad accomplishment, 
you know, to become a cabinet minister. But he was so proud of 
his sons that were serving in the military, as well as his 
daughter. And that’s all he ever spoke about as a World War II 
veteran, is the service to your country. He was a really strong 
patriot. He really was. And he really demanded respect from his 
children. Like, we knew who the matriarch was in our family. 
 
Obviously as a single father, he had to ensure we had discipline, 
had to ensure we had respect for him. And I can remember one 
day we were sitting with him, and it was during the celebration 
for Veterans’ Day, and he proceeded to give me and my 
younger brother and my older brother some grief because we 
weren’t doing things as well as he thought we should be doing 
things. And even though we had our own families and those 
two brothers were accomplished guys — they were both in the 
service for a long time — not one of us said a word. We were 
taught early that when your elders speak, you be quiet and 
listen. And when he spoke, we were quiet and we listened. And 
we were grown adults. And I think what that taught us, Mr. 
Speaker, was the fact that with respect you get discipline. And 
over time I can tell you that it is actually, the memories that you 
have during Veterans Day, it’s actually really a difficult time 
for many, many families. It’s a quiet celebration for some; it’s a 
good celebration for others. But genuinely the undertone of 
respect from all families that had loved ones return or those that 
made the ultimate sacrifice is deep and is rooted in many of our 
communities. 



7666 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

And we’ve seen evidence of that in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Many of 
our veterans that came home, whether it was Vital Morin or 
Gaspar Kenny or my father that came home from the war, they 
made an incredible difference to our communities because they 
brought home a sense of freedom. They brought home a sense 
of democracy that they fought for, and they really taught our 
community how to become more independent, have greater 
pride, and really serve a purpose in life. And to this day our 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse and many other communities 
across the North really benefited from that influx of veterans 
coming home and showing us that what we have in life, we 
have to appreciate it and build on it and build on their sacrifice. 
And they taught that to us not only through their service but 
their work once they returned to our communities. 
 
And I can tell you today that I think my dad would be proud 
because he has . . . My older brother is serving. Recently he’s 
done; he’s finished with the air force, but he ran humanitarian 
missions in Africa as part of the air force. And he also talks 
about tracking the bear during the Cold War, Mr. Speaker. He 
was a flight engineer with the air force. And my younger 
brother John, also. He was a machinist in the army. He also had 
a couple of tours of duty in Bosnia I believe. And my sister 
Donna also served as well and I believe she served in the air 
force as well. And we needed one more, Mr. Speaker, because 
we had the army, we had the air force, and one more component 
of the armed forces and that was the navy. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And I am pleased to say that my daughter Taylor took a 
program through the Bold Eagle program and joined the navy 
and became Ordinary Seaman Taylor Belanger. So we rounded 
the circle. And I was really quite pleased with her because she 
told me after the two and a half months that she was in BC 
[British Columbia] that she was planning on joining, but my 
wife talked her out of it, and I encouraged her to do it. But to 
make a long story short, it was so close for her to join the navy 
and begin to see the world, something that I really wanted her to 
continue doing, but she chose not to. And I asked my wife one 
day why she didn’t want Taylor to go. And she said, well I 
don’t want my baby gone, she said. And I said, well she has to 
go eventually. She has to leave, and it’s something that I think 
that she should have done. 
 
And I talked to her about it at times, but just to let her know that 
I was very proud of the time when I went to her graduation 
ceremony and I seen her walking with her friend. And both in 
uniform, I didn’t recognize them at all. I didn’t recognize my 
own daughter. So I walked up to them and said, excuse me, 
where’s the graduation program? And Taylor said, Dad, it’s me. 
Because I seen this disciplined, young, respectful lady in a 
uniform and I had no idea that was my own daughter. So it 
really changes who you are and how the public and how 
Canadian people see their armed forces, and they revere them as 
heroes and mature people and greater people. So that’s one of 
the things that my father taught me. 
 
And I can tell you there’s some pretty silly times that I tried to 
understand what he went through. Because I know he went on a 
tour, that one year my younger brother took him as well as my 
sister, and they wanted to take him to where he landed. I’m not 
sure what beach it was. But when he came back, I sat down and 

I asked him, so how was your second trip there, Dad? Did you 
enjoy it? He said, yes. I enjoyed it, he said. Well did anything 
change from the first time you were there to now? Like, any of 
the landscape or . . . And he looked at me and said, my son, I 
love you, but the first time I went there I didn’t go for a little 
sightseeing visit. He said, I was busy trying to duck and hide 
behind things. I wasn’t there to see, oh, there’s a nice ridge over 
there. You know, he was kind of making fun of me, but he told 
me he loved me. And then it kind of dawned on me, Mr. 
Speaker, the horror of the war is that fact, the first visit, he 
wasn’t there for a sightseeing tour. He was really there to 
capture land and to fight and to do all these wonderful things. 
 
So I think about my sister Joanne as well, that she was really 
instrumental in building a monument next to the Legion in 
Meadow Lake. And that was to honour her father, as well as all 
the other veterans in the Meadow Lake area. She worked very 
hard for that and fundraised. And a lot of people helped of 
course, but it was a passion of hers and she really, really wanted 
to do this for all the veterans. And I think deep down she also 
wanted to do it for her dad as well. 
 
So I look at some of the things that we have gone through and 
some of the people that I’ve spoken to over the years: Louis 
Roy from Beauval who gave me some very good advice as a 
young guy; Thomas Chartier who is living in La Ronge now but 
originally from Buffalo Narrows, he also gave me some good 
advice and spoke to me about some of these things; George 
Raymond who is still surviving, and he’s going to be at the 
ceremony in Ile-a-la-Crosse in a couple of days. 
 
And I think it’s really important, Mr. Speaker. These are some 
of the people over time that you lose and that you miss. And the 
longer we’re at this place and the more that you begin to realize 
what you’ve lost once you’ve gone home for good . . . That’s 
one of the things that I don’t look forward to once we’re done in 
this Assembly is that when you go home and then you start 
visiting the places that you haven’t been visiting on a regular 
basis, then you realize the intense amount of loss that one 
suffers when you’re away from home working at these jobs that 
we are working. But it pales in comparison to the intense loss of 
many families in the early years, in the early struggles that we 
had to protect our democracy. 
 
Now I stand in the Assembly today in a free, democratic 
society. I speak freely, and I enjoy the ability to speak freely. 
And at times we get raucous and rowdy in this Assembly, but 
it’s not to disrespect the Assembly and this monument of 
freedom that our fathers and grandfathers and uncles and aunts 
and sisters and brothers afforded us. It’s meant to keep on the 
fight to make democracy work. It’s not meant to disrespect the 
gift that was given to us. It’s meant to strengthen the freedom of 
speech. Sometimes the tone doesn’t come across as great, but 
it’s not meant in any way, shape, or form but merely to 
challenge and to try and change minds in a peaceful way. In 
other words, it’s a war of words, not of guns and bullets, and 
that’s something that we always should recognize in this great 
hall of democracy. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I stand in great, proud support. 
And I thank all the families, especially the ones that made the 
ultimate sacrifice. But I also thank all of the people that prayed 
all those years and continue to pray for our service-men 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7667 

and -women that made this country what it is today, a proud, 
noble, yet stoic nation. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured today to 
say a few words on the 70th anniversary of the end of the 
Second World War and the 90th anniversary of the Legion. My 
father-in-law, along with two of his brothers from the Saulteaux 
First Nation, fought in the Second World War. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal peoples from every region of Canada 
served in the Armed Forces during the Second World War, 
fighting in the every major battle and campaign of the conflict. 
To serve their country in the Armed Forces, Aboriginal 
Canadians had to overcome unique cultural challenges. Their 
courage, sacrifice, and accomplishments are a continuing source 
of pride to their families, communities, and all Canadians. At 
least 3,000 treaty Indians, including 72 women, enlisted as well 
as an unknown number of Inuit, Métis, and other Natives. The 
actual numbers were no doubt much higher. Among this small 
number of identified Aboriginal members of the forces, at least 
17 decorations for bravery in action were earned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal soldiers were recognized as effective 
snipers and scouts endowed with courage, stamina, and keen 
observation powers. The brave Native men and women who left 
their homes during the Second World War to contribute to the 
struggle for peace were true heroes. The extra challenges that 
they had to face and overcome makes their achievements more 
notable. Aboriginal Canadians have demonstrated time and 
again their great service and sacrifice for our country through 
their participation in Canada’s military, particularly during 
times of conflict. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few words about the Legion. 
Initially the principal objectives of the Legion were to provide a 
strong voice for World War I veterans and advise the 
government on veteran issues. However World War II brought 
an influx of new demands and the Legion increased efforts to 
help veterans and returned service members as well as those 
serving abroad. Legion members care deeply about supporting 
the men and women who serve this country and want to make a 
difference in the lives of veterans, contribute to our 
communities, and remember those who made the ultimate 
sacrifice for our country. 
 
When you join the Legion, you support the many services that 
they offer to veterans, service military, RCMP, and their 
families. Legion members contribute countless volunteer hours 
and fundraise millions of dollars each year for their 
communities. The Legion is a not-for-profit organization 
funded by the membership fees and operating without 
government grants or financial assistance from the government 
for their operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Legion branches are the cornerstone of their 
communities, and legionnaires raise funds for a variety of 
activities and charities. Annually approximately $6.5 million is 
donated back into the community. For my father-in-law, the 
Legion was a place he went where the horrors of war and the 
loss of good friends is understood. It was a place of refuge and 

security. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate the 
Legion on 90 years of success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
also support this motion today memorializing the 70th 
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and the 90th 
anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion. I’d like to just to 
talk a little bit about my own experiences with the Legion as 
well as the lens through which I see remembrance, which is that 
of a mother. 
 
I grew up, Mr. Speaker, not going to Remembrance Day 
services. Both my grandfathers were World War II vets and the 
way we recognized Remembrance Day actually was watching 
the service in Ottawa on TV. I can remember every year 
without fail, that was when my mom would cry, and we would 
sit and take in the service there. So that was my experience 
growing up, was watching the service on TV, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s been an interesting thing in recent years to have the 
opportunity to go to services as an adult on my own and see 
what that means. 
 
As I said, both my grandpas, Grandpa Champagne, who I never 
met . . . He died a month before I was born and I didn’t hear any 
stories from him but the stories that he shared with my mother 
and my grandmother, I got to hear. As the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said, there weren’t any sad stories shared. 
A lot of them were funny, humorous stories. The one that Mr. 
Wotherspoon shared, or pardon me, that one of my colleagues 
shared as well, they were more of the humorous stories. So I 
didn’t see any of the sadness growing up, which is funny. 
 
I think my grandpa, Napoléon Champagne, was a bit older 
when World War II broke out. He was almost 40. He signed up 
in 1940 and served with the Yorkton Light Anti-Aircraft 
Battery, Royal Canadian Artillery, Canadian Active Service 
Force. He served in Italy and Sicily and spent some time in 
Africa. He ended up coming home in 1944 when my 
grandmother was very ill and he had compassionate leave. 
 
My mom, who was 12 at the time, talks about him coming 
home and being so thrilled about seeing her dad after four 
years. And when you think about it, four years. Men and 
women who left their families for years at a time to put their life 
on the line to ensure that we had freedom and security, Mr. 
Speaker. Four years. My grandpa was gone for four years. My 
mom says when he got off the train, he was a man who had 
contracted malaria in Africa. He was weary and thin and she 
didn’t actually recognize him. But a happy man and contributed 
to his community when he came back. My mom talks about my 
grandma every night spent picking shrapnel out of my 
grandpa’s neck. 
 
My Grandpa Chartier joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in 
April 1941, leaving his wife and four kids on the homestead 
near Rapid View, Mr. Speaker, which was no easy feat and it 
was a lot of work, as many people know here, farming and 
trying to make a go of it. So it was difficult to leave his wife but 
had to do that. He was a corporal assigned to ground duty and at 
the time he helped build the Alaska Highway. After the attack 



7668 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2015 

on Pearl Harbor and at the beginning of the Pacific Theatre, the 
building of that highway became incredibly important to our 
safety here in North America. 
 
So I see Remembrance Day through the lens of my 
grandfathers, although none of those stories were shared 
directly with me. So I always worry about my own kids. I have 
two kids, Mr. Speaker. And war seemed very far removed for 
me growing up because — and thankfully — but obviously the 
member from Wood River pointed out that obviously we 
haven’t had a conflict like World War II where sacrifices were 
made in great numbers in the name of peace. But every single 
year there are men and women who put their lives on the line 
and make that sacrifice from the Canadian Armed Forces, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of the Legion, in recent years I’ve had the opportunity 
to become a member of Branch 63 in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
And things that I’ve had an opportunity to learn and understand 
first-hand is the piece around remembrance and how the Legion 
does such important work around helping us all remember; the 
advocacy piece, making sure that veterans and their families 
have what they need; and the service to community as well, 
which I know the member from Kelvington-Wadena talked 
about — all that went on when she was growing up. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The one thing that I really see, Mr. Speaker, when I attend 
Legion events though, is the camaraderie and support for vets 
and for their families. And the one thing that I’ve really 
appreciated — and I’ll talk a little bit about my lens as a mother 
here in a moment — but as an elected member who has young 
kids, I’ve always been a little insecure, uncomfortable bringing 
my kids to events. As they’ve gotten a little bit older, it’s easier. 
But even when my youngest was just two, bring your kids — 
the Legion members really wanted my kids to be a part of that. 
And I think partly it’s a great family-friendly place, but also to 
instill that remembrance in them. 
 
So in terms of my lens as a mother, the way that I see 
Remembrance Day, I’m a mother of a daughter who is 17 years 
old — she’ll be 18 soon — and is the age of many young men 
and women who have served and lost their lives in conflicts in 
which Canada has participated, Mr. Speaker, and that is not lost 
on me. She’s just a kid. Still she’s a young adult, but I can’t 
even imagine what the bravery and I’m sure the fear that . . . 
Fear goes along with bravery, Mr. Speaker, but I see that as a 
mother who could’ve had children who went away to battle, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see remembrance through the lens of a mother of two children 
who, as a mother, I’m trying incredibly hard to instill the 
importance of remembrance in my kids, whether it’s reading 
some historical fiction, reading Anne Frank, Mr. Speaker, 
talking about the atrocities of war. We’re a very open 
household. We have the news on all the time. We talk about 
Syria. We talk about the armed forces, those kinds of things. So 
as a mom, I’m working really hard to instill the value of 
remembrance so my kids know the things that we have here in 
Canada are pretty great, and we have them because people not 
much older than them were willing to put their lives on the line 
for what we have. 

And the third, the third part of my lens as a mother is I’m truly 
in awe of the sacrifices of women who have served in the armed 
forces, Mr. Speaker. And I hadn’t really thought about this until 
recently. I have a high school acquaintance who is in Trenton 
and has done two tours of duty. She’s been in the Canadian 
Armed Forces for 26 years, a traffic tech, and she’s served two 
terms or two tours in the United Arab Emirates. And she is a 
single mom and has been a single mom for the majority of her 
time as a member of the Canadian Armed Forces. So in talking 
to her a little bit about that, she said to me that being away for 
those six-month tours was the hardest thing that she has ever 
done, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve asked her, well why 26 years? 
Why would you continue to do it? And she said, because I’m 
very proud of what I do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on Remembrance Day I will think . . . And I had a little 
conversation with her about . . . Well, you know what? I’d like 
to talk a little bit about her six months away twice, her six 
months away in the United Arab Emirates. So as a single 
parent, she was living in Cold Lake. She had to have her dad 
come and stay with her daughter, who was then 12, in Cold 
Lake. So she’s away for six months. She comes back and just a 
couple of weeks, or a short time after she came back, she ended 
up spending seven weeks, she had to go on a course in Ontario. 
And then just shortly after that, she found out that she was 
posted to Trenton and moved two months not long after that. 
And so I can’t even imagine, as a mom, the back and forth and 
being away from your young child. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, on Remembrance Day the one thing that 
this friend of mine had asked me, we talked a little bit about it. 
And she said to me, I live in a town with a military base, so it’s 
quite different, but all the people I know who live back home 
honestly know very little about the people who serve today. 
They are the ones we should also think of on Remembrance 
Day, the men and women who give up so much to serve in the 
military and defend this country. Society as a whole is 
forgetting Remembrance Day. Malls and stores are open, and 
less and less people go to parades. It’s quite sad. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on this November 11th, as a mother, I will 
remember all those who’ve made the ultimate sacrifice and all 
their mothers and families that they’ve left behind, Mr. Speaker. 
But I will also pause to think about my high school friend and 
those like her who are willing to put their lives on the line to 
ensure we continue to have the freedoms that we enjoy here in 
Canada. So again, it is my privilege and pleasure to support the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is that, motion by the member for 
Wood River: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
memorialize the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second 
World War by remembering the brave men and women 
who made the ultimate sacrifice in service of their country; 
and further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
commemorates the 90th anniversary of The Royal 
Canadian Legion by expressing its deepest gratitude to our 
veterans and thank them for their contributions to our 
province and our country; and further, 



November 9, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7669 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan expresses 
its gratitude to all the men and women who continue to 
serve in Canada’s Armed Forces. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, transmit the 
oral tributes and motion just adopted concerning the 
memorial of the 70th anniversary of the Second World 
War and the 90th anniversary of The Royal Canadian 
Legion just adopted to the Saskatchewan Command of The 
Royal Canadian Legion. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Assembly, transmit the 
oral tributes and motion just adopted concerning the 
memorial to the 70th anniversary of the Second World War 
and the 90th anniversary of The Royal Canadian Legion 
just adopted to the Saskatchewan Command of The Royal 
Canadian Legion. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 10, ah. We’re 
going to get started early and go longer. This House stands 
adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:38.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7649 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7649, 7651 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7650 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7650 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7651 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7652 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Honouring the Royal Canadian Legion  
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7653 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7653 
 Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7653 
 Challenges to Democracy Conference 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7654 
 Hudson Bay Community School Grand Opening 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7654 
 Saskatoon Hilltops Win Championship 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7654 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Donates to Air Rescue Society 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7654 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Cost of Highway Maintenance 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7655 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7655 
 Condition of Highway to Dore Lake 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7656 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7656 
 Future of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7657 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7657 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7660 
 Commemorating Canadian Military Anniversaries 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7660 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7661 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7664 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7665 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7667 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7667 
  Cheveldayoff (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 7669 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


