
























































Hansard: November 02, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 77A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7563 
 November 2, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great honour for me to introduce many, many special guests that 
have joined us in all three galleries here today. Mr. Speaker, 
there are roughly 182 guests that have joined us. We wanted to 
take a very solemn and special day to say thank you to all of 
those who were involved in fighting fires in Saskatchewan this 
past fire season. And so I have a long list of the groups that are 
actually represented here today, and I’d ask for the indulgence 
of members as we go through the list. 
 
In no particular order, just the list of great organizations that 
helped respond: Muskoday First Nation; RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] “F” Division; the Canadian Red 
Cross; the Salvation Army; The Lighthouse Serving the 
Battlefords; Regina Food Bank; Saskatchewan Volunteer Fire 
Fighters Association; Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority; 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders; Sask Polytechnic; the 
Saskatchewan Science Centre; Battlefords Agency Tribal 
Chiefs; Prince Albert Mobile Crisis; the Prince Albert Grand 
Council; Battle River Treaty 6 Health Centre; Prince Albert 
National Park; Prince Albert Parkland Health Region; the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region; the Saskatoon Health 
Region; Keewatin Yatthé Health Region; Prairie North 
Regional Health Authority; Cameco; Meyers Norris Penny; the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies; Queen City 
Kinsmen Gymnastics Club; and the communities of Warman, 
Balgonie, Prince Albert, Carlyle, Naicam, Nipawin, Humboldt, 
Saskatoon, Pilot Butte, Carrot River, Aberdeen, Langham, 
Outlook, Wakaw, Redvers, North Battleford, Battleford, and the 
RMs [rural municipality] of Britannia and Wilton. 
 
And also with us, Mr. Speaker, are public service professionals 
representing the ministries of Government Relations; 
Environment; Social Services; Highways; Health; Parks, 
Culture and Sport; Justice; SaskEnergy; SaskPower; SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]; and SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we saw in Saskatchewan this past summer 
was unlike anything we had ever seen before in terms of the 
scale of the fires that were in proximity to communities. And 
the evacuation that was required in addition to the suppression, 
in addition to all of the logistics work that went into the fire 

fight, the evacuation itself that was involved was 
unprecedented. We’ve seen nothing like that in the province’s 
history. I hope we’ll never see anything like it again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what was greater than the scale and scope of 
these fires and the impact on these communities and on the 
whole province, what was greater than all of that was the 
response of these amazing women and men, all of these 
organizations — local leadership, First Nations chiefs, town 
mayors and councils, the public service, non-government 
agencies, the private sector, well you heard the list I read. This 
is an amazing list of organizations represented by amazing 
people who just stepped up, really didn’t need to be asked. 
 
The phone lines were busy with volunteers. I remember, Mr. 
Speaker, being involved in the morning ops [operations] call on 
a regular basis and just being amazed by the work of our public 
service, first of all, and also being amazed of reports of the 
response from everyday Saskatchewan citizens in the North, 
people wanting to help from the South. 
 
The writer Henrik Ibsen wrote that “A community is like a ship; 
everyone ought to be prepared to take the helm.” Well we saw 
that this summer. Everyone did their part and more. Everyone 
contributed. Everyone took the helm. And, Mr. Speaker, though 
we were going through a terrible tragedy and some people had 
been out of their homes for a month, despite all of that, through 
all of that, it was a proud moment for everybody in this 
province because of you, because of our guests, because of their 
response to people when they needed their help the most. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a special event here today to say 
thank you. It really doesn’t seem like enough, given the effort 
and the contribution, but we offer it freely and sincerely, both 
this recognition today in their Legislative Assembly, and an 
event a little bit later on this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of a very, very grateful province. Thank you so much for 
proving again the motto of Saskatchewan, “from many peoples, 
strength,” and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And if we ever 
needed a reminder about the fact that we live in a fantastic 
province filled with wonderful, kind, generous people, we have 
a reminder here clear as day, Mr. Speaker, in the many faces 
that we have filling the galleries here in the Assembly. We see 
people from all different walks of life, from all different regions 
of the province. We see fire chiefs, First Nations chiefs, 
leaderships of CBOs [community-based organization] and 
volunteer organizations. We see dedicated civil servants who 
have committed their lives to public service here in 
Saskatchewan. And on behalf of the official opposition, we too 
want to extend our deep gratitude and thanks for everything that 
you have done and that you did over the past months here in the 
province. 
 
And I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure these 
individuals, these leaders of their organizations would also 
recognize that they are the one representative of a big network 
of people helping out. That was most certainly the reality, and 
we want to say a special thank you to each and every member 



7564 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

of your staff, of your volunteer groups, of your band members 
for going above the call of duty to help people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend a special thank 
you to the representatives’ families because we know during 
that period of time a lot of people missed a lot of time at home, 
missed meals together, missed sleeps in one’s own bed, and put 
themselves in harm’s way very often. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, we thank 
all members for their representation here today and thank you 
for their service to Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 27 grade 4 
students from MacNeill School here in Regina. Accompanying 
these students we have their teachers, Ms. Coffin and Ms. 
Johnson, and accompanying this wonderful group of very fine, 
intelligent, young students we have four chaperones. We have 
Leslie Kampe, Lynn Robertson, Mike Strykiwsky, and Peter 
Kampe. So thank you very much, and I’ll have a chance to visit 
with you later on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to welcome 
many of you here. But from northern Saskatchewan, the 
Cumberland constituency, there’s a lot of people from my home 
community, as well as the North, that was impacted greatly. 
 
And I just want to welcome the leadership and the community 
members that are here to your Legislative Assembly and to say 
thank you to the many volunteers and people that came forward 
to help. You have a community, and many people are truly 
grateful and appreciate all the effort and time you put in and, as 
volunteers, the great work you did. We thank you on behalf of 
the Cumberland constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to stand 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 
we know that this province lags behind others in securing the 
rights of gender and sexually diverse students, and that this 
government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students or students bullied because 
of their sexual identity or orientation, and that these students are 
four times more likely than their heterosexual peers to attempt 
suicide. 
 
And we know that GSAs, or gender sexual alliances, play a 
pivotal role in providing inclusive, anti-oppressive learning 
environments and offer reprieve from bullying and assault. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know this government must act so 
students have simple, easy-to-understand information about 

GSAs. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Spruce Home. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition as it relates to 
cellphone coverage in northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake to provide similar quality of cell coverage as the 
southern communities currently enjoy. This would provide 
support for our northern industries as well as mitigate 
safety concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
all throughout Saskatchewan, and this particular page are 
primarily from Dillon and St. George’s Hill. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. The petitioners point out that we continue to hear more 
and more stories about lack of staffing in long-term care, which 
has led to neglect because staff can’t get around to residents to 
ensure that they have what they need. I would like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 
seniors’ care facilities; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Canora, Swift Current, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7565 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition by citizens concerned about the high cost of 
post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
petitioners point out, among other points, that the average 
Canadian student in 2014 graduated with debt of over $27,000, 
not including credit card and other private debt. In the prayer 
that reads as follows: 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
Regina and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Movember 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that 
Movember is upon us, moustaches will once again begin 
appearing to raise awareness of and funds to combat men’s 
health issues. 

During this month, moustaches that would make Tom Selleck 
envious will begin to appear across the globe and particularly 
on this side of the floor, undoubtedly sparking important 
discussions about men’s health, all while moustache growers 
fundraise for the Movember Foundation. 

Since 2003 this international charity has rallied millions of 
people behind the movement to improve men’s health while 
raising $677 million to fund programs and initiatives aiming to 
improve health issues facing men, including prostate cancer, 
testicular cancer, mental health issues, and physical inactivity. 

Mr. Speaker, once again members of our caucus will be 
growing moustaches in an effort to help change the face of 
men’s health. The Minister of Rural and Remote Health will be 
the other member besides myself of our moustache-growing 
team. 

Mr. Speaker, too often men are reluctant to take prompt action 
on our health. With everyone’s help, we have the power to 
change the face of men’s health. And so I ask all members to 
join me in supporting this important fundraising movement and 
to encourage the men they know to take steps toward better 
health. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

[13:45] 

Appreciation for Support During Wildfire Season 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, when the fires started to ravage 
the North this summer, there were countless volunteers, 
agencies, and leaders who supported our impacted communities 

in northern Saskatchewan, and they all deserve a thank you. 

I would also like to express my gratitude to the true heroes of 
this crisis — our firefighters, both on the ground and in the air. 
These brave men and women put in long hours doing all they 
could to protect our communities, land, and animals. 

To those of you who stayed behind to protect your homes and 
cabins, I salute you for your courage and determination, and 
your reluctance to not give up your fight to protect what is 
yours. 

The outpouring of support from people across the country who 
came to help fight these fires was overwhelming, and we thank 
you all for your support. To the people that tirelessly supported 
our evacuees, we are grateful for your compassion and 
assistance during this time of need. 

Now that the fire season has passed, I hope we can reflect on 
what happened and learn the important lessons on how we can 
better protect our northern homes for future generations. On 
behalf of the Cumberland constituency, I would like to say to 
everyone who helped with the fires, tiniki, thank you; 
merci cho. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2015 
wildfire season in northern Saskatchewan resulted in the largest 
emergency response and evacuation in our province’s history. 
Our province came together in a time of crisis, and we are 
grateful — grateful there are no serious injuries or lives lost and 
minimal property damage throughout the North. 

Mr. Speaker, there were so many who helped during this 
emergency. I would like to take the time to name these groups: 
the Canadian Red Cross; emergency management and fire 
safety; Social Services; our Canadian Armed Forces who, when 
called upon, were on the ground for training within 48 hours 
and were deployed to fight fires immediately after; First 
Nations and municipal leaders who worked tirelessly to protect 
their communities; firefighters from our wildfire management 
branch, who worked side by side with firefighters from more 
than 30 municipal and volunteer fire departments across our 
province; crews from SaskEnergy, SaskPower, SaskTel, who all 
worked to protect and repair infrastructure as quickly as 
possible; provincial park staff who stayed behind to ensure our 
parks and our campers were safe. And to the evacuees, thank 
you for your courage and for your patience. 

Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people from Saskatchewan, from the 
province, and US [United States] played a key role in the 
operation during the wildfire. I ask all members to join me in 
thanking everyone involved for their efforts. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Movember 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is 
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month, but in recent years it’s 
probably been better known as Movember, and I for one will be 



7566 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

participating in growing out a moustache to raise money and 
awareness for men’s health issues. 

This Movember Foundation was created in 2003 to help spread 
the Movember message, and since then more than $677 million 
have been raised by the Mo brothers in every corner of the 
globe. 

Over the last few years, Movember has expanded its focus to 
include mental health in addition to men’s cancers, and it’s an 
important step because far too many men don’t reach out and 
get the help they need because of the stigma associated with 
mental illness. There’s certainly more that we need to do to 
improve access and availability of services in all parts of the 
province, but we also need to make sure that the stigma 
associated with mental health, mental illness goes away and that 
men everywhere know that they can come forward and get the 
help they need. 

I know, in this Chamber, Movember over the past few years has 
seen incredible support from all members for growing great 
moustaches or by generous support, and I am confident 
Movember 2015 will see some very impressive results. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
beginning of Movember and in thanking all of those who are 
involved with organizing and promoting this very important 
event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

Moose Jaw’s Better Together Food Drive 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Halloween night, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Moose Jaw North, myself, and our families 
participated in the annual Better Together food drive. 

The Better Together Halloween food drive has been a staple 
event for the city of Moose Jaw and our district food bank for 
the last 10 years. Mr. Speaker, the success of this event over the 
last 10 years is absolutely astounding, as it provides the food 
bank with 50 per cent of their annual food needs each year. Not 
only does this food drive demonstrate the strength of 
community spirit in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker; it also 
demonstrates a commitment to volunteerism. This year over 
400 volunteers came out to support and participate in this one 
event. 

In just five hours, the volunteers knocked on all of the doors in 
Moose Jaw, asking for non-perishable food items. I am proud to 
say that this year’s food drive brought in over 45,000 pounds of 
food for the food bank. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 
me in congratulating the volunteers and organizers of the Better 
Together food drive for another successful event, and their 
commitment for helping the Moose Jaw & District Food Bank. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Corporation Furthers Opportunities 
in Northern Communities 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak 
about the great work being done by Cameco to support the 
people and communities of northern Saskatchewan. Nearly 50 
per cent of the employees at Cameco’s northern work sites are 
residents of the North, and more than 1,250 of these employees 
are Aboriginal. 

In addition to the employment it provides, Cameco aims to 
develop further economic and social opportunities to support 
local communities. As part of these efforts, Cameco embarks on 
a northern tour each fall to celebrate the success of their 
northern business partners and to inform young people about, 
and encourage them to take advantage of, the educational and 
employment opportunities available. 

Mr. Speaker, during this year’s tour, as a way of giving back, 
Cameco donated a repurposed laptop and new printer to 10 of 
the smaller communities they visited. Members of Cameco’s 
business technology services department were part of the 
northern tour to encourage students to consider taking 
advantage of opportunities for careers in the IT [information 
technology] field. 

Cameco also brought one of Canada’s most prominent young 
indigenous entrepreneurs, Kendall Netmaker, founder and CEO 
[chief executive officer] of Neechie Gear, to share his inspiring 
story with the communities the tour visited. 

I ask all members to join me in thanking Cameco for their 
contributions to our economy and their dedication to making 
northern Saskatchewan a better place to live. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce held their 32nd 
annual ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] Awards in 
Saskatoon, celebrating achievement in business excellence 
within Saskatchewan. 

These prestigious awards invite leaders in Saskatchewan’s 
business industry to come together and highlight Saskatchewan 
companies that have gone above and beyond. This year 89 
nominations were submitted to the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce. These nominations represent businesses of all sizes 
from across our province. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to recognize that TA Foods Ltd., from 
my constituency in Yorkton, was nominated in three categories: 
exports, growth and expansion, and innovation. 

Starting their business more than 30 years ago, Terry and Anne 
Popowich started out milling oats. Their business grew into 
Grain Millers Inc., one of the largest oat processors in North 
America. The Popowiches then transitioned out of that business 
to focus on flaxseed. By 2003 they had hired 100 employees 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7567 

while establishing TA Foods. Since 2003 TA Foods has focused 
on providing healthy and functional foods to the marketplace. 
With an emphasis on flax, the company’s mission is to gather 
the best of nature’s flax harvest and help customers convert 
them into health-conscious foods and nutrition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that TA Foods won the ABEX 
Award in the category of growth and expansion. I invite all 
members to join me in recognizing all of the companies that 
were nominated at this year’s ABEX Awards ceremony and 
congratulate Terry and Anne Popowich on their company’s 
accomplishment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — Last week the Premier kept talking about an 
internal chart that shows the performance of the Boundary dam 
carbon capture plant, but the government refused to release it, 
claiming it’s somehow sensitive information that can’t be 
shared with the public. 
 
Well we have that chart, and I think the real reason the Premier 
didn’t want the chart to be shared with the public is that it 
contradicts so much of what he has been saying. The Premier 
said the $1.5 billion carbon capture project was fully 
operational “when it opened,” but the internal documents show 
the unit did not capture CO2 for quite some time after the grand 
opening. So why did the Premier say that it was fully 
operational and working as designed when it opened up, when 
that wasn’t even close to reality? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for his question. I’ve had discussions with the 
president of SaskPower in the last number of days, and prior to 
even the questions being raised, about this particular project, 
Mr. Speaker, about what operational means in the utility sector, 
Mr. Speaker. And I also think he shared this comment with 
members of the media and others, that from the draft board in 
terms of the plant’s technology to the commissioning of the 
plant and turning on of the plant, SaskPower believed that 
wording was accurate — still believes that by the way — that 
it’s operational and it’s fully operational, and so the tweet went 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of numbers tossed around last 
week, and I just want to be clear. Mr. Speaker, this particular 
technology, this amine technology, will capture 90 per cent of 
the CO2 in terms of the exhaust that goes through it. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what this plant will hit. That is the target that 
this plant will hit. Through the last year, the first year of 
commissioning, it ran at about 89, sometimes 90 per cent of 
capacity, capturing about 80 per cent of the CO2. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s going to get to 90 per cent on a consistent basis. 
 
We know that in the coming months the plant will be 
operational again, and we need it to be operational. If we’re 
going to continue to have coal, cleaner coal, in the fleet, if 

we’re going to continue to have coal mining jobs in the 
province, if we’re going to continue to have jobs at Boundary 
dam 3 and 4 and 5, we need to make sure that coal’s viable 
going forward, to also to keep rates affordable for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so we’re going to continue with this technology that’s 
proven actually to work quite well in its first year. The plant 
will reopen again. It’ll reactivate again here in the weeks ahead. 
And we will inform the opposition members and the public of 
the province in terms of progress as it gets to full capacity and 
full efficiency. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, every thinking person in the 
province knows exactly what the Premier has been intending to 
share with the public, Mr. Speaker, in terms of a story. But as 
we look at the internal documents, it’s a story that’s not backed 
up by the facts. 
 
Last October the Premier said the carbon capture plant was 
fully operational. It’s interesting to see how he is changing 
these definitions on the fly. And last week when the media 
asked him about that, he defended it, saying, “It was running at 
full capacity.” Now the reporters asked him if that meant a day 
or what, and the Premier said, “For longer than that.” But that 
contradicts SaskPower’s own chart — own chart — which 
shows no carbon was captured until about three weeks after the 
grand opening. 
 
So to the Premier: should we trust what he said or should we 
trust SaskPower’s own internal chart? Which one? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we can trust the words of the 
CEO and the officials at SaskPower, which are consistent both 
with the tweet that the member referenced and the fact the plant 
was operational the day it opened. In terms of the terminology 
that utilities use, I’ve asked this question very directly, for 
obvious reasons. We need to be consistent. And I invite the 
member to do that. I invite the member to talk to Mr. Marsh and 
get this input from him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also say this: I’m glad this issue’s being 
raised in the legislature today because there’s a very important 
issue at play here. There’s the long-term affordability and 
sustainability of electrical production in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Coal is part of that right now, but we know with 
federal government regulations in the coal industry, we’ll either 
going to have to clean up coal or shut down coal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our view on this side of the House that this 
investment in this technology — which is capturing CO2 today, 
400 000 tonnes, and will be capturing the 90 per cent target in 
the months ahead — it’s our view that this technology helps us 
maintain coal in the fleet, coal cleaner than natural gas by a 
multiple of four times. But it also gives Saskatchewan a chance 
to export technology because they’re building more coal in 
China; they’re building more coal plants in India, even in Japan, 
even in Germany. We have a chance to be a part of a solution 
bigger than cap and trade frankly, bigger than a carbon tax. Mr. 



7568 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

Speaker, it’s an investment that’s worthwhile. 
 
And I guess I ask the member again: what is the position of the 
opposition? Are they in favour of coal continuing? Or like his 
counterpart, the Leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] in 
Alberta, is it his position we should shut down coal in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not capturing one thing today 
of CO2, Mr. Speaker, because it’s been closed since September, 
Mr. Speaker. What we need is the Premier to stop evading the 
questions and start giving Saskatchewan people some 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the spin lines. We’ve heard the sales 
pitch time and time again, and that’s the problem. The sales 
pitch isn’t backed up by the facts, the internal facts of 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. The inconsistencies, the 
inconsistencies between what the Premier has been saying and 
what the internal documents say don’t stop there. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Now the government put out a glowing press release last 
February saying that the project was “exceeding expectations.” 
And the Premier defended that last week, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying the carbon capture plant was running optimally at the 
time of that news release. But yet again SaskPower’s own chart 
contradicts the Premier. The chart shows the unit’s operations 
weren’t anything, Mr. Speaker, but optimal. They were 
anything but optimal. 
 
So again to the Premier: what is the truth? Should we believe 
him or should we believe SaskPower’s internal chart? Which 
one is right? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the member should 
believe, what the people of the province can believe is the fact 
that over the course of a year, the plant at times was running at 
about 89 per cent of capacity, 90 per cent of capacity, that it 
was capturing about 80 per cent of the CO2 during those 
occasions. It was obviously shut down because it wasn’t 
performing optimally and the engineers wanted to make sure 
that it was. This is normal for a commissioning project, 
especially on a major R & D [research and development], on a 
major technology project in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
was true, for example, with the synchrotron years ago, a very 
worthwhile science project that was implemented by the New 
Democrats opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the other truth of all of this, that this 
technology has captured 400 000 tonnes of CO2. This 
technology is working. To the extent we want it yet? No, but 
it’s working and it will meet the targets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I ask the hon. member opposite: what’s the position of 
the NDP? This is the same questions that were asked last week. 
What’s his answer to the question today which is, do the NDP 
support coal going forward or would they phase it out like the 

NDP in the province of Alberta? Do they believe that it’s true, 
that’s it right that we either clean coal up or shut coal down? 
And if they believe that, what do they choose, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these are new questions, because 
what the government was saying last week on Thursday, Mr. 
Speaker, is contradicted by the internal documents from 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. We can have the policy discussion 
and we will. What we need now are the answers, Mr. Speaker, 
about why we’re hearing two very different stories. We have 
the sales pitch from the Premier, Mr. Speaker. We have those 
lines, Mr. Speaker. But we have no explanation about why the 
story isn’t backed up by the facts from SaskPower. 
 
The news release that was sent out, Mr. Speaker, in early 
February, the celebratory news release on February 11th, we 
can look at that, Mr. Speaker. But SaskPower’s own documents, 
their very own documents show the plant was off-line for the 
first part of February and then it was capturing about half, about 
half of total emissions. Mr. Speaker, that sure doesn’t sound 
like it was exceeding expectations and it sure doesn’t sound like 
it was running optimally like the Premier claimed. 
 
So my question to the Premier: how on Earth can he justify 
saying it was exceeding expectations and running optimally 
when SaskPower’s own chart shows that was not even close to 
reality? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we welcome 
the fact that the Leader of the Opposition now says he’s 
prepared to have a policy debate on this and hopefully a lot of 
other issues, because we certainly haven’t had to date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of what was being discussed about the 
facility at that point in time exceeding expectations, if you look 
at the parasitic load of the facility, Mr. Speaker, it was expected 
to be around 110 megawatts. It is exceeding that and is 
generating about 120 or 130 megawatts when it is up to speed 
and operational, Mr. Speaker. So it is exceeding the 
expectations in that area. 
 
However, it is certainly not exceeding expectations in terms of 
the amount of CO2 that’s been captured. And, Mr. Speaker, as 
we have stated, that there has been details provided on a 
number of occasions around the amount of carbon that has been 
captured to date, Mr. Speaker. We will be providing even more 
updates. SaskPower will be going forward, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan are fully 
aware of the amount of CO2 that is being captured by the 
facility and the success of it so far. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the only accurate information it 
seems that they have provided is when they are caught, Mr. 
Speaker, in contradiction to what they’ve been saying with what 
the facts really are. That’s where we’re seeing the information 
coming out from that front bench and from the Premier. 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7569 

The same February news release also said the project was on 
target to capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 2015, on target to 
capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 in the calendar year. That was 
the government’s claim back in February and the Premier, the 
Premier was still defending that claim last week. He said the 
facility was performing optimally in February and capturing 
CO2 at its design capacity. But that’s not true either, Mr. 
Speaker. The only time, the only time the daily capture rate 
exceeded 70 per cent was in the first few days of January. After 
that, on days it was actually turned on, the maximum daily 
capture rate dropped to about 50 per cent and some days it was 
down around 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker — again, the facts from 
SaskPower. 
 
Why would the Premier say that it was on target to capture 1 
million tonnes of CO2 in 2015 when the daily capture rates were 
either zero or between 40 per cent and 52 per cent? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Because that is the target rate, Mr. Speaker. 
We are hoping, and SaskPower officials are certainly of the 
opinion that it’ll reach that target at some point, Mr. . . . future. 
 
It didn’t meet it in 2015. Clearly that’s the case. It looks like 
there’s going to be about 400 000 tonnes captured, Mr. Speaker, 
and sold to Cenovus, Mr. Speaker. That will result in revenue to 
SaskPower of about 5 to $6 million, Mr. Speaker — very, very 
positive with respect to that, Mr. Speaker. We have said on a 
number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, that this plant isn’t operating 
at the efficiency that we would like to see. 
 
But I think a recent column on October 31st probably sums it 
up best: “. . . we need to remember that no technology is free of 
glitches and hiccups and that such problems are typical . . . [for 
such] large-scale technology commercialization projects.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a normal thing in terms of these 
types of projects when they’re brought to commercialization; 
there’s always some hiccups with respect . . . in initial stages of 
commissioning, Mr. Speaker. This plant is no different with 
respect to that. But we believe completely what the SaskPower 
team is telling us, that it will reach that at some point in the near 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the answer from the minister is 
hilarious if it wasn’t so sad. He said, Mr. Speaker, when 
questioned about how they could be on track to capture 1 
million tonnes, he said, well that’s the target, so you know, it’s 
got to be right. Well that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
been their cheerleading on this throughout. It’s not supported by 
the facts one little bit. 
 
In order, Mr. Speaker, in order to capture 1 million tonnes of 
CO2 in 2015, the plant would have to capture an average of 
2740 tonnes every single day of the year. But internal 
documents show the project hadn’t reached that capture rate 
even one day in 2015, not one day. So again, how can the 
Premier possibly say it was truthful for the government to claim 
that it was on track to capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 in 2015? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the target for the project is 1 
million tonnes. Unfortunately it didn’t reach that target in 2015. 
That’s correct. It reached 400 000 tonnes of capture of CO2, Mr. 
Speaker, which is the equivalent of taking off the road of about 
100,000 vehicles here in Saskatchewan. It’s not great, but it’s 
pretty good, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly on target to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that we need to keep in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, “. . . we need to keep in mind that the goal of 
developing clean coal technology is critical for the planet and 
not to be abandoned at the first bump in the road.” 
 
Now I know that the member opposite would like to shut it 
down. He would like to shut it down and just stop the project, 
and the member from Nutana has said so much on a number of 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that’s the right thing to do 
with respect to this, Mr. Speaker. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan need to know that the government is committed 
to cleaning up coal here in Saskatchewan rather than shutting it 
down as the NDP would suggest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they didn’t say they hope to 
capture 1 million tonnes someday off in the distance after years 
of sputtering along the road. They said, Mr. Speaker, this 
government said recently they were on track to capture 1 
million tonnes in 2015. The facts show, Mr. Speaker, that they 
are nowhere on track. The facts show, Mr. Speaker, that that 
statement is not accurate any way whatsoever. 
 
The internal chart, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t just contradict the 
Premier’s claim about how things were going around the grand 
opening and his claims about how things were going last 
February. This chart also contradicts the government’s rhetoric 
about things improving every week. The chart is clear. The 
peak capture rate was actually achieved in 2014 and the 
performance of the carbon capture plant throughout 2015 has 
been much worse than that. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he at least acknowledge that 
fact or will he keep giving a story that doesn’t match with 
SaskPower’s own internal documents? Which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions 
throughout the past year, SaskPower has put out information 
around the amount of CO2 that’s been captured. It’s about 
400 000. The target was 1 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately they’ve missed it by a fair measure to say the 
least. We have committed to, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has 
committed to providing more updates with respect to the 
operations of the facility going forward. 
 
And I think it’s important that we take a look at what their plan 
is going forward, Mr. Speaker. This week they intend to start up 
the plant with completion going forward. In the next two weeks, 
they will conduct nameplate testing at full capacity. That means 
at full capacity for three days attempting to achieve 90 per cent 
capture at the full rate of capacity, the full nameplate rate of 
capacity which is 3240 tonnes per day, Mr. Speaker. After 



7570 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

nameplate testing, they will run the plant at about 2600 tonnes 
per day, which is kind of a normal thing, Mr. Speaker, both the 
ramp-up and also to reduce the amount of load so that they can 
do further testing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how we can believe 
these answers from the minister when very clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, this government said that they were on track to capture 
1 million tonnes in 2015. The facts from SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker, tell a very, very different story, Mr. Speaker. And they 
only are sharing information, Mr. Speaker, when they are 
caught, when they are caught telling information, Mr. Speaker, 
that doesn’t match up with what SaskPower is saying. 
 
Here’s what the Premier said last week: 
 

There’s a chart through the whole year of it coming up to 
full capacity, 90 per cent capture. And then, at any sign of 
decline, SaskPower engineers shut it down to fix the 
problem. 

 
So the Premier said it reached full capacity many times 
throughout the course of the year. But the truth is it did not get 
up to full capacity, not once. And the highest capture rate 
achieved was mid-November last year. This year, in 2015, the 
plant has struggled to capture more than 2000 tonnes per day. 
Most days this year it has fallen far short of that. The Premier 
says that he has seen this chart. So why do his statements not 
even come close to matching what the chart actually shows? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — What the chart actually shows is that 
there’s been lots of problems with the facility and that the 
facility has captured 400 000 tonnes in 2015, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s been noted on a number of occasions by SaskPower 
officials. If you look at the list of it, it goes on, starting in 
January through February. In addition to that, in July there was 
an update with respect to it at that point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s been a number of updates. It’s not operating at the 
optimal amount, clearly, and we have admitted that on a 
number of occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think going forward we are optimistic, and I think 
SaskPower people are optimistic with respect to that. After the 
nameplate testing that they’re going to be conducting here real 
soon, they’ll ramp the plant down to about 2600 tonnes per day, 
or 80 per cent of the capacity, to fill commitments to the 
offtaker with respect to the project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then every eight weeks going forward they’ll have a short 
planned outage to clean the carbon capture equipment as 
necessary, and this time frame could extend between a week 
and two weeks in time, Mr. Speaker. And then in May of 2016, 
they will have a potential one-month planned outage, Mr. 
Speaker, to replace any kind of defective equipment that they 
determine, Mr. Speaker, and further conduct very intensive and 
extensive cleaning and necessary testing, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, just last week, just last week the 
Premier said that the plant had been operating optimally, Mr. 
Speaker. Now we have the minister saying oh, there’s major 
problems with what’s going on. They can’t get their story 
straight, Mr. Speaker, from one question period to the next, not 
to mention from question period out into the rotunda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need to start seeing is some transparency, 
some accuracy, Mr. Speaker, and some clarity for 
Saskatchewan people who are on the hook for a $1.5 billion 
project and growing, and we don’t even know, Mr. Speaker, 
when it might actually work. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, earlier on when US Senator Lindsey 
Graham came for a visit in August, the Premier was boasting 
about the facility operating at full capacity. Do you know how 
much it was actually capturing at that time? It captured nothing 
for almost two weeks at the beginning of August despite 
actually being turned on for most of those days. It then captured 
between 1500 tonnes and 2100 tonnes per day, which is 
between 40 per cent and 58 per cent of total emissions. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s nothing to boast about. 
 
My question to the Premier: was the Premier upfront with 
Lindsey Graham about the problems with the project? What 
exactly did he tell the US senator? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we have been 
saying consistently, Mr. Speaker, is, is that there’s been 
problems with the facility. It has been ramped up and it has 
been ramped down in terms of its production. We’ve seen 
production go at a rate that still isn’t what we would like to see 
it, but we’ve seen it much lower than that on occasions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t think it does any good for the Leader of the Opposition 
to suggest to the engineers of SaskPower and other companies 
that are operating on this facility that they don’t know what 
they’re doing down there, Mr. Speaker. Because I think they 
clearly do know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They have 
developed a world-class project, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 
groups, some 260 of them have had occasion to go down and 
take a look at the facility down at Boundary dam, Mr. Speaker. 
And they believe it is groundbreaking technology. 
 
And I think they also believe something that is very, very 
important and that is to remember that “no technology is free of 
glitches and hiccups and that such problems are typical of 
large-scale . . . projects.” That was something that was reported 
on October 31st in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the shifting stories we’ve had 
from this minister is something else. And to suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that the issue is with the engineers is ridiculous 
because the issue is with this government, this Premier who 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7571 

refuses to release the information, Mr. Speaker, that shows the 
true picture of the project, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the 
problem lies. 
 
The Premier said last week, in some months so much CO2 is 
captured that Cenovus wouldn’t actually take it all. But that 
doesn’t make any sense because we know this government cut a 
cheque to Cenovus last year for not delivering enough CO2. 
And they’re planning to pay another massive penalty this year. 
 
We also know the contract says Cenovus has to take, has to take 
what SaskPower captures or they pay us a penalty. So it’s hard 
to believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe the Premier when 
he says the project captured more CO2 in some months than 
Cenovus would take. But it’s especially hard to believe that 
when you look at SaskPower’s chart, because it’s clear they’ve 
been struggling to capture above 2000 tonnes per day 
throughout 2015. 
 
So a simple question, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier because the 
story is not adding up one bit, whether it comes from the 
Premier, whether it comes from the minister. Simple question: 
in which months was Cenovus unwilling to take all of the CO2? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, within the contract there is a 
point in the contract where the company, Cenovus, along with 
SaskPower, set a nomination rate, which is the amount that they 
believe Cenovus will be able to use and that SaskPower will be 
able to supply them with, Mr. Speaker. That nomination rate 
has been adjusted downward at the request of Cenovus 
throughout the year, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get the exact day that 
that happened. I’m not familiar with it. I don’t have that 
information with me, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll get the time frame 
for that discussion that happened, Mr. Speaker, when Cenovus 
asked for a lower amount than was originally requested. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really quite incredible, quite 
incredible how one little chart can expose so many 
inconsistencies between what the Premier has been saying and 
what the reality is. In fact almost everything he has said about 
the project is contradicted by this one chart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Premier can claim that he wasn’t 
properly informed, that he never asked any questions, or never 
briefed. I guess it’s possible, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think it’s 
all that believable because he has been so heavily involved in 
this project. So perhaps he knew the truth but just didn’t want 
the rest of us to know it. And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, it 
is alarming because we ought to be able to trust what he says. 
So to the Premier: what is the truth? Why do his stories not 
match SaskPower’s own chart? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this project has been 
determined to go forward because of the fact that in 
Saskatchewan we have some 300 years supply of coal. So the 
choices for the Government of Saskatchewan were this: either 
we simply wind up the proposal, Mr. Speaker, we shut down 

the coal facilities in Saskatchewan, or we work towards 
cleaning them up, Mr. Speaker. The project was started, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s had various times when it’s been operating fairly 
well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s had lots of times when it didn’t 
operate very well, Mr. Speaker. We have admitted that on a 
number of occasions. But what is known, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there were 400 000 tonnes that have been sequestered and 
captured so far by the facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The project will make about 5 to $6 million in 2015, Mr. 
Speaker. It allows the province of Saskatchewan to continue to 
operate and continue to generate electricity from that facility 
down at Boundary dam, Mr. Speaker. I think the choices before 
the people of Saskatchewan are very, very clear, that they 
believe that this technology can continue to operate and 
continue to prove that the technology is viable, or would they 
look at the NDP option which is to simply shut it down, throw 
all those people out of work, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Motion of Censure 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to seek 
leave under rule 51(d) and rule 61 to move a motion of censure 
against Mr. Speaker for the unprecedented and unacceptable 
actions we saw last Thursday when Mr. Speaker failed to follow 
well-established parliamentary procedures as well as the rules 
of this Assembly by refusing to recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, even though he was the only member seeking to 
enter the proceedings, and instead forcing the member for 
Saskatoon Centre to enter the debate against his will. If given 
leave, I am prepared to move a motion to that effect 
immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to move a 
motion under rule 61. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 



7572 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 183, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act and The Saskatchewan 
Employment Amendment Act, 2014. The short title is The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is about the legacy of the Premier. 
This is about the Premier and what he has left for Canada from 
his rule as the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s always an interesting topic to discuss because it’s 
important for what kinds of things premiers and their 
governments provide for not just Saskatchewan, but for the 
whole country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say that when all is said and done, the main 
legacy of this Premier will be this particular area of dealing 
with essential services and the fact that the Premier, with the 
assistance of his cabinet and the government, was able to trigger 
and have placed in our constitution an absolute protection of the 
right to strike. That was not something that was there before 
this particular legislation was put in place. And it’s quite an 
interesting thing to think about, that a Premier who was not all 
that enamoured, not all that in favour of labour, came into 
government and ended up basically doing some things that 
didn’t make sense, and ultimately after eight years we’ve sorted 
out what it is that didn’t make sense. 
 
And so what we know is that the election was held in 
Saskatchewan eight years ago this month and that during that 
election and just prior to that election, the Premier and a 
number of ministers said, we’re not going to deal with essential 
services legislation. But the legislature was called into session 
in December, and on December 19th, 2007 the government 
tabled Bill 5, essential services legislation and Bill 6, an Act to 
amend the existing trade union Act. 
 
There were some in the community that applauded this move. 
The Federation of Labour called it “the worst legislation for 
workers in the country.” And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, we 
spent many hours in this Chamber and in committee rooms 
discussing those two pieces of legislation, and we had many 
questions about the legislation. 
 
Now some of the labour representatives put together resources, 
hired lawyers, and ended up just going ahead with a challenge 
to the legislation. And it was interesting at that point that the 
Justice minister, who is now the Labour minister and the 
Education minister, said, “The courts may make findings on our 
legislation at some point, but right now my department drafts 
the legislation.” 
 
So what we had then was legislation that was being challenged 
on a whole number of levels, and it was very clearly being 
brought forward by a new, naive government, a new, naive 
Premier. But the end result after much litigation was that in 
February, February 6th, 2012 — that’s just three years ago — 
Mr. Justice Dennis Ball of the Court of Queen’s Bench of 
Saskatchewan ruled that this essential services legislation was 
unconstitutional, although he did uphold some of The Trade 
Union Act’s amendments. 
 
And so very quickly the government responded by saying, 

we’re going to appeal Mr. Justice Ball’s ruling, and so the 
appeal begins in the fall of 2012. In April 26th of 2013, I guess 
Mr. Justice Richards at that time, of the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal, upheld the Saskatchewan Party’s public service 
essential services Act, and then the matter was sent to the 
Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
In October of 2013, the Supreme Court of Canada said that it 
would be willing to hear this case, which was the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour’s appeal of the decision of Mr. Justice 
Richards of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. That matter 
then proceeded through those courts. And ultimately on January 
30th of this year, 2015, the Supreme Court of Canada struck 
down the 2008 public service essential services Act in a 5 to 2 
ruling. But the most important part of that ruling for all of the 
people of Canada is that it basically said unionized Canadian 
workers have a constitutionally guaranteed right to strike. 
 
This had never been in and part of our law in Canada directly. 
There were some clear indications from the constitutional 
drafting that would say this, but this was the first case that 
ended up confirming that there is a constitutionally guaranteed 
right to strike. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see this legislation and 
what it has triggered and the community discussion that it has 
triggered as the legacy of our Premier. I know that quite a 
number of the other premiers across the country, when the 
challenge started in 2008, said, what are you doing? I mean, 
there was a concern on a whole number of levels that this is 
where it would end up. But sometimes you don’t always think 
through all of the consequences. And so we need to thank our 
Premier for being the person who, through some very . . . 
maybe not such deft moves, but through some moves, ended up 
having the right to strike guaranteed in the constitution. 
 
And the Supreme Court last year said that the government had a 
year to fix the problems that were there in the legislation, and 
practically, the government has gone ahead and dealt with a 
number of these issues. And that’s the legislation that we’re 
looking at right now. And so practically, there have been some 
discussions finally with the people who are most affected by 
this type of legislation, and there are quite a few ideas that have 
come forward into the legislation. And so these changes do 
make some recommendations that . . . and dealing with the fatal 
flaws, if I can put it that way, that were there in the original 
legislation. 
 
And basically what, you know, the . . . Rather than having sort 
of absolute power in the employer to sort of define the whole 
process and then not have any method of appeal, what’s 
happened is that there’s going to be much more consultation all 
throughout the process. And that’s normally how you deal with 
difficult issues. So this legislation I think could have been 
drafted years ago if that was the desire of the government or the 
willingness of the government to listen, but that did not happen. 
 
Now when you look at some of the procedures that are here in 
the legislation, they do seem to capture that sense that it has to 
be both the workers and the employer who end up being part of 
the discussion about what services are essential. 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7573 

Interestingly the process that’s set out in this legislation is very 
similar if not exactly what happened before the government 
introduced legislation. In effect what this legislation, this 2015 
Act, does is basically describe what would happen before, 
which was when there were labour disputes, where there was 
going to be a withdrawal of services, the union management 
and the employer’s human resources people would sit down and 
figure out which kinds of jobs were necessary, you know, what 
locations needed to be covered, how many people would be 
there. And so there was a process already to do that. 
 
And so what this legislation does I think is go back to what was 
there before and said, okay let’s put in a process whereby we 
can do what we were doing before. Now the added part — and I 
think the learning probably from other jurisdictions and from 
other situations that have arisen in the last eight years — is that 
there are some, what would I say solutions when people get into 
an impasse. And those solutions in this legislation appear to be 
relatively reasonable. 
 
It’s a bit confusing when you actually look at the legislation. 
And I say this because over the years the Labour Relations 
Board has had a major role, obviously, in dealing with all kinds 
of issues where there are disputes between employers and 
employees.  
 
But what this particular legislation says is, well we’re not going 
to go to the Labour Relations Board if there’s a problem here. 
We’re going to go to something that we’re going to create 
anew, which is called an independent dispute resolution 
tribunal. And basically there’ll be a person appointed from the 
side of the employer and a person appointed from the side of 
the employees. And the person who’s going to chair this group 
of two is either the chairperson of the Labour Relations Board 
or the vice-chairperson, although the legislation itself does 
allow the minister to appoint almost anybody to do that. But 
what you have then is that chairperson of the Labour Relations 
Board, not as chairperson of the Labour Relations Board but as 
the head of a dispute resolution tribunal, working and trying to 
resolve these issues. 
 
I mean I think it can work, but there’s some complications here 
that are probably going to need to be worked out over a number 
of years to get it sorted out. And it may take a couple of 
disputes that require the use of the whole procedure, but it does 
have a clear procedure. It does have a procedure that has some 
balance. And I think it’s set up in a way that both the employer 
and the employees are satisfied or can be satisfied that it’s 
going to be a fair process. 
 
Now one issue that has arisen as we kind of look at this — and 
obviously we’ll end up with more questions as we go through 
the committee hearings and as more people have a chance who 
are outside of the legislature, more people outside of the 
legislature have a chance to look at this — is that there are some 
other areas where maybe some further definition needs to take 
place. 
 
One aspect of it is that there is no definition of essential 
services like there was in previous legislation, and this, you 
know, may . . . I mean I think the drafters and the minister’s 
done that here because that often becomes such a contentious 
issue. But it also can create problems where things that maybe 

wouldn’t fit the ordinary . . . the definition to the public as 
being essential will be deemed to be essential in this legislation, 
will be used in those situations. 
 
Now the legislation itself also goes to a couple of other issues 
that, you know, are being corrected in The Employment Act, and 
I think that’s a reasonable thing to do. And so what we also 
have is a section that deals with workplace hazardous materials 
information system and making sure that the standards in 
Saskatchewan are basically the same as other parts across 
Canada. And this is something that costs some money both in 
training of people and as far as labelling of materials that are 
transported and handled throughout the province. But if it’s 
done in conjunction with all of the other jurisdictions in 
Canada, it eliminates questions around having to relabel 
products. 
 
I know that there’s a lot of discussion in this same area with the 
United States. And so many of our products go back and forth 
over the Canada-US border that I think this particular change in 
the legislation will assist in dealing with those issues as well. So 
that part of the legislation appears to be an appropriate 
amendment that doesn’t necessarily relate to the heart of the 
bill, but it’s important to deal with this. 
 
Now there’s also some amendments around the issue of notice 
of impasse in bargaining a collective agreement. And clearly 
these ideas are coming forward from probably both labour and 
management because they’ve identified some problems where 
an impasse doesn’t appear to . . . It won’t end because there 
really aren’t deadlines on some of the things that need to be 
done. And so I think that those changes that are being suggested 
by the minister seem to make sense as well. 
 
And so basically we have legislation, as I’ve said before, which 
is the legacy legislation of the Premier that firmly planted the 
right to strike in our constitution. 
 
And I would just say as a lawyer that we’ve spent a lot of 
money in the courts to deal with something that should have 
been dealt with in the legislature in 2008, and it wasn’t. And I 
think that’s a bit of a reminder to all of us that we are the 
trustees of the public’s money. We are the ones that need to 
recognize that we should be doing things in a fair, balanced, and 
reasonable fashion. And unfortunately the way this original 
legislation was brought forward, it has cost many people in the 
community lots of dollars, and it’s also cost the treasury a lot of 
money. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, those are my comments on this legislation. I 
know some of my colleagues have some comments, and so at 
this point I will move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No, 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 



7574 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

Bill No. 184 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 184 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 
join debate and take my place in this Assembly on Bill No. 184, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 
Act, 2015. 
 
While only recently introduced into the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, 
this particular piece of legislation builds on a fairly significant 
amount of public work that had been undertaken previously, in 
particular being informed by work conducted by the motorcycle 
review committee which released their report on findings 
January 2014. 
 
But the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, fairly straightforward, 
and in terms of providing a third choice for injury coverage for 
motorcycle owners in addition to the current choices of tort 
coverage or no-fault coverage; in terms of the possibility that 
that additional option reducing the package of no-fault benefits 
which will provide the same level of benefits as the tort product 
but with a limited ability to sue — referring here, Mr. Speaker, 
to the second reading speech of the minister introducing the 
legislation. 
 
[14:45] 
 
In terms of providing more choice, that would seem to be a 
good way to go. In terms of standing down from different 
notions that have been made public or mooted by the 
government previously, that provide a lot of cause for concern 
out in the community and certainly with those that enjoy riding 
a motorcycle, you know, in terms of where this particular piece 
of legislation has wound up in terms of the work of consultation 
that was done, again in terms of the committee of review that I 
had referenced, and again in terms of the better options being 
provided — up to and including the one option providing, again 
referencing the minister’s second reading speech, 20 to 30 per 
cent of savings for most motorcycle owners — in terms of the 
work that this will do around again striking that balance 
between cost of coverage and adequacy of coverage and 
affordability for the individuals who ride motorcycles, there’s a 
fair number of things being balanced off here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess in that spirit we’ll certainly have more questions 
for this particular piece of legislation at the committee stage of 
hearings. And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my 
remarks on Bill No. 184 and allow for . . . I guess we’ll keep on 
going and wait for somebody on the opposite side to get there 
so we can move it to committee. I don’t know if the member 
from Regina Dewdney wants to do that, or what’s happening 
over there. 
 
But carrying on with the bill, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
improved choice in coverage, we’ll see how that goes. I guess, 
you know, another option would be always welcome. In terms 
of the individuals that did the work with the committee, again 

we’re hopeful that their good work is borne out in terms of . . . 
 
And again just to reference some of the folks that were on that 
committee, Mr. Speaker, you’d had Rick Dobson, 
Saskatchewan PowerSport Dealers Association; Earl Driedger 
with Maximum Training; Don Fuller with Riders Against 
Government Exploitation or R.A.G.E., Mr. Speaker; Robb 
Hertzog, Prairie Harley-Davidson, again a fine 
Harley-Davidson shop, Mr. Speaker; Cody Jordison, 
motorcycle enthusiast; Klaus Littman, Saskatchewan 
Dual-Sport Club; Barry Muir, Saskatchewan Safety Council; 
Dr. Jag Rau, trauma doctor; and George Wright, insurance 
broker. 
 
So we’d like to go on record thanking those individuals for the 
work that they had done to again take a closer look at what the 
government was offering around basic insurance for motorcycle 
riders, and making sure that affordability and good sense as 
related to public education, public insurance, public safety, was 
being well balanced off. 
 
So I’d return to where I was earlier, Mr. Speaker, and I’m ready 
to conclude my remarks at this time. And if the government 
would like to move it on to committee, we’d be happy to take 
up further consideration of Bill No. 184 at that stage. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 184 . . . No. Question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister for SGI that Bill No. 184, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this bill be committed to the Committee of 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 185 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 185 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Also great to join 
debate, to take my place in this Assembly and to offer up a few 
thoughts and observations on Bill 185, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act. 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7575 

Certainly in terms of the substance of the bill, Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
be interesting to see a bit, get a bit more, I don’t know, opinion 
or analysis in terms of how different of these measures are 
going to be enacted and proceed. But certainly the allowing for 
the use of facial recognition technology around use in 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance driver’s licences, that is 
fairly interesting. 
 
We note with interest that the Privacy Commissioner was 
consulted in the drafting of the legislation and has noted his 
agreement with how it was written. We’ll be interested again to 
see how this meets muster in the broader community and how it 
has been brought forward in other jurisdictions. 
 
In terms of drivers having 120 days to take an approved 
education course, up from the current 90, again there are a 
number of fairly straightforward, more of a housekeeping 
nature in terms of the amendments, that are being considered 
here. So we’ll be interested to see again if that has a better 
impact, what the cost of it is, and on. But again it would seem to 
be fairly straightforward, Mr. Speaker, in terms of moving from 
that 90 days to 120 days. 
 
In terms of drivers of impounded vehicles being able to cancel 
the plates and insurance on their vehicle while it’s impounded, 
fair enough, Mr. Speaker. That would seem to make sense that 
you’d stop the meter running while an impounded vehicle is out 
of your hands and out of your use. It would seem to make good 
sense. We probably have some questions in the committee stage 
around what the different liability considerations are then, but 
probably . . . At any rate we’ll look forward to getting an 
answer on that question. 
 
We’re also interested to see that the list of Criminal Code 
sections pertaining to prostitution have been updated to reflect 
the changes brought in by the federal government in 2014. And 
we’ll be watching with interest, Mr. Speaker, to see if that 
changes in the days, weeks, and months ahead in terms of 
where the federal government is going with that. 
 
But again you’ve got to keep your legislation current and make 
it jive with the federal legislation. Fair enough. And if it goes, if 
it aids one john being taken off the streets, Mr. Speaker, or 
helps in the fight against prostitution, we’ll be glad to see what 
impact that might have. 
 
We’ve also seen that in the legislation it will be providing the 
power for requiring drivers of certain prescribed vehicles to 
wear helmets and eye protection. Again, Mr. Speaker, it would 
seem to be a fairly straightforward proposition. 
 
But again, all of these things are undergirded by the fact that 
traffic safety is something we want to see enhanced, something 
that in a lot of different ways we’ve seen problems with in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, something that we’ve seen a committee 
of inquiry go out across the province to talk to citizens about 
how we can improve the situation. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, the stakes are very high. If it goes 
wrong on the road, then of course the penalty that people pay is 
sometimes with their lives and sometimes with grievous injury 
that changes you forever, Mr. Speaker. So anything that can 
improve the situation of traffic safety and public safety, and 

again bouncing all these competing objectives but keeping that 
traffic safety foremost in mind, we’re interested to see it come 
forward. 
 
And at this stage, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re ready for the 
closer examination and questioning that can be afforded at the 
committee stage. So with that, I would conclude my remarks on 
Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 
Amendment Act and await the government doing their thing. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Crown Investments that Bill No. 185, 
The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This bill 
should be referred to the Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 186 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 186 — The 
Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter in briefly here today as it relates to Bill No. 
186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015. 
This bill relates directly to municipalities across Saskatchewan 
and municipal councils and to administrations. 
 
I think, just at the onset, I’d like to say thanks and pay my 
respect to the municipal leaders across Saskatchewan who sign 
up, who step forward, who provide leadership, who make 
decisions in the best interests of their communities, and that’s 
the vast, vast majority of municipal leaders across this province 
in our rural municipalities and in our urban municipalities, as 
well as extended through the dedicated administrators and staff 
of these municipalities. 
 
That being said, there was a very serious conflict that was noted 
by government and the public and Justice Barclay some time 
ago. And I would like to thank as well Justice Barclay for his 
work in the Barclay report which, as I read and listen to the 
minister’s comments, was a substantive piece of guiding the 



7576 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

steps and actions taken by government in this piece of 
legislation here today. 
 
Certainly at first blush and based on the minister’s comments, 
this piece of legislation seems to be one that will strengthen the 
accountability and ensure the integrity of municipalities across 
the province, recognizing, as I say again, that municipalities and 
municipal leaders provide exceptional leadership to their 
communities and to our province. Mr. Speaker, we’re thankful 
for that. 
 
That being said, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, when you 
recognize serious matters — as was the case that was studied by 
Justice Barclay as it related to RM of Sherwood — it’s a 
government’s responsibility to improve legislation and 
frameworks to protect the public and municipalities for well 
into the future. And I believe that’s the thrust of this legislation 
and certainly want to, as I say, thank Justice Barclay for his 
report and to recognize government’s efforts in working with 
that report, and hopefully as well, as I believe has been 
indicated with municipalities across Saskatchewan, particularly 
through their representative organizations — SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and New 
North and the administrators’ association — to make sure that 
what’s brought forward is a constructive piece of legislation 
that will be able to be applied into practice and ensure the kind 
of accountability, transparency, and integrity to governance 
across this province. 
 
Certainly this provides some structure around how 
municipalities will deal with conflict of interest, clearer 
direction on that front, and that’s definitely important. It will 
also provide and ensure a standard of disclosure around conflict 
of interest that will certainly be some new aspects or 
strengthening some of what’s there for municipal leaders across 
the province. 
 
The measures that have been brought forward at this point in 
time seem to be reasonable and important to, as I say, ensure 
accountability for Saskatchewan people, but also to ensure that 
they are able to ensure the integrity of our municipalities and to 
also make sure that they’re practical in usage by municipal 
governments across Saskatchewan. So that’s important. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Certainly we’ll follow up in committee and get a full 
understanding of all aspects, but the second thrust within this 
bill, I believe, is giving some greater authorities and 
responsibilities to government itself proper, through cabinet and 
a minister to be able to follow up on concerns, to address 
situations as they may arise as it relates to a municipal 
government. 
 
And certainly this is an area where we’ll want to learn a little bit 
more about how this will be practically applied. We’ll want to 
make sure we understand the consequences of it, the intentions, 
and making sure as well that all the unintended consequences 
have been assessed and analyzed both by government, but by 
stakeholders proper and certainly municipalities as well. 
 
Another important measure of this legislation expands the scope 

and mandate of the Provincial Auditor to pertain directly to 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is an important 
measure. The role of independent officers are essentially 
important to good governance, essentially important to 
engender and build public trust, and to ensure accountability to 
the public at large. 
 
We as a province are certainly strengthened by the leadership 
and efforts of the Provincial Ombudsman and the other 
independent officers of this Assembly, like that of the 
Provincial Auditor. This is something that is critically important 
to the people of the province, looking at the role of independent 
officers to the public, critically important to ensuring good 
governance, important to the democratic processes.  
 
And, I believe, the extension of the mandate of the Ombudsman 
to municipalities, you know, likely makes a lot of sense to 
provide that same sort of outlet to the public at large. And I 
understand the mandate would be broadened in the sense — just 
as it is right now with the Ombudsman as it relates to provincial 
programs, or just as it is with the auditor as it relates to 
provincial entities — that it would be extended in the sense that 
even if there were a member of the public that had a concern or 
had an allegation or had information, that that would be a direct 
avenue, an independent avenue for that member of the public to 
go forward and to have trust that the independent officer would 
have the ability and the resources and the authority to follow up 
in due course. 
 
So I think that’s a very important mechanism to the public at 
large to ensure accountability and transparency. Certainly we 
recognize the value of the independent officers as it relates to 
the provincial government and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And when we look specifically at municipalities, certainly 
that’s an important piece. 
 
Certainly you know, as it currently stands, as I say, 
municipalities provide exceptional leadership and service to the 
people of this province. Municipal leaders, the vast, vast, vast 
majority step forward to lead within their community because 
they truly believe in making a difference. They believe in the 
role of public service. They believe in leaving their 
communities as a better place than when they entered into 
office. And certainly we see that sort of passion, that sort of 
commitment, and that service demonstrated time and time again 
in communities — rural and urban, small and large — all across 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s certainly important to ensure that we have robust 
accountability around all of our organizations, certainly public 
organizations. As it relates to the provincial government, that’s 
critically important, and as it relates to municipalities, this 
seems to be a substantive improvement. 
 
We’re going to spend time in committee with government and 
that minister to get a greater sense of all aspects of this piece of 
legislation. We will certainly be consulting with stakeholders 
and invite those that have been engaged on this file to connect 
directly with us as well. If there’s any concerns related to this 
piece of legislation, particularly how it can be as effective as 
possible or if it can be strengthened, certainly we as the 
opposition will be working to ensure that legislation that is 
advanced is as strong and effective of a legislation as possible, 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7577 

and we’ll be looking for opportunities to improve it if need be. 
 
At this point in time, you know, I don’t have further comments 
within this debate here, but I certainly do want to thank Justice 
Barclay for his efforts. I want to thank the municipal leaders in 
rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan and communities 
large and small who have contributed to building this piece of 
legislation, those in the Far North as well and those directly 
related to roles of administration within municipalities across 
our province, I want to thank all of those individuals. 
 
And you know, certainly we look forward to gaining a stronger 
understanding and greater clarity on some aspects of this bill as 
we go through the committee process and, in the end, doing 
what we need to do for the people of Saskatchewan: building a 
piece of legislation that works, that’s effective, that’s 
applicable, and building one that’s robust and will ensure 
integrity and best practice in accountability and transparency at 
all levels of government well into the future. 
 
So at this point in time, I’ll conclude my remarks and look 
forward to some time in committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 186, The 
Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this bill be referred to the Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 187 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 187, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. The official title for the 
legislation is The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 
2015. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is a little longer than 
I expected, given the kinds of changes that were made. But 

when I look at the actual legislation, I see that there are quite a 
number of small changes that are made to update the legislation 
to the current standard as it relates to neutral language and some 
of the descriptions of the courts and also of some of the farm 
lending institutions. So we have quite a number of clauses that 
basically update various parts of the legislation. 
 
But I think we all understand that this particular legislation 
continues the long, interesting debate in Saskatchewan about 
who can own land in our province, and it’s a long and 
interesting debate that encompasses many pieces of legislation 
besides this particular legislation. But I think it’s important to 
understand a bit about that in the context of what we’re dealing 
with right here. 
 
What we know is that the first farm security legislation was 
introduced in the ’70s and it’s often . . . I mean it seems like not 
that long ago but it was awhile ago and the concern then related 
to land out by Kindersley where there were some Europeans 
were interested in buying some fairly large chunks of farm land. 
And also land I think up in near Hudson Bay and in that area, 
where there were once again people from outside of the country 
who were interested in buying some fairly large pieces of land 
for hunting purposes and other purposes like that. And so 
legislation was introduced at that time. 
 
But to really put this idea of who can own land in Saskatchewan 
into context, you really have to go back to the original 
settlement of the land and the whole Dominion Lands Act, all of 
the legislation around homesteads and proving up your 
homestead and having the right to get another quarter close by 
or adjacent to your homestead. And what happened was in the 
boom times of the teens and ’20s, but especially the ’20s, a lot 
of farmers were able to borrow money against their land. And 
that was a good idea in those times. But things changed in the 
’30s, and all of a sudden land was being owned by mortgage 
companies and banks, primarily from Ontario and Quebec. And 
so there were a number of pieces of protective legislation 
around the ownership of land that arose in that context, 
including things like the homestead Act and other pieces of 
legislation that protected people’s homes. 
 
And so when the government now enters again into a discussion 
about the ownership of land, it does raise the questions that 
arose in quite a number of decades in the 19th and 20th century, 
and now the 21st century, about who can own land in 
Saskatchewan. And so the key part of this legislation is that 
they’ve effectively affirmed what was done just over 10, 11 
years ago around, under the constitution, the fact that any 
Canadian can own land in Saskatchewan. 
 
Prior to that, it was hard for people who lived outside of the 
province, who weren’t resident in the province, to own land. 
But now we have rules around Canadian ownership of land. But 
then it gets at this question of who is or what is an entity that’s 
Canadian owned. And so in this legislation they’ve added a 
definition of a Canadian-owned entity. And the definition, and 
I’ll quote it, is: 
 

a corporation or any other entity in which all the shares or 
interests are legally and beneficially owned, and all the 
memberships are held, by resident persons or other 
Canadian-owned entities. 



7578 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

So that’s one way you can meet that term. And the second was, 
“any other corporation or entity or class of corporations or 
entities prescribed in the regulations.” And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve got this whole idea of a Canadian-owned entity and in its 
attempt then to get at a particular issue. 
 
I think it’s also wise to remind ourselves here that it was 
pension plans and basically financial entities that were owned 
by pension plans that triggered this discussion. But now let’s 
talk about the term “entity.” Entity is described in the 
legislation and it’s defined as follows: an entity includes (a) a 
partnership. So in other words, unincorporated partnership, 
people working together. 
 
A syndicate is the second version. A joint venture, a 
co-operative, an association, a pension plan, a trust, or any other 
body that is prescribed in the legislation. And so it goes on then 
to try to provide restrictions around who can own land in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s not a simple task to do this. And I know the lawyers in 
Justice who have been working on this file will be basing what 
they’re doing on various decisions of the Farm Land Security 
Board over the years, but also on concerns and ideas and court 
cases where some of these things have come up. 
 
And so ultimately it appears that the goal of the minister, and 
we saw it from the responses of people who were surveyed, is 
to place a restriction on some of these different types of 
organizations so that they can’t own Saskatchewan land. And to 
do that, there are a whole number of clauses in here that go back 
and around, and ultimately they have that super hammer of, 
well whatever cabinet defines. And we see that in a couple of 
places where the entity includes in (viii) “any other body that is 
prescribed in the regulations.” 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now that may be the best way to do this because as we all 
know, in the whole world of finance, it’s the imaginative 
financiers who figure out the next way of raising capital and 
investing that capital that are often the ones that can get 
involved in some pretty interesting things. I know that there’s a 
lot of the issues around the major financial crisis in the United 
States in 2008 involved instruments, financial instruments, and 
investments that weren’t fully understood by all of the 
regulators, or the conditions set up in those regulations around 
the particular financial instruments weren’t strong enough to 
cover that. 
 
And so what this legislation does I think is try to capture all of 
the different types of instruments and financial ideas and make 
sure that they end up having . . . the government has the power 
to say no, that particular way of putting money together cannot 
be used in Saskatchewan to purchase farm land. 
 
Now all of this is dangerous. I mean I think I can use that word 
dangerous because it does relate to interfering in the market for 
the purchase of farm land. I think, though, we all accept 
restrictions in certain ways because of the concern for farm land 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is appropriate to understand how important farm land 

has become as an investment worldwide. And we know, for 
example, that in the Middle East — Saudi Arabia, some of the 
emirates — that they’ve given up on any idea of trying to 
irrigate the desert to grow crops. They’ve gone to Ukraine, 
Kazakhstan, other places like that, and purchased land to grow 
food and effectively transfer water from those areas down to the 
Middle East. We also know that there’s interest from China in 
buying farm land around the world and that it also relates to the 
whole issue of food security. 
 
And so this legislation in a way is attempting to deal with some 
of those major economic issues in the production of food right 
around the world, and so we may end up getting some 
challenges. It’s not affected, I don’t think, in any of the trade 
agreements that we’ve been involved with in the last few years, 
but the issues involved here do relate to some of the control of 
production. 
 
Now this discussion, this plan is I think an important one. There 
are questions that I think we all have around how this is going 
to be done. We want it to be done in a way that doesn’t hurt our 
farmers but we also want to have it done in a way that allows 
for the next generation of Saskatchewan farmers to have access 
to the land so that they can be successful, productive farmers in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation is often legislation that 
maybe we should have a longer period of time to reflect upon 
and which would have been the normal process if this was a 
normal legislative year. It’s not that and so we will have to just 
take the opportunities that we’ll have in our committees to ask 
questions about that and understand what is here. I also suspect 
that there will be amendments in the next session or the session 
after that as we come to understand the effect of the actual rules 
that are here. 
 
One thing I do like is some strengthening of the agency that has 
been reviewing this and also a strengthening of the penalties. 
And it’s an area where it’s of quite a lot of interest. I know 
traditionally this legislation has been in the purview of the 
Minister of Justice and is brought forward as Justice legislation. 
This has been brought forward from Agriculture. I’m not sure 
that affects anything, but it does affect the perception of how 
it’s being handled. And so I think we also need to understand 
why Agriculture is bringing this forward and not the Ministry of 
Justice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any further comments now, but I 
know some of my colleagues will want to speak to it some 
more. So at this point I will move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 188 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 188 — The Best 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7579 

Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015. Looking over I 
guess a little bit of understanding from procurement policies 
and giving opportunities to I guess government Crown 
agencies, different organizations had the opportunities in time 
to tender stuff and try to get the best value for taxpayers’ 
dollars. I understand that government, the Crowns try to do that. 
 
But having said that, there has been some concerns that have 
been I guess . . . that we have seen from the government and the 
way it’s dealing with procurement. And I’m going to go over 
some of those because I think it’s important to talk about some 
of the families that have been impacted by this government’s, 
you know, choice to outsource jobs and outsource services to 
not only out of the ministry, some of the facilities that we have 
within the ministries to do their own whether it’s maintenance 
— and there’s a lot of them — whether it’s the maintenance, 
cooking. 
 
I guess I think about the laundry one in Prince Albert. I feel for 
the families. I think there’s about 80 of them, families that, you 
know, were impacted by the government, you know, in P.A. 
[Prince Albert], in the area, and other communities that did 
laundry service, provided that service for years. It was a 
government laundry service. And we did that for our hospitals, 
and I think they did a great job at that. 
 
When I think about what’s happened now to those families, 
they’ve had . . . I think there was a, like a, kind of . . . It was a 
sad day for many of the families in Prince Albert. But I 
remember they had kind of a barbecue or a community . . . 
thanking those workers, you know, for the work they did and 
the good, hard work they’ve done for Saskatchewan people to 
make sure we had clean linens for that. 
 
But you know what was interesting to see is comments from the 
leadership, comments from those unions and stuff. They know 
exactly what this government’s done. And you know, it’s fine 
we’re going to introduce legislation that says procurement is 
very important. For some of them it’s so late. And it’s 
unfortunate this government’s bringing in now when families 
have been impacted, and I mean that. Those jobs in Prince 
Albert, they were good-paying jobs that provided, you know, 
for the families. When you think about the health services that 
they had because of their job they got . . . And to the economy 
of Prince Albert, those dollars were earned there. They stayed in 
Prince Albert to help the economy. And you know, when you 
think about Prince Albert, I think it’s been clear. They’re trying 
to do all they can to make sure their economy is going, people 
have an opportunity at their job. 
 
So when I see government making a decision to phase out 
opportunities for families and to impact so many families in 
P.A. [Prince Albert], I think come April 4th — and I think the 
leadership over there has made it very clear — come April 4th, 
send a message to the government. And the leadership is even 
saying that. That’s amazing that the leadership would be saying 
to the communities and people in Prince Albert, if you really 
want to get the government, send the message April 4th, 2016. 

That’s interesting. You know, that, to me, is saying, if you’re 
not going to hear us as MLAs or government or ministers when 
we’re having issues, we’ll send you a message too, that we’re 
not going to listen when you’re canvassing and talking. 
 
So when I think about that I think P.A. MLAs are going to have 
a little struggle winning over those families that have been so 
impacted and touched. It’s there. And now you look at 
corrections, there’s many . . . And they’re corrections that 
provided the meals . . . [inaudible] . . . correction facilities now? 
Government’s decided to outsource that as well. And it’s not 
just . . . It’s out of province. When you look at it, really you 
wonder like what the . . . whose idea and what a plan. 
 
You know, and they could say, well we’re going to save some 
dollars. These are the government that have had, for eight years, 
record revenue. Year after year, this government has had record 
revenue. So to all of a sudden come to those families that are 
being touched and impacted to say to them oh, now we’re going 
to come up with legislation that, you know, best value for 
procurement. A little, little late for some of those families, for 
quite a few people impacted by this government’s deciding to 
get rid of it. 
 
And it doesn’t just go there. And you know, I want to go over 
some of it. I talked about the laundry services but also the 
Regina bypass. We look at that and, you know, you talk about 
the concerns that my colleagues have raised and I think the 
public. And you have even individuals out there or a group, 
organization. I don’t know what they’re called, but they’re 
raising their concerns and I think even went as far as ads or 
information that they’re sharing. 
 
So when I see individuals coming out, and groups, and saying, 
enough’s enough, and this is the wrong way of the government, 
and the government’s not listening. The government’s not 
listening. The government . . . They can heckle all they want 
over there. They’ve got a lot of time. You’re going to have an 
opportunity. You’ll get your evaluation come April 4th. April 
4th, you will get your evaluation. So they can heckle all they 
want. 
 
And I think that is a time for the people. The report card’s not 
looking too good, really. But having said that, it’s going to be 
interesting to see, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be interesting to 
see what people have to say about the government and 
introducing this. And you know, we’re going to have to lots of 
things. 
 
We talk about the food services, and I talked a little bit about 
that. We talked about the school services and supports, food 
services for the corrections. And now that’s going to . . . It’s 
outsourced to a company. So what are those individuals going 
to do for work? They had good-paying jobs. They had health 
benefits that provided for their family, pensions. Now that’s 
interesting. You know, it’s interesting. 
 
Now let’s go a little further. And you know, I’m really thinking 
about this. I had a number of people, a number of people come 
forward when it comes to hunting and fishing. And they said to 
me, I don’t know how many people have said to me, whose 
bright idea was this to do this? And they’re frustrated and 
they’re mad. 



7580 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2015 

It’s not only . . . Yes, like it’s just bizarre. People are saying it’s 
bizarre as people raise this concern. When you want a licence to 
go fishing, well you have to go online. And many people don’t 
have access to online; they don’t. They don’t. And maybe you 
have to have a credit card. You have to have all these things to, 
you know, and . . . But even to have a government who 
outsources the way out of the province is enough. It doesn’t 
even make sense, Mr. Speaker. But the government’s put on 
their blinders and they’re going ahead. At all costs, they’re 
going to do what they’re going to do. So that’s just another area 
that we look at. 
 
Now we look at P3s [public-private partnership], you know, the 
P3s, and we look at . . . And I talked a little bit about P3s, a 
little bit. You know, when you look about that, when you look 
at that, Mr. Speaker, P3s, and you look at the maintenance, the 
bypass, you look at the maintenance, a 30-year contract to a 
company from out of the province, out of Canada. It doesn’t 
even make sense. 
 
We don’t have enough people here in our province with that, 
you know? Is this what the government’s idea is? We don’t 
have the companies? Are you not putting credit into the 
companies that are here? And we have private. We have the 
ministries. But they’re not doing what they need to do. I think 
they provide good service. What they need is the government to 
make sure they’re supporting our industry in many different 
areas. But we see this government clearly doesn’t have . . . It’s 
put on the blinders and they’re going ahead with it at all costs. 
It doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to go ahead and 
they’re going to outsource. They’re going to privatize. They’re 
going to do what they’re going to. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And it’s not even to the point of . . . If you would at least leave 
it in the province, but they can’t even do that. Everything seems 
to be out of province. They like that for some reason. I don’t 
know how you’re putting . . . Yes, the list goes on, and I mean 
my colleagues have been talking about this, you know, and 
we’ve raised this. 
 
But a little late for government to come forward and say . . . 
You know, a little late. Well you know what? Now we’re 
talking about, we’ll talk about outsourcing the maintenance. 
North Battleford hospital will be as well, another one, another 
project we’ve heard about that they’re going to outsource the 
maintenance of that. They don’t even do it in-house. They don’t 
do it in-house, and then do you know you go back and . . . The 
member from P.A., speaking now and want to heckle? You 
know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes, that’s right. Now 
in this House you speak when you could have been speaking 
around your caucus table. You should have been doing 
something for P.A. people then. Not now, it’s a little late, little 
late over there. But April 4th they’ll send the message to that 
member. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, again many Saskatchewan 
families want to have an opportunity to a quality of life. They 
want a good-paying job. They want services that governments 
provide, and the government could provide these things. They 
could find industry in our province to do that. But instead, what 
do they do? They are outsourcing. Time and time again we see 

this government . . . And you know you think about the record, 
and I’ve had people tell me, you guys keep saying record 
revenue year after year. This government had such opportunity 
if they really wanted to do what’s right for the people of this 
province. 
 
And those members can heckle all they want. The reality is 
you’re not doing . . . And you know you’re not focused on what 
matters to Saskatchewan families and people. And that’s what 
they need to do, Mr. Speaker, focus more on what matters to 
families, matter on to Saskatchewan people. 
 
But unfortunately, they’re going to spin what they want. We see 
time and time again what this government is focused on. 
They’re focused on their agenda, their blinders, and whatever 
they want to do, they do. I don’t know who gave them the idea 
to outsource the things that they’re on. And I’ve listed a number 
of different things, Mr. Speaker, a number of different areas. 
Now they want to come out with a procurement policy. Wow, 
now — a little late for so many Saskatchewan families, so many 
people that were working providing for their families. No, no 
more. You don’t see it, and they don’t get it. You know they 
want to heckle. But again at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of the day Saskatchewan people will speak. 
Saskatchewan people will speak, and this government . . . And I 
talked about that. 
 
I think, you know, even to set up a phone for a person in the 
corrections, if you wanted to set up a phone so they can phone 
out, you have to, I believe, phone out of country. It’s not even 
in the province. It’s not even in Canada. You have to phone to 
set up a phone line and give your credit card information to . . . 
So outsourcing again. Like why would you outsource 
something like that where you could just take care of it from 
with in-house or have a service provided within our province? 
We can’t find that. We can’t find a way to do it so that it stays 
within our province. We have to go out of country. 
 
But again it just goes to show you, it goes to show you, time 
and time again outsourcing. And then this government’s saying, 
oh we support industry; we support business. Yes, that’s fine. In 
some areas you’re doing that, and that’s good. And that’s what 
the people want and you should be doing. But time and time 
again the people and opposition are showing where government 
is turning away, turning their back on the working men and 
women of this province and the voters. And I remind them of 
that. 
 
There’s going to be an opportunity. You’ll get your evaluation. 
Keep doing what you’re doing. Keep doing what you’re doing. 
Keep doing what you’re doing. Just keep, just keep doing what 
you’re doing. That’s all right. The Saskatchewan people will 
decide. And every member on that side of the House will get an 
evaluation too, just like on this side, and we’ll see what 
happens. The people will decide. We know that. We know that. 
The good people of this province . . . So you take them for 
granted, that’s fine. You can take them for granted. 
 
Getting back to this bill, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
important. Those members like to hear this stuff according to 
what they’re saying, and we’ll share a little more with them. 
Why would you outsource, you know, the different services that 
I have talked about, resources that you have in province, that 



November 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7581 

you would outsource? And I say because there used to be good 
paying jobs. Well I don’t know exactly what. We maybe ask 
them some questions about that, get some information, if you 
could ever get the information, maybe a written question. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, this is a little late for many 
families, for companies that thought they could have an 
opportunity. And I know that there’s a lot of businesses up 
north who want an opportunity to bid on work. They want to 
make sure that they get a part of it, whether it’s fuel, all kinds of 
different areas whether, you know, services that government 
ministries use, they want an opportunity. And should they have 
a, I guess some will say an advantage, there should be a 
procurement policy that gives, yes, best value but also making 
sure that we support our own industry at home as much as you 
can to support them. You want to support them. Do all you can 
as a government when you have the money that they’ve been 
spending year after year, that they have spent when we’ve had 
record . . . saving nothing. 
 
But having said that, that’s another issue, and I don’t want to 
get away. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this 
legislation that they’re introducing now is a little late for many. 
I’ve said that, but I think it’s important to say that for those 
families that are losing their jobs because of this government’s 
idea of going one way. Now they want to make it sound . . . 
We’re close to an election. Now they want to sound like they 
care about the people. A little late. You’ll get your evaluation. 
You’ll see at the end. I’ve said that. We all will. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will 
have much to say and there’ll be a lot of opportunity in 
committee when this does go there. Because I know a few of 
my colleagues have a few more things they want to talk about 
this bill so I, at this point, would like to adjourn debate, and 
we’ll wait to see what questions we have later on. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister for Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this bill be sent to the 
Economy Committee . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No? Mr. 
Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Social Services has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:38.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7564 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Movember 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 
 Appreciation for Support During Wildfire Season 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7565 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 
 Moose Jaw’s Better Together Food Drive 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7566 
 Corporation Furthers Opportunities in Northern Communities 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7566 
 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7566 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7567 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7567 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7568 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Motion of Censure 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7571 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7572 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7574 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7574 
 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7574 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7575 
 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7575 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7577 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7577 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7579 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


