
























































Hansard: October 13, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 66A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 13, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7265 
 October 13, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today we proclaimed Co-operatives Week in 
Saskatchewan in recognition of the important work done in our 
province by co-operatives. 
 
I’d like to take a moment to introduce a few people that are with 
us and comment on their ongoing success of co-operatives here 
in Saskatchewan. Seated in the east gallery, I believe — yes, I 
see them there — I think, I’m not sure all of the representatives 
of the co-operative movement are with us this afternoon, but 
they were certainly there this morning. And it is very good to 
see them: Dusty MacDonald, president of Federated Co-ops 
Ltd.; Beryl Bauer, president of the Saskatchewan Co-operative 
Association; Myles Shaw, director of the Co-operative Housing 
Federation of Canada; Myrna Hewitt, executive vice-president 
of marketing at the Affinity Credit Union; Brad Schultz, 
director of Federated Co-ops Ltd.; and Ryan Anderson, director, 
Federated Co-ops Ltd. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 
their legislature here this afternoon and helping to proclaim the 
important Co-operatives Week this week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister opposite and welcome these fine leaders in 
our province to their Assembly seated in the east gallery here 
today. Of course we had many more that were here just a little 
while ago in the rotunda to raise the flag for Co-operatives 
Week. 
 
This is really important, Mr. Speaker. We recognize the rich 
and vast contributions of co-operatives to Saskatchewan, both 
from a historical perspective but to who we are today, and to 
build that bright future, Mr. Speaker, that we all believe in. We 
recognize that co-ops play a key role, whether it’s in lending to 
small- and medium-sized businesses through credit unions, 
whether it’s in a refinery, in retailing, in child care, and in 
health care through seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. We have an 
exceptional array of co-operatives with many individuals who 
are involved in making them a great success to their members 
and to the people of this province. 
 
So it’s my pleasure to join with the minister opposite, welcome 
these fine community leaders, and to recognize all that make 
co-operatives such a success in building our economy and 
building our communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure today to introduce four guests in your gallery. I see 
with us today, and if they could just give a wave, Dennel 
Pickering, Vanessa Spencer — it’s her first time here actually 
— Kari Pruden, and Tom Howe. 
 
These folks are no strangers to this House. They’re members of 
SEIU [Service Employees International Union] West, a very 
important union we have here in Saskatchewan and across 
North America, as they provide important services in the public 
sector. And they make sure every day, every day people are 
cared for well in various settings here in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members here to give these folks a 
warm welcome to their House. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is my pleasure to introduce, in your gallery, Mr. Andrew 
McFadyen. Mr. McFadyen is an advocate for children or 
individuals living with MPS [mucopolysaccharidosis]. And he’s 
here today and will make his presence known for as many days 
as necessary until the minister reverses his unjust decision on 
the funding of Vimizim for the three Akhter children here in 
Saskatchewan. So with that, I would like to ask all my 
colleagues to welcome Mr. McFadyen to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
too want to join with the member opposite in welcoming 
Andrew McFadyen to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. McFadyen works tirelessly on behalf of 
people across this country through his foundation, The Isaac 
Foundation, named in honour of his own son, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’ve had an opportunity to meet with Mr. McFadyen on a 
number of occasions. Last week was the most recent time; I’m 
sure it wasn’t the last time though. And so I want to ask all 
members and my colleagues to join with me in welcoming Mr. 
McFadyen to the legislature. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 
this session’s Pages. We have with us today Sabra Leier, 
Chantal Kimpinski, Tayler Kosloski, and Sydney McWilliams. 
They are returning for this session. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of GSAs [gay-straight 
alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And we know gay-straight 
alliances, or gender sexual alliances, are important in our 
schools, but yet this province lags behind others in securing the 
rights of gender- and sexual-diverse students. And we know this 
government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 



7266 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

schools for sexual-diverse students or students bullied because 
of their sexual identity or sexual orientation. 
 
And we know that GSAs can play a pivotal role in providing 
good inclusive, anti-oppressive learning environments and 
offering reprieve from bullying and assault. And we know that 
this government must act and must act now so that students 
have simple, easy-to-understand information about gender 
sexuality alliances in their schools, and how to form a gender 
and sexual alliance so that they can know who to talk to in order 
to form a GSA. And this government must act now so that 
under no circumstances gender- or sexual-diverse students are 
denied the right to form GSAs in their schools. 
 
So we in the prayer ask that: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to take immediate 
and meaningful action to pass The Respect for Diversity — 
Student Bill of Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the 
right of Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their 
schools in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive 
environments and deliver equal opportunities for all 
students to reach their full potential. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Regina, Melville, Melfort, and Swift 
Current. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition today for a residents-in-care bill of rights. Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that residents in care have the 
right to dignity, respect, and safety. They point out that 
residents in care have the right to individualized care that meets 
or exceeds the minimum quality of care standards; that this is in 
fact the responsibility of the provincial government to ensure 
consistent standards of care in facilities throughout 
Saskatchewan; and that requiring each care home to post a 
residents-in-care bill of rights will guarantee that senior 
residents have individualized care plans and minimum quality 
of care standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan adopt Bill 606, 
The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act which would 
provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right to a quality, 
high-level standard of care in seniors’ care homes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals in Big River 
and Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from students and citizens here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They’re concerned about the state of 
affairs on our province’s campus. 
 

They state in the petition, Mr. Speaker, that Canadian full-time 
students in undergraduate programs pay 3.3 per cent more on 
average in tuition fees for the 2014-15 academic year this fall 
than they did the previous year. They point out a similar 
increase in the year previous. They point out a report released 
by Statistics Canada that labelled Saskatchewan as the province 
with the highest increase in tuition, with tuition for the 2014-15 
year having increased by 4 per cent in the province for 
undergraduate students and over 5 per cent for graduate 
students. And they also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the average 
Canadian student in 2014 graduated with debt of over $27,000, 
not including credit card and other private debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from here in the 
good city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina — how 
quickly we forget — Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
present a petition today from residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about schools and the fact 
that we need better schools. 
 
Too many of our classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced. The Sask Party government’s eliminated 
hundreds of educational assistants positions. Students don’t 
often get the one-on-one attention they need. Conditions of our 
schools are rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and the 
government refuses to release the information of $1.5 billion in 
known repairs about the schools. The government plans to rent 
schools from private corporations. This is expensive and 
reckless, and none of this is acceptable given the record 
revenues that the government has had over the last eight years. 
 
So the people in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
And these are signed by people from across Saskatchewan 
including Assiniboia, White City, Vanguard, and Rockglen. I so 
submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to provide a petition in 
support of affordable housing from all throughout 
Saskatchewan, but this particular petition is from northwestern 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7267 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to restore the rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters of the social housing program and to 
reinstate their remote housing program. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had petitions signed from all 
throughout the land, and this particular page has been signed 
primarily from people from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Remembering Wes Funk 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a heavy heart that I rise 
today to pay tribute to Wes Funk, a stalwart in Saskatchewan’s 
literary community. Wes was the author of several books 
including Wes Side Story, Dead Rock Stars, Cherry Blossoms, 
and Baggage. He was a fervent supporter and promoter of 
Saskatchewan writers through his heavy involvement in the 
Saskatchewan Writers’ Guild and the Saskatoon Writers’ Coop, 
and as host of Lit Happens on Shaw TV. I know many 
Saskatchewan authors credit Wes with inspiring them, 
motivating them, and helping them achieve their dreams. 
 
Wes was boisterous, joyful, kind, caring, generous, open, and 
genuine. As one of his friends posted on social media: 
 

It’s my belief that Wes wouldn’t want us all moping dourly 
around at his loss, though heart-wrenchingly sad. Wes 
would want us to look to the future and keep doing our 
thing: pursuing our passions, advancing our art, and living 
our lives to the full. That’s just what he was doing, and it 
was a great example to us all. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
expressing our deepest condolences to Wes’s family and friends 
and to say a hearty thank you to Wes for his countless 
contributions to our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Citizens Unite During Forest Fires 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to acknowledge and express our gratitude for 
firefighters, volunteers, organizations, community leaders, and 
for all those who provided aid during the wildfire emergencies 
this past summer. 
 
To the First Nation and community leaders in the North, thank 
you for your efforts on the ground and for your leadership 
throughout the evacuation efforts. To the Canadian Armed 
Forces and our professional and volunteer firefighters, thank 
you for your hard work and for your dedication to the safety of 
Saskatchewan citizens. Of course, Mr. Speaker, thank you to 
the citizens of Saskatchewan for answering the call to help 
those in need, be it through volunteer efforts, donations, or 

offering professional services and supplies to those who needed 
it. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, lastly I must acknowledge the up to 10,000 people 
who slept on cots in gymnasiums, who left their homes, and 
who faced uncertainty every day for weeks. Thank you to the 
evacuees for your patience and for your courage. Saskatchewan, 
you should be proud. 
 
I ask all members to recognize and thank those who put all their 
efforts to ensure the safety and well-being of all Saskatchewan 
people. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

International Day for Disaster Reduction 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand and recognize the International Day for 
Disaster Reduction. Today provides the chance to promote a 
culture of disaster reduction, focusing on prevention, 
preparedness, and mitigation. 
 
Since 1989, this international day has been celebrated with the 
approval of the UN [United Nations] General Assembly. The 
focus of this year’s international day is on the role of local, 
traditional, and indigenous knowledge in disaster prevention. 
This year’s theme is appropriate for us in Saskatchewan, having 
endured a record-breaking season of forest fires. Knowing early 
warning signs in nature allows responders to act quickly to 
mitigate the impact of fast-onset disasters. Indigenous 
knowledge passed on from generation to generation 
complements modern science and is vital to prevention. 
 
Thinking back on this year’s tragic fires, the contributions of 
indigenous knowledge certainly played a role in fighting the 
fires here in our province, but we can always do more, Mr. 
Speaker. We should strive to better collaborate with our 
northern communities to fully utilize the contribution of 
indigenous knowledge to show and prevent disasters like the 
one that impacted so many this summer. On the International 
Day for Disaster Reduction, we should commit to build more 
disaster-resilient communities, starting with acknowledging and 
incorporating traditional knowledge in disaster preparedness 
plans. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I can say with 
confidence that we all have friends and family that have had to 
fight breast cancer. That is why October is Breast Cancer 
Awareness Month. Breast cancer is the most commonly 
diagnosed cancer for women in Saskatchewan, with an 
anticipated 710 new diagnoses this year alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early detection is key, and screening programs 
such as the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency screening program 
for breast cancer help with early diagnoses. Approximately 75 



7268 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

per cent of breast cancers diagnosed are in the early stages, 
which means this program helps give women and their medical 
teams the best chance to beat this disease. Thanks to early 
screening programs, the five-year survival rate is now at 88 per 
cent. That’s the highest it has ever been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is dedicated to help create a better 
life for Saskatchewan women and families fighting breast 
cancer. In the 2015-16 budget we provided the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency $157.3 million. That’s up 1.6 million from last 
year. This funding will help enhance treatment facilities and 
options and will contribute to furthering cancer research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to make sure that everyone 
who faces the fight against breast cancer comes out of the other 
side of this fight as a survivor. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Co-operatives Week 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has 
been proclaimed Co-operatives Week in Saskatchewan. As part 
of the ongoing annual recognition, co-operatives have been an 
integral part of the province’s economy for decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that Saskatchewan is home of 
more than 1,300 incorporated co-operatives that are creating 
jobs and providing the residents of Saskatchewan with service 
in both rural and urban communities. From retail to wholesale 
businesses to credit unions and child care, co-operatives 
literally cross every part of our economy and operate in cities, 
towns, and villages across Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I along with some of my colleagues 
had the pleasure of kicking off Co-op Week with a flag-raising 
ceremony here in the Legislative Building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome all members to join me in 
congratulating all of those who are involved with a co-operative 
movement. They are an important partner in our economic 
growth and continue to help make us the province the best to 
live in, to work, invest, and to do business. Co-operatives are a 
proud Saskatchewan tradition that help keep our province 
strong. And with that, I ask all members to recognize and 
appreciate co-operatives as we celebrate Co-operatives Week in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Physician Numbers in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
inform you that we have well over 500 more physicians in 
Saskatchewan than we did eight years ago. This is a 30 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker, and it represents a great improvement in 
residents’ access to physician services across Saskatchewan. 
Along with the overall increase in physicians, there has been a 
23 per cent increase in family physicians and a 35 per cent 
increase in specialists, including a 50 per cent increase in 
pediatricians. Mr. Speaker, this is good news for families all 
across our province. Today more than ever, people have access 

to the health care professionals they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in contrast to the history of the previous 
NDP [New Democratic Party] governments where we lost 
hundreds of physicians and health care professionals. Under the 
NDP, the recruitment of specialists dwindled, rural and remote 
communities were forgotten, and medical graduates were not 
retained. 
 
Today our government was elected on commitments to increase 
the number of doctors, educate and recruit more physicians, and 
provide incentives to retain more health care professionals after 
graduation. Mr. Speaker, we have kept those promises. With 
500 new physicians in our province, the evidence speaks for 
itself: our government is moving Saskatchewan forward. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
last week the Canadian government signed the largest trade 
agreement in history. The Trans-Pacific Partnership includes 12 
countries and over 800 million people. It removes tariffs and 
other trade barriers with Saskatchewan’s most important trading 
partners, opening up many potential new markets for 
Saskatchewan exporters. It has been endorsed by numerous 
exporters, including virtually every agricultural organization 
that represents Saskatchewan producers. The TPP 
[Trans-Pacific Partnership] means more markets, more exports, 
more opportunities, and more jobs for Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why our government strongly supports the TPP. 
 
And where does the NDP stand? It’s hard to say. At first an 
NDP caucus spokesperson appeared to support the TPP, but 
since then at least three provincial NDP candidates have posted 
their opposition to the TPP on social media. And where does 
the NDP leader stand? Who knows? He hasn’t said a word 
about the most important trade deal in history. Here’s the 
problem: on one hand, it’s good for Saskatchewan; on the other 
hand, his federal party and leader Tom Mulcair are against it. 
So here’s the question: does the NDP leader support or oppose 
the TPP? Will he stand for Saskatchewan, or will he bow down 
to Thomas Mulcair? 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Emergency Room Wait Times 
 
Mr. Broten: — Michael Line was 45 years old, and he had a 
history of heart trouble. When he showed up at the emergency 
room on August 19 with chest pains, he was left for three and a 
half hours in the waiting room. And he died. I’m sure all of us 
in this House extend our deepest condolences to Michael’s 
family and friends, but what they need, and what we all need, 
are answers and accountability and action. 
 
So my question to the Premier: how did this happen? 
 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7269 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly on behalf of the government I extend our condolences 
to the family on the tragic loss of Mr. Line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can inform members of the House that the family 
has been in communication with me through correspondence. 
They’ve had contact with the minister’s office as well, the 
Minister of Health’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also inform the House that the Cypress 
Health Region has looked at the case, although the review is 
ongoing, certainly in terms of recommendations that can come 
from this, from this tragedy, Mr. Speaker. The analysis looked 
at areas including patient examination rooms, patient flow in 
ER [emergency room], and staffing changeovers at the ends of 
the shifts, Mr. Speaker. There’s being action taken on these 
fronts as a result of this tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s of course not a lot of comfort to the family, to 
whom we again extend our condolences, but the region is 
looking very specifically at recommendations that this might be 
avoided again in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Michael Line waited three and a half hours. 
That’s about the average wait in Saskatchewan now from when 
someone arrives in an ER to when they finally see a doctor — 
almost three and a half hours. A few years ago the average wait 
was one hour and 42 minutes. So the average wait doubled. 
 
At the Reginal General Hospital, the average wait to be 
assessed in the ER is even worse. It’s almost four and a half 
hours. And we’re hearing more and more about the horrific 
consequences of those long ER waits, including Michael Line’s 
premature death. ER wait times are a huge problem. So can the 
Premier, can the Premier please explain why he walked away 
from his ER wait time commitment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have not 
walked away from that commitment. Mr. Speaker, the 
government noted the challenges around wait times in the ER 
years ago and we have confirmed our commitment to shorten 
those wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, evidence of that commitment can be seen in the 
very significant increase in human resource personnel across the 
health care system. We just heard in member statements that the 
government has exceeded its goal of attracting 500 more 
doctors to the province of Saskatchewan, with more work to be 
done. Over 2,000 more nurses of every designation practising 
now in the province versus the complement that was here when 
members opposite had the chance to form the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This remains an ongoing priority for the government, the issue 
of wait times in emergency, Mr. Speaker. And health regions 
are taking different approaches to trying to meet the need and 
solve the problem and meet the objective that we have that there 

oughtn’t to be any wait times, frankly, for emergencies, by 
definition. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue that work. 
We’re going to continue to work with the regions, with health 
care professionals to provide that kind of emergency care to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier should read the 
annual report from the Ministry of Health and he will see that 
the commitment will not be met. With a lot of fanfare, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of fanfare, the Premier repeatedly announced 
over the last four years that his government would eliminate ER 
waits by 2017. But the Ministry of Health documents show the 
Premier has now walked away from that goal, walked away 
from that goal because it’s too hard. 
 
Now I agree that the target was ambitious, and I think most 
Saskatchewan people would not be upset if the government fell 
a bit short of that target as long, as long, Mr. Speaker, as it was 
making significant progress. But that’s not happening. Speak to 
any patient who’s visited an ER in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
will know this government is not making progress. The 
government’s own documents say ER waits have not 
substantially improved. 
 
My question to the Premier: why has there been almost no 
progress towards achieving his commitment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to 
again correct the record after the member has incorrectly 
portrayed the intentions of the government. This government — 
my office, myself, the government, the ministers — have never 
nor will they walk away from a goal that has been set. Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why there’s an additional $4.7 million in this 
year’s budget. That’s why we’ve increased the complement of 
health care professionals and doctors significantly over the last 
number of years. That’s why we’re working through systems, 
including ER room management in the case of Cypress Hills, to 
deliver on the goals of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to set goals. And I agree with the 
member opposite. The people of this province would rather 
their government set goals even if they fall short of them in 
terms of their own timeline, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Because the people of this province got tired of precisely the 
opposite tact taken by members opposite. Because I sat on those 
benches when our Health critic would ask the minister of 
Health of the NDP, why don’t you hire the nurses that are 
needed? SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] says we need a 
thousand more; why won’t you at least set a goal? And the 
minister of Health stood up at the time, the NDP minister of 
Health, stood up at the time and said, no we’re not going to set 
health care goals. And do you know what the reason was, Mr. 
Speaker? Because we’ll fall short. We’ll probably fall short of 
the goals, so we’re not even going to bother to set them. 
 
We’ve taken a different approach in terms of setting a goal for 
an increased complement of nurses; we’ve exceeded that goal. 
An increased complement of doctors; we’ve exceeded that goal. 



7270 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

We set goals in terms of beds for long-term care patients across 
this province after the NDP closed them. We met that goal, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll not back away from emergency room objectives 
that we have, the goals that we have. And we’ll back up the 
goals with more resources, as we’ve done in this year’s budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’re not even making time on 
ER waits. They’re going in the wrong direction. The ministry’s 
very own documents, Mr. Speaker, show how they’re walking 
away from their commitment, Mr. Speaker, with secrecy, with 
not making an announcement, Mr. Speaker, compared to the 
hype and the over-the-top comments we saw with the Premier 
when he actually made the commitment. 
 
Here’s what the media reported to the Premier saying in one of 
his many announcements on this. This is what the Premier said: 
“If the goal of ‘zero’ wait times is not met, then setting the goal 
and answering to it publicly should at least mean the 
government is on the right path.” But they’re not on the right 
path, Mr. Speaker. Recent data shows that the average ER wait 
time doubled, and then stabilized to three and a half hours 
almost. In Regina General the average wait is almost four and a 
half hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t even begin to tell the Premier how many 
horrific stories I’ve heard from patients about how waits in the 
ERs have affected their health, Mr. Speaker, in a very serious 
way. These aren’t just statistics to be brushed off, to be 
explained away. These are lives, precious lives of Saskatchewan 
people who go the emergency room — in their most desperate 
moments very often, Mr. Speaker — some of these lives that 
have ended far too soon. The Premier said he’d publicly answer 
if he failed to meet his commitment on ER wait times. So 
what’s his explanation for not making any real progress? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, the spring budget 
included $4.7 million towards our emergency room, emergency 
department wait time reduction initiative. Mr. Speaker, I think 
the provincial team that is comprised of physicians, other 
providers, patients and their family members across this 
province, I think would be quite surprised to hear from the 
Leader of the Opposition that we had walked away from this 
because they are still doing the work that needs to take place as 
we make progress on this goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing projects being put in place in a 
number of cities, including in Regina for example. A new 
patient treatment and assessment in Regina Qu’Appelle has led 
to a 27 per cent reduction in time to assessment for 
non-emergent visits. Mr. Speaker, that is progress for those 
particular patients. 
 
We’re seeing for example our connecting to care programs both 
in Regina and Saskatoon, seeing that people are diverted from 
the emergency rooms where normally their care would have 

been provided. We now have found a better way to provide care 
for these individuals. As well, Mr. Speaker, through some work 
that’s been done at St. Paul’s, for example for ED [emergency 
department] patients, that have presented a 50 per cent in 
reduction from time of the emergency department to the time 
they find a bed. 
 
We are seeing progress, but we have a long way to go to make 
improvements on the mistakes of the previous government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the Premier 
would hand this off to the Health minister because this 
government’s record, according to the ministry’s very own 
document, Mr. Speaker, is not very flattering. Not very 
flattering, especially in the face of the word that the Premier 
provided to the people of the province. 
 
The Premier unveiled this ER wait time commitment at the start 
of 2012. He said, “No one will wait to receive emergency room 
care.” He then proceeded, Mr. Speaker, to spend hundreds of 
millions of dollars on John Black lean, where they sent 
front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker, into these 
workshops where they learned Japanese words and learned how 
to fold paper airplanes. 
 
No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that we see these, the results that are 
lacking and that are concerning for Saskatchewan people, 
because their priorities are so horribly misplaced. No wonder, 
Mr. Speaker, that almost four years later from the Premier 
unveiling his zero waits commitment the Ministry of Health 
admits that no significant progress has been made on ER wait 
times. 
 
And now the Premier has quietly, very quietly walked away 
from the commitment that he very loudly made to 
Saskatchewan people. And he can laugh all he wants, but that is 
cold comfort to the many people who are going to emergency 
rooms who need care right away, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 
unacceptable to have the Premier and the Deputy Premier just 
sitting there chuckling like this is a big joke for Saskatchewan 
patients. Absolutely unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: very clearly his fascination with 
the John Black lean pet project has not worked, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I stutter, Deputy Premier. 
That’s all right. It’s not a big deal. What does matter, Mr. 
Speaker, is to make sure that patients are well cared for in the 
province. My question to the Premier: the John Black lean 
project has failed horribly, is not bringing results. So now what 
is his plan for ER wait times in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
well I can say that, Mr. Speaker, we do have our team in place 
that is using the $4.7 million in this year’s budget. They had 
money in last year’s budget to work with health regions to put 
in place initiatives that will see reductions in our wait times in 
our emergency departments. I consider that this is complex 
work. The same was true for the surgical initiative, which we 
had some of the longest waits for surgery in all of Canada. But 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7271 

it took some time, and it took a number of years to get down to 
the point where we can offer surgery within three months in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can talk about the police and crisis teams that 
we’re funding both in Regina and Saskatoon. For example, in 
Saskatoon in six months, 238 patients were contacted through 
this program and only 105 of those needed transport to hospital. 
In the majority of those cases before this program, most of 
those would have ended up in the emergency room. Same for 
the Lighthouse, a paramedic program, a pilot program in 
Saskatoon to provide services. 
 
Here is what we heard from members opposite when the 
member from Lakeview was the Health minister in 2001 when 
there was an emergency overcrowding: “But what I would say 
is we know that all across Canada there’s a shortage of nurses.” 
Well what do you need to do? Then hire more nurses. That’s 
exactly what we’ve done on this side — hired more providers, 
more physicians, more nurses, and put in resources to where 
they’re needed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s frustrating to hear these 
responses because we see, Mr. Speaker, in the ministry’s own 
documents that this government is not making progress when it 
comes to wait times for ERs. We see the Premier quietly walk 
away from a very public and a very loud proclamation that he 
made with respect to eliminating wait times in Saskatchewan. 
He just wants to quietly sweep it under the rug. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Michael Line’s life was cut tragically short. It was 
cut tragically short because of an ER wait time that was 
completely unacceptable. Now the Ministry of Health admits 
that there were nine critical incidents last year which were the 
result of “delay or failure to reach a patient for emergent and 
scheduled services.” A critical incident is a serious adverse 
health event including the actual or potential loss of life, limb, 
or function. There were nine such incidents related to delays 
last year, which is a 350 per cent increase from last year. Does 
the Premier know how many of those critical incidents were 
related to long ER wait times, and how many of those incidents 
were premature deaths like Michael Line’s? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a very 
important issue and a priority for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can say that the government has 
not walked away from wanting to see reductions in the waits 
that people are waiting in our emergency departments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost, the evidence of that is the 
fact that if we were to quietly back away from wanting to 
reduce wait times in our emergency departments, why would 
we put $4.7 million in the provincial budget that everybody sees 
on budget day and that shows a financial commitment to this? It 
also shows, Mr. Speaker, that we wanted to ensure that we have 
a team that has been assembled to look at different ideas, 
different initiatives from not just in Canada but across North 
America, that has shown improvements in wait times in 
emergency departments. 

Key to that, Mr. Speaker, is ensuring that we are treating people 
in an appropriate way both before they get to the emergency 
department — and that’s why we’ve put in place the paramedic 
program at the Lighthouse; that’s why we’ve put in place the 
connecting to care programs — but as well after they’ve visited 
the emergency department. And that’s Home First/Quick 
Response that’s ensuring that people have placements in the 
right bed or the supports to go back to their own community. 
That’s where . . . our priority. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Many schools in our province are 
struggling because of massive enrolment increases that this 
government stubbornly refuses to fund. Just as one example in 
Saskatoon, there are 1,160 more students this fall, but the Sask 
Party government didn’t give any extra money to the schools to 
cover these new students. In fact they scrapped the mid-year 
adjustment. The Chair of the Greater Saskatoon Catholic school 
division says, “It’s tough when you’re being asked to always do 
more with less dollars.” 
 
1,160 new students, similar story in Regina, with not a single 
extra penny from this government to help meet the needs of 
those students in classrooms across Saskatchewan. How can the 
Education minister possibly defend such neglect for the 
students of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, I want to once again set 
the record straight. No school division saw a decrease in 
operating funding this year. Despite it being a tough budget for 
the province, education spending increased by 14 per cent. 
 
While we were able to provide for the largest education budget 
in the history of our province at nearly $2 billion, we weren’t 
able to commit to all of the funding-projected enrolments that 
we had. We asked the divisions to work with us. The divisions 
have agreed to do that. The divisions are continuing to work 
with us. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the divisions to budget 
within their means. 
 
This is a problem that’s unique to this government because 
under that government they dealt with enrolment decline. They 
dealt with closing 176 schools. They weren’t dealing with the 
issues that we have of growth. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s appalling that the 
Education minister takes and questions the statements of a 
school board Chair like that of Greater Catholic Saskatoon 
Schools, who says that they’re having to do more with less. It’s 
a shame that the Education minister really denies the reality in 
classroom and that his measures defy common sense when he 
scrapped the mid-year adjustment for students. 
 
The 1,160 new students in Saskatoon schools this year will add 
an additional cost of $7.4 million in additional expenses, but not 



7272 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

a single nickel, additional nickel to meet the needs of those new 
students. Schools in our capital city here in Regina are in a 
similar situation, just like so many others across Saskatchewan. 
Prairie Spirit School Division has 300 new students, none of 
which the Sask Party funded. 
 
This is Sask Party neglect, and all of our kids are paying for it. 
Why won’t the Education minister just admit it was a mistake 
not to fund these thousands of new students? Why won’t he fix 
the problem? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the budget that this 
province has given the school divisions is record funding. There 
has never been as much funding as there is now. Mr. Speaker, 
between 2007-2015 — I want to do some numbers for the 
members opposite — Saskatoon Public’s enrolment increased 
by 17 per cent; their operating funding increased by 39 per cent. 
Saskatoon Catholic, enrolment increased by 12 per cent; 
operating funding, 38 per cent. Prairie Spirit, enrolment 
increased 18 per cent; operating increased 31 per cent. Regina 
Public, enrolment increased 6 per cent; operating funding, 37 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, Regina Catholic, enrolment increased 11 
per cent; operating funding, 35 per cent. Prairie Valley, no 
increase in enrolment; operating funding increased 22 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the monies that we’ve given the school . . . We’d 
like to give more money to the school divisions. We realize that 
they do good work. They work hard. They provide the services 
that we need for the best and brightest of our future. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve done far more than the members opposite have 
ever done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister needs to 
wake up to the reality in classrooms across Saskatchewan, stop 
denying the reality and stop disrespecting the voice of 
educational leaders in this province. 
 
A key reason for this population, these enrolment increases, is 
immigration. Over the last four years we’ve seen almost 50,000 
immigrants move here directly from other countries. Meanwhile 
in terms of people moving between provinces, we’ve actually 
had a net loss of 2,600 people over the last four years. We 
celebrate the increasing diversity of our province, but it’s 
crucial that the government understand that they need to invest 
in the students across this province. 
 
In Saskatoon Catholic Schools alone, the need for help with 
English as an additional language jumped 19 per cent this year 
alone, but no new money from the Sask Party. That hurts all of 
our kids. Does the Education minister recognize that many of 
these new students have extra needs which cost extra money? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased that the 
province’s enrolment has gone up. We’re pleased that the 
population has gone up. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that 
immigrant students, when they come to our province, pose 

additional challenges for our school divisions. 
 
This year’s budget alone, English as additional language 
teachers, we have increased that number by 8 per cent. We 
heard loud and clear from teachers that money previously 
earmarked for standardized testing would be better spent 
elsewhere. We responded by allocating $4.6 million directly to 
supports for their classrooms, specifically so that they could 
deal with the challenges that they face from some of these 
students. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for just a moment or so about the 
things that happened under the previous administration. In 1993 
and ’94, the NDP actually reduced the operating grant from the 
province. In 1995 they didn’t do a reduction; they gave the 
school division zero. This was at a time when there were over 
20,000 more students in our education than there are today. Mr. 
Speaker, they planned for decline. We’re not doing that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Release of Reports on Seniors’ Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Why is the Health minister refusing to release 
the most recent health region reports on the state of seniors’ 
care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, because the reports are 
now at the ministry, now that they’ve been completed by all 12 
health regions. The ministry is reviewing those, and they will be 
released shortly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These internal 
health region reports on the state of seniors’ care were finished 
over the summer, perhaps with the exception of the two 
northern ones. We would have liked to have seen the other ones 
before now. The only reason the Sask Party is delaying the 
release of these reports is to sanitize them. The Health minister 
should table those reports today in the Assembly. Why won’t he 
do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said before, yes we had delays, obviously because of some 
issues out of the control of the health regions, particularly in 
northern Saskatchewan. The reports have been compiled. They 
are being looked at by the Ministry of Health and they will be 
reported publicly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This is the minister who released the last 
reports almost a year later, only after being questioned multiple 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7273 

times in committee, Mr. Speaker, and then cut and pasted 
reports. To the Health minister: on whose desk are these reports 
sitting right now and what is happening to them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would have to 
check to see who exactly has the report on whose desk. They’re 
not sitting on my desk currently, but I’d have to find out who 
exactly has the reports. They are at the ministry. The 
information will be reported on publicly as I have committed, 
and that will be done in short order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this delay is completely 
unacceptable. He told me in the spring that they would be ready 
at that point, just a few months . . . not long after I had asked in 
the spring. Perhaps the Premier and the Health minister have 
already forgotten about the Ombudsman’s damning report on 
the state of seniors’ care. She heard about residents suffering 
because of widespread, widespread short-staffing and the lack 
of clear standards. 
 
If the government actually took this seriously, the internal 
reports would dig into these problems. But the government 
cares way more about trying to manage its own reputation than 
actually solving the seniors’ care crisis. That’s why it’s sitting 
on these internal reports. We’d like them tabled today, Mr. 
Speaker. How can the minister possibly justify this delay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again as I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, the ministry is compiling 
all the information that is being provided by the regions, 
knowing that it is 156 facilities that were being toured across 
the summer, across this province, knowing that those tours 
couldn’t be completed in a timely fashion in a number of our 
health regions because of the issues in the northern areas 
because of forest fires and the impact that that had on the fact 
that we had patients, residents that were transferred to other 
health regions outside of the North. Mr. Speaker, when they are 
ready to be provided to the public and tabled, I will be doing 
that, and that will be shortly. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Who Will You Help Campaign 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is time we acknowledge, on this record, violence against 
women is a serious problem in this country and we need to take 
action to address it. For all our efforts to achieve equality 
between genders, there is a reality of life women experience 
that differs sharply from their masculine counterparts, and that 
is the risk of harassment and abuse. The presence of violence 
against women’s lives lives to an unequal and intolerable 
degree. Canadian women are four times more likely to be 

victims of intimate partner violence, 11 times more likely to be 
a victim of sexual violence. And of course we’re all concerned 
about the acts of violence that have led to the deaths and 
disappearance of too many indigenous Canadian women. 
 
Addressing this problem is no small task. Compassionate 
support for victims of violence, as well as accountability for its 
perpetrators, are all part of the solution. Yet experts are now 
agreeing that the best way to bring this problem to an end is to 
change the unhealthy behaviours and attitudes that underlie 
gender violence. 
 
As one step in this journey, our government is proud to launch 
Who Will You Help public awareness campaign to combat 
sexual violence and abuse. Over the next few weeks, a video 
with a powerful message will be airing on television, in movie 
theatres, and across social media encouraging everyone to be 
mindful of their role in ending violence. This video hopes to 
remind people that we all have a responsibility to protect 
vulnerable women and girls, including when that means 
intervening to stop inappropriate or criminal behaviour. By 
speaking up, we can be part of the solution. 
 
Over the long weekend, the Who Will You Help video made an 
unofficial debut on social media, aiming to influence the 
conversation on what we all have to be thankful for. The online 
response from Saskatchewan people has been inspiring. The 
video from the Government of Saskatchewan Facebook account 
has now received 1,000 likes and almost 900 shares and more 
than 150,000 views. We are gratified that our community 
partners, including STOPS to Violence [Saskatchewan Towards 
Offering Partnership Solutions], PATHS [Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses Saskatchewan], local 
transition houses, and police are sharing our video. 
 
But most encouragingly, young people are posting the video to 
their own walls with messages to their friends. One young 
woman from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan reposted the video 
alongside the comment “Your voice can and will make a 
difference.” Another asked her Facebook friends to please use 
their energy to speak up and help when they see these crimes 
that offend taking place. This is the type of change we need to 
see. I would like to commend everyone who has watched, liked, 
and shared this video for being part of the solution to violence. 
And for those of you who have not yet seen it, I encourage you 
to watch it on YouTube and consider who will you help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attitudes that legitimize sexual violence and 
misogyny are an ongoing impediment to the safety of our 
province’s women and girls. So on behalf of 561,830 women 
that call Saskatchewan their home, let’s all pledge to be active 
in the quest toward equality, healthy relationships, and gender 
equality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
minister for sending over a copy of his remarks early on. 
 
I want to acknowledge some of the comments that the minister 
made. As one of those women in the province and the mother of 
two daughters, I appreciate his comments about, although 



7274 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

without limiting the suffering of men too that are victimized, 
the presence of violence affects women’s lives to an unequal 
and intolerable degree, and that attitudes that legitimize sexual 
violence and misogyny are an ongoing impediment to the safety 
of our province’s women and girls. Those are very true 
statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Whether we looked at school cheers or chants that come up, 
that we hear, that are sang at campuses across Canada, or we 
hear about Dalhousie and the difficulties that female students 
face there, Mr. Speaker. Or we had a reporter here, a CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] reporter here in 
Saskatchewan this summer at Craven, who was on the receiving 
end of some unwanted sexual attention, Mr. Speaker. The 
reality is these things happen every day to women, Mr. Speaker. 
And this is a good campaign, and yes, cultural change is 
absolutely imperative. The reality is there is still sexual 
violence and harassment that goes on every day. 
 
I remember 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker, working as a waitress in 
restaurants and bars, and being on the receiving end now. And 
even as a 45-year-old MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], Mr. Speaker, I know that I get comments from 
people that my male colleagues would not receive. This is a 
very real issue, and that culture change, starting with young 
people, is absolutely imperative. 
 
But I also would have to add, Mr. Speaker, that that culture shift 
is really important, but when we talk about fleeing intimate 
partner violence and stopping sexual harassment, some of the 
things that need to happen, Mr. Speaker, are housing. Housing 
is often a huge impediment to women leaving their domestic 
situation. The lack of child care and those kinds of supports, 
affordability. All those kinds of things make it very difficult for 
some women to leave family situations where they are 
experiencing intimate partner violence. 
 
So although I commend the government on this campaign and I 
think it really is a great place to start in changing those patterns 
and the culture — it really is a culture shift — I think that 
there’s much work that this government could and should be 
doing on ensuring that the supports are there in place for 
women when they leave. But I also would like to thank all the 
organizations that work very hard on the issue around 
harassment and sexual violence and intimate partner violence, 
including STOPS to Violence, PATHS, the local transition 
houses, and our police services. But with that, I’ll conclude my 
remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. I recognize the 
Minister for Immigration. 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership Free Trade Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On October the 5th, the Government of Canada successfully 
concluded negotiations of a free trade agreement with 11 other 
members of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. This was a 
significant announcement for our economy. Saskatchewan’s 
economy is the most reliant on exports in a nation whose 
economy is one of the most reliant on exports. That’s why we 
fully support this agreement that achieves real access to the TPP 
market for our products. 

Once the agreement is implemented, our exporters of 
agricultural products, agricultural equipment, and industrial 
goods will have duty-free access for the majority of their 
products to a market of close to 800 million people. For 
instance, within three years, Malaysia will be eliminating tariffs 
of up to 30 per cent on harvesters, mowers, and ag equipment. 
Japan will be significantly reducing tariff on fresh and chilled 
beef, while eliminating tariffs of up to 50 per cent on processed 
beef within 15 years. Vietnam, a country with significant 
growth potential, will be eliminating its tariffs on canola oil 
within five years. The Parliament of Canada is required to ratify 
this agreement for it to take effect. 
 
In 2014, Saskatchewan exported more than $25 billion in goods 
to the 11 TPP members, representing more than 71 per cent of 
our total exports. Today, even before we benefit from the 
agreement, one in five Saskatchewan jobs depend on 
international exports. By not signing the TPP agreement, more 
than 71 per cent of those jobs would be placed at risk. It’s close 
to 81,000 jobs that depend on continued trade with those 11 
TPP countries. Non-ratification of the agreement would place 
our exporters at significant disadvantage, and that’s why our 
Premier called on all federal party leaders to commit to 
honouring the agreement if they are elected on October the 
19th. 
 
Last Tuesday, on the front pages of both the Leader-Post and 
The StarPhoenix, it was encouraging to see so many positive 
comments about the agreement from many stakeholder groups, 
including the Barley Council of Canada, the Western Canadian 
Wheat Growers, the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, 
and even, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan NDP who indicated 
that . . . They said, the TPP sounds promising for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s been more than a week now, Mr. Speaker, since the 
agreement has been signed. I actually have a copy of the 
agreement, the public materials of the agreement right here with 
me, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to table that. I’m hopeful that the 
opposition are going to stand up and support this agreement. 
I’m hopeful that they don’t say that they need to see the details. 
The details are right . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, no. Mr. 
Speaker, the details are right here, are right here. So we’re 
happy to table that agreement, Mr. Speaker, and we look 
forward to their support. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, pleased to join with the 
minister opposite in entering into a brief discussion of the TPP 
and the discussion of it. It’s good to see that there’s some detail 
that might be able to be shared. Of course that’s critically 
important for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly we see many things that sound promising for 
Saskatchewan on this front. There’s also some matters that are 
cause for some concern which is why it’s critically important of 
course to have the details, details which are referenced by the 
minister. And of course then we just need to make sure that 
there’s the proper assessment and scrutiny to make sure that we 
have the net benefit that Saskatchewan people deserve, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7275 

And members opposite . . . I know it’s kind of cute, Mr. 
Speaker. We know they’re very close friends of the Harper 
government, Mr. Speaker, and we know that the minister 
opposite has a close relationship and support for Stephen 
Harper. So it makes sense that, you know, I guess that he maybe 
has those details here today, and he’s tabling them and urging 
for immediate review of all of those details, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we’ve said before, as we’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, we 
see promise in this deal. Saskatchewan people and Canadians 
deserve appropriate scrutiny, and the details are important. To 
date right now we simply have the high-level summary from the 
federal government. And you know, as I say, there seems to be 
many elements that are important to Saskatchewan from 
agricultural products as well as machinery and metals and 
minerals, Mr. Speaker. But we also know that there’s been 
some legitimate concerns which should be fully understood, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think all people in Saskatchewan and 
Canadians certainly deserve a responsible government to 
conduct that review. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So we’re not going to get caught up in the gamesmanship or the 
support of Stephen Harper that we see here today from this 
government, Mr. Speaker. What we will do, what we’ll always 
do is recognize that we have a very important role for trade in 
this province. We will always support expansion and 
diversification of trade, Mr. Speaker, with countries that have 
good environmental records, with good labour standards, with 
democratic processes. That sort of trade and expansion is 
important to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll 
stay out of the games that we get from members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the House of rule 
19(2), ministerial statements: “A Ministerial statement shall be 
restricted to a new policy, program or government direction to 
matters within its administrative competence.” TPP is not 
within the provincial competence. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to report 
that the committee considered committee membership changes on 
May 28th, 2015 which were tabled with the Clerk pursuant to rule 
136(6), and I am now presenting its 12th report. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved: 
 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I am further 
instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to report 
that the committee considered committee membership changes 
August 25th, 2015 which were tabled with the Clerk pursuant to 
rule 136(6), and I am now presenting its 13th report. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I of 
course move: 
 

That the 13th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 
House Services Committee: 
 

That the 13th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I would like to table a report that 
was previously tabled on June the 6th from the Lieutenant 
Governor. Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly 
Act, 2007, I hereby inform the Assembly of the membership of 
the Board of Internal Economy effective May 21, 2015: the 
Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair; the Hon. James Reiter; the Hon. 
Jeremy Harrison; the Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff; Doreen Eagles, 
MLA; David Forbes, MLA; Warren McCall, MLA. I so table. 
 
In accordance with the Board of Internal Economy directive 23, 
I table a copy of the following reports prepared for the Sask 
Party caucus by the accounting firm MNP: audited financial 
statements for the year ending March 31st, 2015; Report on the 
Opinion on Internal Controls; Report on the Opinion on 
Compliance with Directives. 
 
Pursuant to Board of Internal Economy directive 23, Caucus 
Accountability and Disclosure, I hereby table the audited 
financial statements for 2014-2015 fiscal year, prepared for the 
NDP caucus by the accounting firm of MWC Chartered 
Professional Accountants LLP. I so table. 
 
As per directive 22, Members’ Accountability and Disclosure, 
clause (1), I table a copy of the reports of the fiscal year ending 
March 31st, 2015 for all of the MLAs. I so table. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I request leave to introduce a motion regarding sitting 
days of the legislature. 
 



7276 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to move a motion regarding sitting days for this session. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Legislature Sitting Days 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day, the subsequent sitting days of the fourth session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature shall be in accordance with the 
conditions set out by this order as follows: 
 

That the Assembly will sit from Wednesday, October 
14th, 2015 (sessional day 67) for 24 sitting days, 
concluding at the end of the daily adjournment on 
Thursday, November 26th, 2015 (sessional day no. 90); 
 
That the rules that govern the conduct of business within 
the parliamentary calendar shall not apply in accordance 
with rule 5, sittings outside calendar periods; 
 
That the Clerk of the Assembly shall publish a schedule 
that shows the days on which the Assembly shall meet in 
accordance with the order; and further 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on November 26th, 
2015 (sessional day no. 90), it shall stand adjourned to the 
date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven days clear notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, the subsequent sitting days of the fourth session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature shall be in accordance with the 
conditions set out by this order as follows: 
 

1. That the Assembly will sit from Wednesday, October 
14th, 2015 (sessional day no. 67) for 24 sitting days 
concluding at the time of the daily adjournment on 
Thursday, November 26, 2015 (sessional day no. 90). 
 
2. That the rules that govern the conduct of business 
within the parliamentary calendar shall not apply in 
accordance with rule 5, sitting outside the calendar 
periods. 
 
3. That the Clerk of the Assembly shall publish a 
schedule that shows the days on which the Assembly 
shall meet in accordance with this order; and further 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on November 26, 2015 
(sessional day no. 90), it shall stand adjourned to the date 
and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven days clear notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise 
briefly to address this motion here today which sets out the 
parameters of the fall sitting. Certainly we’re amenable to the 
sitting days. It’s important for us to do the work. We’d always 
be pleased with an extension of the sitting days for the scrutiny 
of actions of government. 
 
But what’s a notable departure by this government in this stage 
of their term is that they’re unwilling, Mr. Speaker, to do what 
governments have done time and time again in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, which is that they come at the start of the session 
and they lay out their vision and their plan for people of the 
resources. They lay out some accountability to the people of 
this province as to where dollars are flowing, where the 
finances are at, Mr. Speaker. They lay out a vision of where 
their plan meets the realities of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it’s sad to see, Mr. Speaker, a departure, a historical 
departure on this front by this government, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s surprising, to be honest, to many people across this 
province. It’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, in that we have of 
course so much opportunity in this province but also many 
areas which need actions, need vision, and need plans, Mr. 
Speaker. And for this government to simply sit on its hands, 
Mr. Speaker, to not take its place, to be unwilling to lay out a 
vision and a plan for the people of this province as it relates to 
the opportunities and challenges across this province is highly 
unaccountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, I hear from people across this province. Many 
that believe that the government has changed in a significant 
way. I hear from many, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a growing 
arrogance in this Sask Party government, a lack of 
accountability, Mr. Speaker, a disconnect if you will, on those 
things that really matter to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
And that couldn’t be more evident, all of those points, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at a government that’s grown, I guess, 
so entitled that they feel that they don’t need to lay out their 
vision and their plan to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, maybe it’s that they’ve simply — and they can 
heckle, Mr. Speaker — maybe it’s that they’ve run out of 
steam. Maybe it’s that they’re lacking in new ideas. Maybe it’s 
that, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve lost that touch with everyday 
families and communities across Saskatchewan, workers across 
Saskatchewan who deserve action, Mr. Speaker, on the issues 
that matter to them. But it’s awfully telling, Mr. Speaker, that 
we see a government resume a sitting and deny Saskatchewan 
people the opportunity to have a vision and plan shared and 
some accountability back to those people. 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7277 

It’s almost like, Mr. Speaker, that kind of late in this term, with 
this large majority, Mr. Speaker, like they’re just sort of mailing 
it in, Mr. Speaker. And we see it here today as well — just 
mailing it in, Mr. Speaker. We see it here today as well that, 
you know, with the initial day, the first day of the sitting which 
would normally have a Throne Speech and have stakeholders 
from across this province and workers and communities that 
would be connected, Mr. Speaker, they would be coming in 
here to hear the plan of government, to hear where the dollars 
are going, Mr. Speaker. But instead we see this government not 
provide that and try to break that precedent, not provide that 
accountability, not provide that vision and plan, Mr. Speaker. 
But actually what we’ve seen is wanting to play sort of political 
games as we’ve seen here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So pretty telling, Mr. Speaker, that a government comes back 
with a large majority, that seems to be growing out of touch 
with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, who increasingly seem 
to be all about their own political self-interest, Mr. Speaker, or 
the political self-interest of Stephen Harper, Mr. Speaker. As 
we can see here today, which is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And we hear from the Minister of Finance who’s running a 
massive deficit, Mr. Speaker. We know that that’s been his 
record basically for every day that he’s been in office, Mr. 
Speaker, and he wants to shout loudly across the floor. 
 
But what I think Saskatchewan people would rather see instead 
of a government that’s mailing it in, and a Minister of Finance 
who’s shouting across the floor, I think what they’d like to see 
is a vision and a plan. And for the minister who is presiding 
over a large deficit that they’ve created, Mr. Speaker, I think 
they’d like to know where all the money went, and I think that 
they’d like to see how that minister is going to be able to get 
finances back in line, Mr. Speaker. Because Saskatchewan 
people increasingly aren’t trusting this Sask Party government 
with their finances or their management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And to be frank, I think Saskatchewan people continue to see 
how this government (a) couldn’t manage the finances during 
the best of days, Mr. Speaker, during the days with record 
revenues, during that time where they were piling up debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and not saving a penny, and privatizing and liquidating 
public assets every step of the way, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
it’s very telling that we have this Finance minister not providing 
some of the plan here to Saskatchewan people here today, 
shouting across the floor. 
 
But Saskatchewan people are anxious about what his next move 
will be and what that government’s next move will be. And I 
know there’s many people telling me that we just can’t afford 
four more years of a Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And 
when we see a government that’s so willing to turn at any time 
to privatization and selling off of assets to fill budgetary holes 
that were created by the mismanagement of this government, 
there’s a growing uneasiness across Saskatchewan because 
Saskatchewan people are smart. When they look at the public 
assets and the Crowns that they were a part of building, Mr. 
Speaker, they know that by reckless, short-sighted moves of a 
government, by a stroke of a pen, Mr. Speaker, that when 
they’re gone, they’re gone. And these are all reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are concerned. 

So when we, you know, see that government show up at the 
Assembly, they’ve had a significant amount of time away from 
this legislature. You’d expect they’d have a vision and a plan in 
response to the realities that Saskatchewan people are facing. 
We don’t see anything here being announced, Mr. Speaker. We 
see the political games in the federal election to support 
Stephen Harper, Mr. Speaker, but we don’t see a vision and 
plan to ensure affordability for families, to ensure opportunity 
for young people. And we don’t see the plans to ensure the 
security and dignity that seniors deserve, Mr. Speaker. Not a 
vision and plan that addresses the pressures in health care, the 
ER waits that have almost doubled under this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and the lack of progress on that front. Not a vision and 
plan to make sure that seniors have the protection that they 
deserve. In crisis right now, Mr. Speaker, many of the senior 
care environments across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not 
having the supports to ensure those working on the front lines to 
provide that care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t see any vision and plan from this government, who 
will boast and brag about enrolment growth, Mr. Speaker, and 
about population growth, but totally unwilling to get the job 
done where it matters in the lives of students and teachers and 
education workers across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t hear any vision and plan, Mr. Speaker, to address 
the lack of affordability, the cost of living pressures that 
Saskatchewan families are facing all across Saskatchewan, 
many of which, Mr. Speaker, have been exacerbated or caused 
directly by the actions of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it says to us, and I think to many Saskatchewan people, that 
this is a government that has increasingly grown arrogant, that 
has increasingly grown entitled, Mr. Speaker, that has fallen out 
of touch, Mr. Speaker, with the real Saskatchewan and the 
reality of Saskatchewan families and communities, and an 
unwillingness to provide the leadership that Saskatchewan 
people deserve to capture the opportunities that each and every 
one of them have and each and every one of our communities 
have, but to address the challenges that we face as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We don’t see a government providing the accountability that 
they should on the spending of this government. And for this 
government, it’s big spending, Mr. Speaker, on pet projects and 
projects that are ballooning, Mr. Speaker, by the day. We have a 
government that didn’t even bat an eye, Mr. Speaker, when it 
came to just advancing and signing on to a $1 billion overrun, 
Mr. Speaker, on a P3 [public-private partnership] with a French 
company, Mr. Speaker, and no accountability back to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve better. They deserve a 
government that’s going to be transparent, that’s going to be 
open, that’s going to govern in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people today and for tomorrow. And they 
certainly deserve a government that understands the pressures 
and challenges that Saskatchewan people are facing. 
 
We see a government that boasts and brags about many things, 
Mr. Speaker, but are unwilling to ensure real action to improve 
procurement, Mr. Speaker, to ensure a fair shot for 
Saskatchewan companies, a better opportunity for 



7278 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

Saskatchewan companies and workers here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And we see a government that’s, at every turn, so 
willing and ready to outsource and privatize services and roles 
that could be provided here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s sort of a low-wage strategy, if you will, of this government. 
Maybe that’s its economic plan, Mr. Speaker. But the reality in 
how this is working out for many Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they’re working incredibly hard, many of them 
in precarious work, piecing together two and three jobs just to 
pay the bills, Mr. Speaker. And we see a government that’s 
actively pursuing an agenda that’s making things not better on 
that front, but making things worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We deserve and Saskatchewan people deserve to have a 
government that’s committed to building good, 
mortgage-paying jobs here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
deserve a government that’s going to actually get the best value 
for Saskatchewan taxpayers when it comes to procurement, to 
ensure a fair shot for Saskatchewan companies, and to ensure 
full opportunities for Saskatchewan workers here in this 
province. 
 
We deserve a government, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to get it 
right in the classrooms and support the next generation so they 
can live up to their full potential, and thus that our province can 
then live up to our full potential, Mr. Speaker. These are the 
kinds of matters that we should be hearing today in this 
Assembly. It’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, to see the departure 
that we see from this government to not bring forward a vision 
or a plan, to disregard the need for a Throne Speech, to engage 
first off right into federal political games, Mr. Speaker, but not 
to focus on what matters to Saskatchewan people. 
 
So you know, I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t 
here today. I’m disappointed that we’re not discussing a vision 
and a plan for Saskatchewan people. I’m disappointed that we 
don’t see measures in place and actions to address the 
challenges and pressures that Saskatchewan people are facing. 
I’m disappointed that I don’t see plans that allow us to fulfill 
the opportunity that every Saskatchewan person and community 
deserves. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, you know, as I say, as I hear from 
many people across this province noting that this government 
has grown an increasing sense of entitlement, a growing sense 
of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, and has lost its touch with everyday 
families across Saskatchewan and the realities across 
Saskatchewan, I think it’s awfully evident to see that here 
today, where a government comes into the Assembly and 
doesn’t provide a Throne Speech, doesn’t lay out measures to 
improve people’s lives. 
 
So that’ll be our focus, Mr. Speaker, as the official opposition, 
and for now, Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan New Democrats 
working directly with Saskatchewan people, all the 
communities of this province to ensure that we ensure 
opportunity for young people, affordability for families, and 
dignity and security for seniors across this province, and that 
every single child in this province is given the opportunity to 
live up to their full potential, and thus our province lives up to 
the full potential. 
 

At this point in time I won’t get into any more points, but I do 
know the member from Athabasca would like to enter this 
discussion on this motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased once again to stand in my place and to offer my support 
to my colleague that’s obviously made some very compelling 
early statements about the challenges we face in this Assembly 
when we have a government that basically has become bankrupt 
of ideas, Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly it wants to be able to 
thwart what I think is really important, thwart the information 
that people of Saskatchewan should have as it relates to their 
finances and where we’re heading in the future. And that’s 
really, really important to many, many families that we’ve 
spoken to as we’ve travelled throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to do, to the people that may be 
listening, is to basically draw out a picture or explain to them 
the process that we undertake here in the Assembly so many of 
the young people that are listening could understand exactly 
what we’re trying to debate, what we’re trying to determine 
here as a problem that we see the Saskatchewan Party creating, 
and that they should know that this is something that is totally 
unacceptable in the sense of how government should act and 
how government should conduct themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw evidence of that under the most recent ruling around 
the TPP debate, Mr. Speaker. That was just, I think, insulting to 
the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence when you bring a 
TPP agreement here and say, here it is; will you guys blindly 
sign this agreement but without us seeing the document and 
being able to research it? And obviously calling the motion out 
of order, Mr. Speaker, obviously shows that there is a bit of 
work that needs to be done from the strategic perspective of the 
Saskatchewan Party as it conducts itself here in the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously we’re a trade-dependent province, Mr. Speaker, 
something that the NDP want to really herald, something that’s 
really important, Mr. Speaker. We know that there’s a lot of 
discussion in and around our caucus from our colleagues, our 
former cabinet colleagues, and all the people that give the NDP 
advice, Mr. Speaker. We know that these agreements are really, 
really important. We want to know the details. We know we’re 
a trade-dependent province, Mr. Speaker, and for that type of 
style of crass politics and gamesmanship at a critical time in 
Saskatchewan’s economy and the Canadian economy, Mr. 
Speaker, quite frankly was very insulting to the people of 
Saskatchewan’s intelligence. And I’m pleased to see that the 
ruling was out of order in the sense of having that debate. 
 
And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that there’s more resources and 
more time spent on actually researching the issue and bringing 
forward some solid issues and solid points that the TPP may 
offer to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
see the agreement. We need to see the detail. And we certainly 
need to research it as everybody would expect us to do as the 
official opposition. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, again we’ve seen evidence of 
how the gamesmanship and the silliness that can occur in this 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7279 

particular Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and we’re pleased that that 
particular motion was ruled out of order. And therefore it’ll give 
us more time, more time to understand what the TPP is about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again I reiterate the comment I made at the outset. We are 
a trade-dependent province. I hear from our leader of how 
important some of these deals are. We hear from the deputy 
leader, we hear from many business community people — the 
leaders that are out there — that tell us trade is really important 
for Saskatchewan. The economy of Saskatchewan deserves it, 
Mr. Speaker. And we know on the NDP that the economy is the 
issue, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got to continue building and 
continue strengthening our communities, our people, our 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, on all sectors. 
 
And one of the things that I find myself at times smirking and 
smiling on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when the 
opposition . . . or the Saskatchewan Party, opposition to the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, come along and they try and create these 
little scenarios, these little plays and trying to create the 
division. Mr. Speaker, I would encourage that particular 
member that tried that particular manoeuvre here to study the 
history of Saskatchewan and he’ll soon realize that every time 
the economy of Saskatchewan was in full swing and things 
were going absolutely excellent for all people of Saskatchewan, 
the NDP were the government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do your history. Check out the facts, Mr. Speaker, and people 
will quickly realize that the NDP do indeed have a lot of 
thought and a lot of credibility when it comes to strengthening 
the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because we 
engage the business community. Why? Because we don’t get 
involved with these silly little political gamesmanship. And, 
Mr. Speaker, above all else, we balance in the interests of many, 
many quarters and many, many sections and many people of 
Saskatchewan’s aspirations to be part of that economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we also include the importance of balancing our interests 
against the environment when it comes to the economy. We’ve 
got to make sure we maintain that balance. We’ve got to see a 
strong sector such as the Crown corporations. That’s got to be a 
key, pivotal part of our economic plan. We want to involve as 
many people throughout the province of Saskatchewan, whether 
they’re in the far North or the eastern part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, in the small towns to our biggest cities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that we prepare that 
economy, prepare the people that are going to drive that 
economy by giving the basic important building blocks of 
education, security, and involvement, Mr. Speaker. And we 
talked about the challenge today where we hear 1,100 students 
in Saskatoon alone, 1,100 students are not being properly 
funded. And, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that a key, pivotal part of the 
economic building that is necessary to strengthen our province 
overall? And these are all the issues that we bring in too as New 
Democrats. When we speak about the economy, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not about floating out a trial balloon on the TPP saying, 
don’t read it, just sign. Mr. Speaker, we want to see what the 
details are. And that’s what any, any party in the province of 
Saskatchewan that’s worth their salt will at the very least read 
what the TPP’s about, Mr. Speaker. 

We appreciate that, again I reiterate, that we’re a 
trade-dependent province, Mr. Speaker. So it’s really important 
that we work very hard to secure these deals, to learn about 
these deals, but incorporate a whole whack of other factors 
when we talk about the economy, Mr. Speaker. And some of 
those other factors, Mr. Speaker, is to strengthen the position of 
Saskatchewan people’s interests to things like involvement of 
the Aboriginal community, things like incorporating the fact 
that we have many immigrant communities settling in 
Saskatchewan, that we have to make sure we had the labour 
force necessary to continue driving that economy, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve got to make sure that we research all these issues. And 
this is the only way, Mr. Speaker, that we could build a lasting 
economy that could serve many, many people long after we 
stop being part of this particular Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And this gives us the confidence that our children and 
grandchildren will inherit a greater Saskatchewan, and that is 
what we talk about on this side of the Assembly. When New 
Democrats talk about the economy, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
regurgitating some of the comments from Prime Minister 
Harper, which we see every now and then from that side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I sit here and I smile because a lot 
of times you say, oh I understood the Premier said, oh we’re not 
sure who we’re going to vote for, is what the Premier said. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the news flash is 80 per cent of his people behind 
him have Conservative memberships, federal Conservative 
memberships. So it doesn’t really take a lot of rocket science to 
figure out who they’re voting for. But at least it was an effort to 
try and distance himself from the Prime Minister, which I think 
will no longer be Prime Minister fairly soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But people in Saskatchewan, they know what’s going on. A lot 
of people that follow politics know that 90 per cent if not 100 
per cent of the Saskatchewan Party caucus are going to vote 
Conservative, Mr. Speaker. We know that. And the bottom line 
is they’ve eradicated the Liberals on that side. There’s no more 
Liberals on that side and, Mr. Speaker, they are full-blown 
conservatives. People of Saskatchewan know that. 
 
So I wish the Premier would not come along and say, well 
we’re not certain who we’re going to vote for. I think he’s 
hedging his bets in terms of where the winner’s going to go. 
Our money of course is on our national counterpart. I think 
they’re going to do very well, Mr. Speaker. I think they’re 
going to do very well. And I think what’s going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker, is the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Canada will realize that when it comes to economic building, 
the Saskatchewan Party or the Conservatives have . . . they can 
barely hold their own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP will show them how to strengthen and build an 
economy that is inclusive, that’s certainly going to balance the 
many interests that are out there, whether it’s environmental or 
inclusiveness or training the young people to be the labour force 
of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. We want to build the greatest 
shining example of how an economy can be built using our 
values, Mr. Speaker — not the old, same old, same old 
approach by the conservatives which is to try and separate 
people, Mr. Speaker, or divide people and try and hoodwink 
people and say that they are the only ones that could drive the 



7280 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

economy, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely false. It is absolutely 
false. We’ve seen evidence of that over our time, certainly in 
government and over the history of the New Democratic Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason we are being able to say that confidently today, 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why we’re able to say that confidently 
today . . . And I want to explain to the students that might be 
watching here. There’s a lot of young people are watching this 
channel to try and understand politics a bit better, Mr. Speaker. 
Typically what would happen is every session . . . As we come 
to Regina, there’s two sittings that we have. We have the fall 
sitting, which we’re at now, and that typically runs anywhere 
from five to six weeks, Mr. Speaker. And then we have the 
spring sitting which usually starts in March. 
 
Well what happens is, the reason why it’s divided in two, for 
those that are listening, is that typically the Government of 
Saskatchewan would do what they call a Throne Speech. And 
what the Throne Speech does, Mr. Speaker, it identifies what 
their priorities are, what their aspirations are as a government. It 
sets out the tone of their next year of operation. Plus, Mr. 
Speaker, they also introduce some of the bills that they want to 
bring forward, because the opposition then can critique the 
Speech from the Throne and they can also begin to have a first 
look at what their agenda is for the bills. 
 
That’s what typically the fall sitting’s about. So it gives the 
opposition the opportunity to say, okay, what’s the 
government’s tone? What is their plan? What is their vision? 
What are some of the bills they’re bringing forward? So as we 
begin to understand the bills and research the bills and 
understand what their plan is, then we have the Christmas break 
in which they go back, the government does, and they 
determine, based on their budget, how they’re going to meet the 
obligations that they’ve identified in their Throne Speech. 
Because it’s all about what their priorities are, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s how it’s typically done. 
 
So the fall sitting, the fall sitting is you set the tone and you 
introduce your bills, and then the opposition has their first 
opportunity to critique the Throne Speech and also the bills. 
And then they go away and they bring their budget in and they 
bring the final debate process that’s attached to the bills. So we 
have two particular sittings, and each sitting certainly plays a 
role. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, today now, as a result of this particular 
motion, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this particular motion, the 
Saskatchewan Party decided not to have a Throne Speech. They 
decided, oh we’re not going to have a Throne Speech, which 
leads us to believe they’re not going to have a budget, Mr. 
Speaker. So this is the first time in a long time . . . I’ve been 
here for a few years, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been privileged and 
honoured to be here for a few years. This is the first time I’ve 
seen a government come along and not provide a Throne 
Speech for what they see the future of Saskatchewan in terms of 
the challenges and the opportunities of what they would do if 
they were government, Mr. Speaker. They have decided that 
they’re not going to do that this year. 
 
And that’s why we have this motion today, a motion to identify 
the sitting days so we’re done at the end of November. That 

gives us 25 sitting days, Mr. Speaker. No Throne Speech, so 
we’re very safe to assume there’s going to be no budget, Mr. 
Speaker. So the people of Saskatchewan are all sitting there, as 
we are, saying, well what is this government up to, Mr. 
Speaker? What are their plans? What is the budget going to 
look like? Where are their priorities? And just how bad are our 
finances, Mr. Speaker? This is one of the things that people are 
asking us as we sit. 
 
So the students that may be listening today, I can tell you today, 
what typically should happen in a fall sitting is we should have 
a Speech from the Throne, which is basically a message from 
the government that these would be their priorities. Following 
the Speech from the Throne, in the spring, we would have a 
budget and they would identify how their budget would again 
fulfill their comments or their vision attached to the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what one would quickly begin to realize is that 
the Saskatchewan Party are not only broke, Mr. Speaker, but 
they have run out of ideas, Mr. Speaker. They are sitting on 
their hands saying we shouldn’t bring any information forward, 
because, quite frankly, they don’t have any new ideas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think, from the perspective of the finances, Mr. Speaker, 
as identified by my Regina Rosemont colleague, is they I think 
borrowed about $700 million last year. Is that the correct 
amount? And now it’s $1.3 billion more on to our debt, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan need to know, where has 
the money gone? Where has the money gone? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, after eight years, eight years of record 
revenue — and this is what’s really important, to the students 
and the people that are listening — that I would point out eight 
years of record revenue, and today, Mr. Speaker, as a result of 
this past year’s operations, we now have added $1.3 billion 
more into debt, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re having this 
process where the House Leader from the Saskatchewan Party 
has basically said, all we’re doing, all we are doing is we’re 
going to be limiting the amount of days we’re sitting in the fall 
sitting. There’s not going to be no Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is exactly the challenge that many people in 
Saskatchewan are going to be asking themselves fairly soon, is 
where has the money gone, and why isn’t there a budget in 
place for next year? Because, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to 
happen is if there’s no budget next year, then the election is on, 
and guess what? The Saskatchewan Party doesn’t have to 
explain how badly they’ve mismanaged the finances of this 
province and how badly they’ve mismanaged the economy, Mr. 
Speaker. Because all that’s going to be coming out fairly soon, 
early next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t think the Premier wants to go into an election based 
on what we think is happening with it, that they’re ratcheting 
debt so high. The fact that they’re going to come along and 
justify . . . What we think, what I personally think is their net 
objective is they want to sell off the Crowns so they can justify 
to the people of Saskatchewan, let’s sell these profitable 
Crowns so we can balance our books, Mr. Speaker. And then 
their objective as a conservative party, their objectives have 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7281 

been met in which they want to privatize everything. And the 
people of P.A. [Prince Albert] have seen a lot of examples of 
what we talk about when we speak about privatization, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I want to recap what I think, the reason why we have the 
situation where there is no Speech from the Throne this fall. 
First of all, as my colleague has said, I believe that they are 
running out of ideas, that they are running out of steam. After 
eight years we see a tired old Sask Party government, Mr. 
Speaker. They are bankrupt of new concepts, Mr. Speaker. And 
quite frankly, I think they don’t have the cash to go forward and 
build a bold, brave new Saskatchewan as they always predict 
they could do, Mr. Speaker, because they simply don’t have the 
ideas. They don’t have the manpower. They don’t have the 
cash, and they don’t have the mandate, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
the reason why we see today that they are not, they are not 
proceeding with a Speech from the Throne. And that’s why this 
bill limiting the amount of sitting days is before us, and this is 
the issue that we’re speaking of today. 
 
Now I want to contrast, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve heard in and 
around our caucus with our new leader. Mr. Speaker, there’s no 
question that the NDP are on a level of confidence that we’re 
going to continue building because what, frankly, we have 
heard on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we need to 
focus on what really matters to the people of Saskatchewan, 
what matters to their families, to their children in school, to 
their children in daycares, to their children at university levels, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to focus on the high cost of living in all parts of the 
province. We know that many people are struggling to continue 
meeting some of the obligations that they have, but it doesn’t 
help when you have your power bill going up on a steady basis. 
It doesn’t help when you’re seeing more and more debt piled on 
to future generations, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t help when you 
have the downturn in the economy that we’re having. It really 
has a negative, drastic effect, Mr. Speaker, on what people of 
Saskatchewan are going through and what they’re suffering 
through. 
 
And our leader understands that, Mr. Speaker. Our leader has 
said that on numerous occasions that we’re going to focus on 
what matters to the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve had that 
discussion in our caucus on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the other point that’s really important that our 
leader has continually focused on and continually reminded us 
as caucus members is that all, Mr. Speaker, prosperity . . . The 
people of Saskatchewan should benefit people, Mr. Speaker, 
that all the people of Saskatchewan should benefit our 
prosperity, not just the rich and the few that the Saskatchewan 
Party cater to, Mr. Speaker, but absolutely everybody from all 
corners of our province should, Mr. Speaker, be the benefactors 
of our economy, Mr. Speaker, not just the chosen few. 
 
So I wanted to recapture if I can, Mr. Speaker, to the young 
people that are listening and all the people that are listening in 
general. Number one, no Throne Speech from this fall, Mr. 
Speaker, to identify what the government’s priorities are. So 
we’re not having no Throne Speech as a result of this bill. So 
you can bet your bottom dollar we’re not going to have a 
budget, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and his entourage want to 

have an election without telling the people of Saskatchewan 
what the budget looks like, what challenges exist out there, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is what’s really, really important. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they smile and laugh and sit in the comforts 
of their chair talking about all you NDP guys are always beating 
up on the Saskatchewan Party guys. And rightfully so, Mr. 
Speaker, rightfully so. The people of Saskatchewan should 
know that the Saskatchewan Party are running out of ideas. 
They’re running out of money. They’re running out of time, Mr. 
Speaker and, quite frankly, they’re running on empty. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan know that this Premier has 
changed, Mr. Speaker. This Premier has changed. The 
Saskatchewan Party members have also changed. They’ve 
become, Mr. Speaker, what I think, in the long run, a tired, old 
government, Mr. Speaker. They’ve run out of steam. They’ve 
run out of ideas. And as a result of that, the people of 
Saskatchewan can sense that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m not going to quote one of my colleagues, I want to 
quote today’s Leader-Post. Mr. Speaker, today’s Leader-Post, 
Tuesday, October 13th, the headline reads “Sask Party support 
dips,” Mr. Speaker. And this is going to be a continual trend, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be a continual trend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member knows you’re not allowed to use 
exhibits in the House, so please refrain from doing so. I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I am quoting from the 
Leader-Post again, and the headline reads “Sask Party support 
dips,” Mr. Speaker. We see that trend continuing, Mr. Speaker, 
because obviously the people of Saskatchewan are astute 
enough to know that as you look at the Saskatchewan Party, as 
we said, there’s a lot of things that have changed over there, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a lot of things that have changed. And after 
eight years of record revenue, they forgot the people that 
mattered the most, Mr. Speaker, the people that went to talk to 
them about a wide variety of issues, whether it’s health care, 
housing, highways. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Party has arrogantly dismissed some of those 
concerns, and we’re seeing evidence of that in this Assembly on 
a regular basis. 
 
They know as well as we know that they have lost their way. 
And the biggest question they’re asking, the people of 
Saskatchewan have asked, in the last eight years of record 
revenue, where did the money go, Mr. Speaker? Where did the 
money go? And you look at the facts. We have more debt, as 
my colleague has indicated. The rainy day fund has been 
depleted, Mr. Speaker. They’ve sold off a few Crowns; they 
want to sell more. And now they had to borrow I think $700 
million last year to balance the budget is what they said. But 
then the Minister of Finance came along and said, oh no, no, it’s 
not debt for capital. It’s operating debt. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know debt is 
debt. And when you have to go back and borrow $700 million 
to balance your budget, you have to borrow $700 million to 
balance your budget, and they all stand up and crow, look, our 



7282 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

budget is balanced. And the people of Saskatchewan kind of 
hold their nose and say, what’s up with that math? 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
are beginning to realize that the Saskatchewan Party, after the 
record revenues have stopped and the money is gone, all of a 
sudden, Mr. Speaker, they do not want to tell us what the 
situation is when it comes to the financing of our province and 
the finances of our province, Mr. Speaker. And that is of great 
concern, great concern, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
people of Saskatchewan in terms of having the right to know 
where we’re at financially. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the motion that is today that we simply not 
have a Throne Speech is very, very concerning to the 
opposition. We want to know what’s going on over there. Just 
how bad is it, Mr. Speaker? Just how bad is it in the sense that 
they don’t even want to go forward with the budget? And the 
people of Saskatchewan have a right to know where things are 
at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And after you’ve seen, as I’ve indicated, they have spent every 
single penny, drained the rainy day fund and added a mountain 
of debt, so people are saying, okay you spent this money. 
You’ve drained the rainy day fund and then you’ve added debt, 
but yet you’ve had record revenue. And yet we find people all 
throughout Saskatchewan are saying, well that didn’t help my 
family; we’re still facing a huge amount of increases in the cost 
of living. 
 
So we’re trying to figure out here how in the heck is it, Mr. 
Speaker, that you could have record revenue, then after eight 
years you’ve drained your rainy day fund, you’ve spent every 
single penny you’ve had, and now you’re adding more debt — 
$1.3 billion and counting this year alone. We just simply can’t 
understand where the money went, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is an important part of the people of Saskatchewan, I 
would ask them, like with the bottom line, the bottom line, Mr. 
Speaker, is this party has had, the Saskatchewan Party has had 
record revenues, eight years of record revenues. And after eight 
years of record revenues — don’t forget record revenues, Mr. 
Speaker — they’ve drained the rainy day fund. They’ve drained 
the rainy day fund. They’ve spent every single penny that 
they’ve had, Mr. Speaker. And just to add insult to injury, Mr. 
Speaker, they are now adding on more debt. And as a final, I 
think the final nail in their coffin, Mr. Speaker, is that they are 
not letting the people of Saskatchewan know where our 
finances are, and they want to go into the next election without 
having a budget. And this is evidenced today that the Throne 
Speech is not present today because they’re not going to come 
forward with the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And based on the fact that they refuse to have that courage, the 
NDP on this side are saying, bring on the election, Mr. Speaker, 
because we will tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly where 
the finances are, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to hide from their 
record, Mr. Speaker. They’re hiding from their record, and 
rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. Bring it on because the people of 
Saskatchewan had enough of this kind of mismanagement, Mr. 
Speaker, and families have had enough suffering. And yet 
despite record revenue, there are many areas and many people 
and many communities that are still suffering because of the 

Sask Party’s priorities. They’ re misplaced. 
 
They have spent money on lean programs, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve blown a lot of money on silly projects, on the 
Premier’s pricey pet projects, that’s what we use — a triple P 
deal, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re hearing that the Regina bypass is 
going to be $1 billion over budget and counting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So really, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a lot of questions the 
people of Saskatchewan have and a lot of answers that they 
deserve, Mr. Speaker, but they’re getting neither, neither from 
the Saskatchewan Party. And this is where I think, Mr. Speaker, 
it is really, really troublesome from our perspective as 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as I said before, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, as we 
speak in the caucus — and our leader has a great amount of 
influence and certainly has a great amount of say when it comes 
to the future of Saskatchewan — we have a number of 
principles. And the leader, our future premier, has always 
reminded us as caucus members to go out there and listen to 
what people are saying. Listen to what Saskatchewan people are 
saying. Make sure that we advise them that the prosperity will 
benefit all not just the chosen few. And the fact of the matter is 
the Saskatchewan Party and their leader have changed, Mr. 
Speaker, have changed for the worst. 
 
And this is what really is beginning to resonate throughout 
Saskatchewan that this is a totally different ball game now, Mr. 
Speaker. And quite frankly, it’s important that we learn as 
politicians that we’re in this business for public service, and 
when we begin to disregard what the public is saying, what the 
people are saying, they will quickly send you a message, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what’s really, really important that we 
understand. And our leader has pointed that out on numerous 
occasions where he simply indicated that if we’re going have 
prosperity, we’re going to benefit all people if we’re going to 
make sure that we’re going to deal with the issues that matter. 
That is what we’re constantly reminded of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again as we pointed out, they sometimes 
tend to — the Saskatchewan Party do — sometimes they can 
become arrogantly dismissive of the issues that are bring 
forward. And our leader has constantly reminded us that we’re 
not going to have misplaced spending like the Saskatchewan 
Party. We’re going to do right for what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. We’re going to listen to them. We’re going 
to make sure that the economy and the benefits are felt 
throughout all the province, and we’re going to make sure that 
everybody is included, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In building that brave new economy, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party have lost their way tremendously. Despite 
the inheritance that they have, they just messed it up, Mr. 
Speaker. For eight years I’ve been sitting in this Assembly 
telling them, please don’t mess it up. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
messed it up. We’re seeing now as a result of how they’ve 
handled the circumstance that we now have a mountain of debt, 
Mr. Speaker. We have a mountain of debt, and we’re seeing that 
each year this province is growing more and more into debt. 
 
As a result of last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, 700 million they 
had to borrow just to balance the budget, and then they have the 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7283 

audacity to come into the Assembly and saying, we balanced 
the budget. Well if you borrow $700 million to balance your 
budget . . . I wouldn’t mind sending the Minister of Finance a 
memo, well guess what? Your budget is not balanced, so stop 
saying that to the people of Saskatchewan. Because when you 
say that, Mr. Speaker, you are insulting their intelligence. A lot 
of people in the province know exactly what’s going on. The 
business community knows and, Mr. Speaker, the academic 
community knows it. Many people that managed finances know 
this as well, and the many people that manage homes, families 
that manage their homes, they know what debt is. And all they 
see from the Saskatchewan Party: despite record revenue, 
they’re also getting record debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that we hear as we 
travel throughout the province, on doorsteps and at kitchen 
tables, is Saskatchewan people tell us that their biggest concern 
is their own health care. We heard yet another example today of 
how the health care system has failed a gentleman and his 
family. We hear constant reminders of seniors’ care and how 
dismal the service is to many of our seniors that are in their last 
years and the pioneers that built our province, and how they are 
treated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve bumped into many of these older people 
and they are very stoic people; they’re very strong. And in 
northern Saskatchewan I’m blessed to have many older people 
that I’m friends with and they tell me a lot of things, Mr. 
Speaker, about what is necessary for the future. And what they 
don’t do, Mr. Speaker, is tell us, go and hire an American-based 
consultant, the toxic John Black lean program, and spend a 
bunch of money on that particular program. That is not their 
priority as senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan. They say 
that was a big waste of money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And no matter how much they justify, the Saskatchewan Party 
do, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not fooled. 
And they certainly aren’t convinced that the John Black 
contract, which was a completely misplaced project, was of any 
benefit to our province. It wasn’t. It cost us a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was compliments of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you talk about the ER wait times and 
2017. The Premier made a bold statement. Where are we now? 
Where are we at in terms of the actual objectives, Mr. Speaker, 
that they have failed miserably? So on wait times, you look at 
what they’ve done. They’ve failed miserably on wait times. 
There are tremendous concerns from a number of areas, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve heard all the challenges with some of the 
hospitals that aren’t maintained properly. We hear the 
challenges of some of the communities — I think Craik was one 
of them — in the sense of them coming to the Assembly and 
demanding doctor services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These problems are all throughout Saskatchewan. They are in 
every community. And again they ask the question, where did 
all the money go? Because health care was our number one 
concern. And, Mr. Speaker, we have quite frankly seen a dismal 
performance by this government when it comes to providing 
service in health, in proper health care, to the many people in 
the province, especially the senior citizens. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at northern Saskatchewan in general 

and I get access to a lot of information from southern 
Saskatchewan from a lot of different rallies that we go to, to a 
lot of different meetings and gatherings, and certainly a lot of 
the discussions we have in caucus. And as an NDP caucus we 
do have a lot of discussion. Our leader is not going to sit by and 
make hasty decisions. There are things that are really important 
to him as we’ve indicated: inclusiveness, being fair, being 
open-minded, not allowing the people of Saskatchewan to be 
hoodwinked on some of these challenges. It is really, really 
important from his perspective, is that we, again, that we really, 
really focus on what matters and what affects our families and 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear issues around health care, not 
necessarily of the . . . just about not having doctors available, or 
the senior citizens having some difficult times, or the fact that 
we’re having people dying on wait times, waiting in the 
emergency room and dying like we heard today of the 
gentleman that sadly passed away, Mr. Speaker. There are tons 
and tons of examples of people that have come forward to this 
Assembly and sat in these chairs as they watched the 
proceedings, and quite frankly had some devastating issues that 
really impacted one of their loved ones, and really, really, really 
had some traumatic events happen where loss of life was the 
end result. And, Mr. Speaker, we look at the examples that they 
mentioned: Dave Carr, Darrell Meck, Dale Winacott, just to 
name a few of the people that have been here. And there have 
been hundreds of people that have come forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you look at these challenges. People are finally coming to 
their Assembly, and I admire their courage because they have 
had enough of the Saskatchewan Party who have lost their way 
and who have changed, Mr. Speaker. And we’re seeing 
evidence of that today, the negative change that’s impacting the 
people of Saskatchewan today. It’s not just the debt, not that the 
fact that they blew the Heritage, or the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, as we used to call it. Not the fact that they’ve had record 
revenue, Mr. Speaker, not the fact that they’ve added debt over 
the last eight years. They’re coming here because they’re tired 
of being ignored. 
 
They’re quite frankly tired of being ignored, and they’re quite 
frankly tired of this government not responding to their issues, 
not acknowledging their concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, those 
people will continue to come to the Assembly. And I encourage 
them, and to also point out that I admire their courage to come 
forward and say what is wrong with this current government’s 
treatment of their issues, their community, or their family. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few times that we’ve seen, as we 
bought things forward, you know, to the concerns, of the 
Saskatchewan Party, they’ve been very dismissive. They’ve 
been arrogantly dismissive, whether it’s the Preeceville issue 
with Mr. Floyd Head or whether it’s the issue on Craik or some 
of the other gentlemen and ladies that I mention here that had 
some very, very severe issues and the end result was not good, 
Mr. Speaker, that this Saskatchewan Party continues to flounder 
and they continue being dismissive of these concerns. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that kind of attitude will certainly catch up to you in 
the end. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out as well that one of the 
things that we often talk about is the importance of agriculture, 



7284 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

and our leader really speaks a lot about that as well because he 
travels all throughout the province. And I can tell you that it’s 
sure nice having him show up in Buffalo Narrows, as it is 
showing up in La Ronge and showing up in a number of 
communities. And there first-hand he begins to hear some of the 
issues that the people are bringing forward. And that really 
reinforces what he fundamentally believes right through his 
core and the fact that we need to start talking about things that 
matter to people, and we need to start respecting the people’s 
opinions more. And most important, Mr. Speaker, is you’ve got 
to make sure that the opportunities and the revenues we have 
today can benefit as many people out there as possible. And 
that’s not something that we see under the Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we certainly want to talk about is we 
talk about health care in general, and these are some of the 
comments that we talk about. We’re going to prioritize health 
care, Mr. Speaker. It is something that is fundamental and really 
important to the NDP, is that health care should be a shining 
example of how health care could be delivered by a province. 
Saskatchewan wants to lead that particular charge, Mr. Speaker, 
and we certainly can. 
 
We forced the Saskatchewan Party government to put an end to 
the toxic lean program. We were paying millions of dollars to 
this consultant from the States to tell us how to run our health 
care system, Mr. Speaker, when we had front-line workers that 
could have saved the Saskatchewan Party government and the 
taxpayers a bunch of money. And what happened? The 
Saskatchewan Party once again arrogantly dismissed those 
individuals and simply plowed ahead, plowed ahead with their 
plan to bring John Black, lean program, and the senseis, and 
that was their solution to try and deal with the challenges of 
health care costs in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also going to make sure that we focus on the front line. 
The same way that the Saskatchewan Party ignored the 
front-line workers, an NDP government will begin to engage 
the front-line workers to the extent that is necessary to make 
sure that their involvement and their contributions are made and 
that we use that information to build a better health care system 
under an NDP government as opposed to the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are also going to look at some of the decisions. Again, 
we forced them to get rid of John Black — toxic waste of 
money, toxic waste of money. And, Mr. Speaker, we all have 
examples of how they have squandered a lot of money paying a 
consultant to basically do nothing but bring in Japanese senseis 
to do paper planes and also to learn Japanese language. And, 
Mr. Speaker, with the full respect to the Japanese culture, we 
want to make sure that we can learn as much as we can from all 
cultures. But what we don’t want to do is learn from an 
American-based consultant how to run a health care system, a 
health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our front-line workers know what to do. They have the 
experience. They know exactly what has to occur in order for us 
to build a better health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, an NDP 
government will engage them fully and respect their 

participation and start using their ideas and utilizing them to 
make sure we build the best health care system that we can. 
 
There’s basic things like capping the cost of ambulance fees, 
fully re-opening the City Hospital. These are some of the 
things, Mr. Speaker, that I think that the NDP are working their 
ways in terms of building a platform, a responsible platform. 
But the number one thing that’s really important to us is that 
prioritizing health care is something that’s really, really key to 
our future. 
 
Now we’ve spent a bit of time on seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously it goes without saying that seniors’ care is pretty 
important to us as an issue. We know that there’s been these 
issues all throughout the province. And we’re going to continue, 
as our leader has done, continue shining the light on that 
problem in the sense of how poorly and how badly we have 
treated many of our senior citizens in many of our group homes 
and many other places as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to make sure that we bring something forward 
substantial, something that’s really going to raise the bar in 
terms of providing service to seniors. And that’s why we would 
bring in what they call The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we would certainly make sure that 
there’s minimum standards of care put in place and that we had 
adequate staffing levels as some of the components of that 
residents-in-care bill of rights Act that the NDP are trying to put 
forward. This is something that’s really, really important, as 
well as a seniors’ ombudsman. These are some of the ideas that 
we have pushed and pushed onto the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the greatest victory I think in the last six 
months is we got rid of John Black, the toxic John Black lean 
program that the Premier and many of the members of the 
caucus, the Saskatchewan Party caucus, continued to defend 
even though they knew they were wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the challenges that 
we’re going to have as it comes to the financing. I think overall, 
Mr. Speaker, another pile of debt that people need to 
incorporate as to how the province of Saskatchewan is going to 
operate in the future is all around the P3 model that the Premier 
and his cabinet are bringing forward, Mr. Speaker. Many people 
know that the P3 model . . . if you look at the challenge they 
have with schools. We’ve heard discussion from the member, or 
our Finance critic, and where he’s indicated that P3s throughout 
many other jurisdictions in the country have proven to be a lot 
more expensive than a traditional government build process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we know, P3s, what I’ve said before, that 
I look at the P3s as a more expensive proposition for the people 
of Saskatchewan. This is typically how I think it works. First of 
all, the government puts out a project and companies 
throughout the country, throughout the world, as we’ve seen 
evidence of recently, they have the right to bid on these 
projects. And what would happen, Mr. Speaker, is that if a 
certain company decides to build a school, as an example, they 
would actually finance that school. They’d use their money. 
They would build it, and then they would maintain that school. 
 
Now people out there would say, well what’s the challenge with 
that? Well, Mr. Speaker, the challenge is (a) first of all, when 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7285 

they build it, they make a profit. There’s nothing wrong with 
that. We anticipate companies building things in the province 
that profit should be their bottom line, and it’s something that’s 
really, really important, that the business community knows that 
we understand that. Nothing wrong with that. But the people 
that are putting up the financing for these schools, they want 
interest on that particular money. So they’re going to charge us 
a lot more than we would traditionally have to borrow from the 
different sources, Mr. Speaker. And whether you want to admit 
it or not, when you’re borrowing money at the rate that the 
Saskatchewan Party is borrowing, it’s going to add some 
dramatic financial burden to future generations. We know that. 
 
But the Premier is bent on making sure he gets all the good 
news before the next election, and he’s punting that debt down 
the road. It’s a legacy of debt that we’re seeing from this 
particular Premier and this party and, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t 
stop there. So the company is going to lend us money at a 
greater interest rate, and we’re locked in for 20, 30 years in 
some of these projects. 
 
Secondly, and I think the most important, compelling argument 
under this rent-a-school scheme is the fact that they will control 
this asset. It’s under their control unless and until it’s paid off 
by the government. So some of these agreements, Mr. Speaker, 
would really thwart a lot of accessibility issues that many 
schools enjoy today.  
 
And I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker: back home in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, when we have the gym, guess who makes 
decisions around who gets to use that gym? The local school 
board does, Mr. Speaker, in concert with the staff and of course 
in concert with some of the programmers in the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, not some corporation in Eastern Canada. 
 
And that’s exactly one of the challenges that we see with the P3 
model, that they will limit access to the school because they 
want to protect their asset because that’s their school. It’s not 
owned by the taxpayers. It’s not owned by the government. It’s 
not owned by the parents or the teachers. It is owned by that 
particular company, Mr. Speaker. They can dictate who goes 
into that school and who doesn’t, and they can dictate any 
changes, any changes to any of the school facilities or use of the 
facilities. And that is where I think a lot of parents are 
beginning to realize that this P3 model program really has some 
challenges, not from the affordability issue, Mr. Speaker, but 
it’s also from the accessibility issue and really who’s in control, 
Mr. Speaker, who’s in control of that particular asset. 
 
And this is where I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to really pay 
attention to what we’re getting into. And my colleague and the 
critic for . . . the Finance critic really put forward a bill which I 
think is only fair, Mr. Speaker, where he asks for the P3 
accountability and transparency Act. He’s asking for all the 
details to come forward so the people of Saskatchewan can 
actually see how these deals look; what are the financial 
obligations around a P3. And, Mr. Speaker, they won’t do it. 
The Saskatchewan Party won’t do it. 
 
So you look at the challenge we have. And this is why we’re 
here today talking about this motion brought forward by the 
Saskatchewan Party House Leader to limit the amount of, or to 
dictate the amount of days we’re sitting here in the fall without 

bringing forward a Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
want to hide from their legacy of debt, whether it’s cleaning out 
the rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s spending every 
penny they have, or whether it’s adding $1.3 billion in debt 
despite having record revenue. 
 
And the final piece, Mr. Speaker, the final nail in the coffin of 
our future financing is of course the P3 model that the 
Saskatchewan Party wants to impose on people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to know what those costs are and what the 
people of Saskatchewan are obligated to as a result of someone 
in the Saskatchewan Party caucus signing on the dotted line, 
agreeing to these P3 models that are costly and don’t provide 
any control for the local people and, Mr. Speaker, that again, 
that aren’t being held to account to the people of the 
Saskatchewan through the proper process which is this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
So we think we’re going to have a really rough ride financially 
as a party and as a province, because this particular Sask Party 
has really put Saskatchewan behind the eight ball. We have not 
seen any evidence, Mr. Speaker, that they’re willing to share the 
information that we have spoken about. It is just absolutely 
ludicrous in the sense of denying that information to the people 
of Saskatchewan because the taxpayers out there will know this, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m a taxpayer and I pay a lot of tax, Mr. 
Speaker: land tax and GST [goods and services tax] and income 
tax, Mr. Speaker. But a lot of other people in Saskatchewan, the 
business community, families, they all know they do a lot to 
contribute to the well-being of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers watch very carefully how we 
manage the financing of our province, which is fair, Mr. 
Speaker, because they are obviously paying the bills. But a lot 
of taxpayers are beginning to realize that the P3 model that the 
Saskatchewan Party is trying to impose on the people of 
Saskatchewan without sharing any details, without sharing any 
details, that the P3 model, the debt that the P3 model provides 
us is really deferred taxation, Mr. Speaker, deferred taxation 
that the Saskatchewan Party does not want to deal with. They’re 
going to leave the debt there for the next generation to take care 
of. This way the Saskatchewan Party can say, no new taxes. 
We’re just going to defer those taxes until four or five years 
down the road because I don’t want, as the Premier would like 
us to believe, he doesn’t want to deal with that problem right 
now. I’ll let somebody else down the road deal with that issue.  
 
And that’s exactly what P3s are. They’re deferred debt that the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to be hooked on for the next 
20 years at a higher interest rate and certainly not having access 
and control of our schools. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s 
really insulting. 
 
And all that the Sask Party was asked to do by the opposition — 
by my colleague, the critic for Finance — is give us the 
information. What exactly are the P3 model is going to cost us? 
We need to know that so we can share that with the people of 
Saskatchewan. So we proposed the bill, the P3 financial 
accountability and transparency Act and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard nothing from the Saskatchewan Party because they don’t 
want to share that information. 
 
So I want to recap from one particular issue on why I think 



7286 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

there is no Throne Speech at this particular sitting, Mr. Speaker, 
because the Saskatchewan Party are bankrupt of ideas. Mr. 
Speaker, they ran out of money, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, where has the money gone? 
 
And it’s worse, Mr. Speaker, it’s worse than that. Not only did 
they spend every penny, as we have indicated, they have now 
added more debt, $1.3 billion this year. Mr. Speaker, they have 
drained the rainy day fund. That money’s gone as well. And to 
add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, to add insult to injury, what 
they’ve done is they have added debt on to future generations 
through their P3 models. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to know 
what the debt is so the people of Saskatchewan could be 
apprised of that. And, Mr. Speaker, they will not give us that 
information. 
 
We look at the Regina south bypass project. We know now it’s 
a $1 billion cost overrun, and this is a bill that will continue 
building up. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people want information 
on that particular project. We know that that alone, Mr. 
Speaker, is $1 billion over what was originally scheduled, and 
some company out of France, I believe, got the contract. No 
people from Saskatchewan got the contract. 
 
So all of these particular issues, Mr. Speaker, is an issue that the 
people of Saskatchewan have a right to know. And the 
Saskatchewan Party is holding all that information. That’s why 
we don’t have a Throne Speech this fall and that’s why we 
won’t have a budget. That’s what the Premier wants to go into 
an election without a budget because that budget is going to be 
very painful for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the other issue is we’ve talked about 
the importance of education. We’ve talked about that at great 
length of why it’s important that we properly fund school 
divisions and be respective of students, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why we need to also look at issues that are really important, 
whether it’s bullying, and we have an anti-bullying bill that’s 
going to make sure that everyone in the school is not bullied. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we look at the LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] movement, and 
the fact that many of our young people that are struggling with 
their identity certainly have a lot of challenges as well. They’re 
subjected to bullying and harassment and the list goes on. And 
as a compassionate people and certainly as a compassionate 
province, we want to make sure that schools are safe, that it’s a 
good place for people to learn, and that there ought to be those 
support mechanisms in place, Mr. Speaker. We, as part of our 
process within the New Democratic Party, believe that it’s 
fundamental that we respect all people in our schools and we 
provide as much protection and support that we can, including 
those students that are struggling with their sexual identity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at some of the challenges with the 
schools themselves. We hear how the government is going to 
the P3 model, but what’s really, really disturbing as well is, as 
you look at the financing again, is that the Sask Party know that 
they have a backlog in school repairs of $1.5 billion. We’ve 
asked for that report, and they spend less than 2 per cent of 
what is required to begin that work. So we know that there’s all 

kinds of issues. We’ve heard in the session how some of these 
schools are also having a lot of challenges. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question we have is, how is it that you 
go into debt for a longer term? How is it that you can’t deal 
with the big $1.5 billion challenge in meeting some of our 
school needs, and how is it some schools are getting some of 
the supports and others are not? And yet they’ve had record 
revenue, Mr. Speaker; that again doesn’t add up in our books. 
And this is where I think it’s really, really important that people 
in the province of Saskatchewan start paying attention to how 
the misplaced priorities of the Saskatchewan Party is really 
having a drastic, negative effect on our schools and our children 
and certainly on our communities. 
 
So we have spoken at great lengths about the schools. We spoke 
at great lengths about the debt, about the P3 model, and of how 
the health care system is challenged, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
where we go back again as to what I think is fundamental to our 
position as the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. Every time 
that the economy was doing really well in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP were in charge. And we had four 
fundamental principles that I think that really, really help. And I 
won’t get into detail of all the principles but issues, for 
example, of being very inclusive of all sectors, you know, and 
understanding that the business community has a vital role to 
play. We understand that within the NDP party. 
 
We know that small business, medium-sized business, and large 
corporations can do a tremendous amount of good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. So they have an important, important 
role to play. We know that. We accept that. We embrace that. 
And we want to continue building our relationship with those 
large corporations because it’s the right thing to do for people 
who need their jobs and for people out there that are looking for 
that kind of work. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s good for the economy; 
it’s good for everyone. So we want to be very inclusive of the 
role that the business community plays, and we also want to be 
very respectful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other issue that’s really important is the role of the Crown. 
We think that there is a place for the role of the Crowns, that the 
people of Saskatchewan want to keep the SaskTel. They want to 
keep the SaskPower. They want to make sure that they keep the 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], Mr. Speaker. 
These are really important cornerstones to what we think is the 
basis of a family of Crown corporations, that they have to be 
part of the solution. Mr. Speaker, they have to be part of the 
solution so the Crown corporations do play a pivotal role when 
it comes to the economy and how we position the supply of 
goods and services and basic things like energy to make sure 
that the economy continues moving forward. We need to make 
sure that the Crowns are an important part of that. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Speaker, is the protection of the 
environment. People in the province of Saskatchewan and 
throughout the world, thank goodness, and especially the young 
people, Mr. Speaker — I notice a lot of young people — are 
getting more and more active when it comes to the protection of 
the environment. The young people are going to drive that 
particular change. And any party that doesn’t realize that, very 
quickly in the future is going to realize that the young people 
demand that type of respect for the environment, and they know 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7287 

that it’s important for their family members to work. But they 
also know, they’re smart enough and astute enough to know 
that yes, you can balance the needs of the economy with the 
protection of the environment, that there is ways and means in 
which you can achieve that. 
 
And the young people know that, Mr. Speaker. I find, when we 
attend different rallies and different functions, when it comes to 
the environment that many, many young people are there. And 
they’re demanding that governments, senior governments do 
more to protect our waterways, do more to protect our forests, 
do more to protect our wildlife, do more to protect our 
environmental interests as a province, and certainly as a 
country. And I think the day is coming that the environmental 
issues will be in the forefront, Mr. Speaker, on par with the 
economy. 
 
And right now as you see evidence, federally especially, that 
Prime Minister Harper has thrown the environmental integrity 
of our federal government as something that’s not important, 
and that it’s all hands on getting the economy moving, which is 
important, but at the expense of the environment. The 
environment is not being taken into any account when it comes 
to some of these projects. That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because 
we should have that environmental conscience, but we also 
know that people need to work. People need a job. People need 
to pay their bills. People need to raise their children. 
 
We understand that in the NDP side but, Mr. Speaker, the worry 
we have is the amount of debt and disregard that the 
Saskatchewan Party have for addressing cost-of-living prices, 
and certainly the fact that they haven’t spent money on issues 
that are important to families and what’s important to the 
province overall. We’re telling the people of Saskatchewan that 
the Saskatchewan Party has changed, they have changed for the 
worst. Now we’re seeing evidence that the financing of our 
province is in dire straits, and that something has got to be done 
to address this particular challenge. At the very least let the 
people of Saskatchewan know where we’re at when it comes to 
the financing of our province and of our future. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is really, really important to point out that 
when it comes to the environment, when you talk about the 
balance and the importance of the economy as it relates to the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the Saskatchewan 
Party cut programs, cut funding to climate change, Mr. Speaker. 
It scrapped programs like EnerGuide. Its own technology fund 
doesn’t have a start date, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you talk about the Sask Party, they start talking climate 
change and the challenge to the environment is really a myth 
based on witchcraft reasoning — Mr. Speaker, this is the type 
of language that the conservatives and the Saskatchewan Party 
use. But, Mr. Speaker, we have got to provide leadership as a 
province, because whether we want to admit it or not, 
Saskatchewan has the highest per capita emissions in the 
country. So we need to begin to address what our challenges 
are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the green economy overall is a great 
opportunity. I often speak about this in caucus, that if you look 
at the green technology and the green opportunity and look at 
the renewable resource sector itself, whether it’s solar power, 

wind power, or whatever the opportunity is, Mr. Speaker, this is 
a growing opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. And we 
have led on a number of issues, whether it’s health care or the 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s time that 
Saskatchewan embrace what I think is going to be a great 
opportunity in forging a really balanced economy, and that is to 
take full opportunity attached to the green economy. 
 
And I was privileged, Mr. Speaker, to be able to attend a 
number of hearings throughout the province as a former 
member of the Committee on the Economy, where we travelled 
throughout Saskatchewan and spoke about the opportunity 
attached to the green technology and green energy. And there 
was an incredible amount of energy, incredible ideas out there, 
Mr. Speaker. And we went through several weeks of travelling 
throughout the province, and everywhere we went, the most 
amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the fact of the matter is that 
people wanted to embrace green technology, wanted to build a 
green economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all they have gotten from the Saskatchewan 
Party is program cuts, closed doors. And when you talk about 
the issues of global warming, some of them call it witchcraft 
reasoning. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a crying shame. Because 
we know that the weather is changing throughout the country, 
and as long as they continue sitting on that misinformation, the 
Sask Party does, that they don’t think there’s a problem. And 
the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to realize that, and 
the young people are certainly going to have their say when the 
time comes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I talked about some of the challenges when 
we sit in caucus and deal with issues, and our leader has been 
quite forceful and quite forthright when it comes to talking 
about the issues that matter and to make sure that everybody 
benefits from what Saskatchewan has, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 
seen, what we’ve seen that the Saskatchewan Party has done is 
not come forward. They have not come forward with a detailed 
list of how much debt we have as a province. They have not 
done that. We have asked them through a variety of bills. 
Nothing. It’s very, very quiet. And now we’re not going to have 
a Throne Speech, and now we’re not going to have a budget for 
next year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we think that the 
people of Saskatchewan have a right to know — what are they 
hiding? How bad is our financing, and what plans do they have 
to address those deficits? Because we know there are deficits. 
We have a right to know. We’ve been asking this and, Mr. 
Speaker, all we got from the Saskatchewan Party is a muted 
response. They sit there and hope that the issue goes away. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue holding them to account. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how can . . . when we talk about misplaced 
priorities, how does this affect us? I spoke about the kids in the 
school system that don’t have the proper supports. I spoke about 
the families that are struggling through health care. I spoke 
about some of the crumbling highways. I spoke about some of 
the challenges around housing. I spoke about some of the issues 
that . . . whether it’s the John Black lean program, like the list 
goes on as to what I spoke about that is plaguing the 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 



7288 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

And we know that it’s having a negative effect on them, 
because they have not been forthright when it comes to our 
finances. The people of Saskatchewan, as I’ve reiterated here 
time and time again, have a right to know where our finances 
are. Because whether it’s P3s or whether it’s current debt or 
whether it’s dealing with the errors that they have made to 
things like the John Black lean program, the taxpayer is paying 
for their mistakes. They’re paying for their misplaced priority, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why, one of the reasons why we have 
got to know where we’re at financially. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think that the Saskatchewan Party is serving the people of 
Saskatchewan well if they don’t provide that information in a 
fair and forthright manner, especially before an election is 
called, and now we’re seeing that they’re not going to do that. 
 
Now how does this affect certain areas, Mr. Speaker? How does 
it affect families in my riding? I’ll give you an example. The 
cost of living for every day, a family — throughout all of the 
province, but I’m more acutely aware of the ones in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker — whether you look at the power 
bills, they’re way up. And we know that, because one of the 
things that we have to pay is the Minister for SaskPower, the 
smart meter problem that they had. I don’t know what the final 
cost was for all the bills that the people have to pay now 
because the minister didn’t read a couple of memos that warned 
us about the smart meter fiasco. He didn’t read that memo. It 
mustn’t have crossed his desk. But as the Minister for 
SaskPower, he ought to have known these were issues, and he 
just didn’t pay attention. And that cost the people of 
Saskatchewan money. 
 
And every day as you go pay your power bill, like the rest of us 
do, you can think a portion of that bill is based on the 
mismanagement of the Crown corporation, SaskPower, because 
the minister didn’t pay attention to the memo that warned him 
about the smart meter failures and yet he still plowed ahead. 
And what happens today, Mr. Speaker — I don’t know what the 
final tally was; perhaps my Finance critic would know what the 
final tally is for the smart meter failure — but everyone, 
everyone in the province of Saskatchewan is paying for his 
mistake. 
 
Now we look at some of the property taxes, Mr. Speaker, the 
delivery on energy bills, property taxes. Post-secondary 
students are paying more for the tuition costs as we’ve talked 
about today. So whether it’s your power bill or whether it’s 
your energy bill or your property taxes or your young students 
going to university, all these costs are being paid by one 
individual — the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes the 
taxpayer gets tired of the debt that’s being piled on by this 
particular government. And, Mr. Speaker, we look at the 
failures that they’ve had in many areas, and it’s not getting any 
prettier. 
 
We warn the people of Saskatchewan that we’ve got to have 
accountability from the Sask Party government and that they 
should not go into the election without the people of 
Saskatchewan knowing the true debt that we’re under and some 
of the issues that they’re going to present after the election. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do our darndest as an 
NDP caucus to form the next government and again, Mr. 
Speaker, provide better hope and opportunity than the 
Saskatchewan Party is currently providing the people of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in our particular area, we’ve had the northern 
fire management program. We’ve heard a lot about the 
challenges with the evacuation and fire program, Mr. Speaker. 
It has been really a very trying summer. I’ve had the 
opportunity to travel to a number of communities, as my 
colleague has from Cumberland and many of the other of my 
colleagues. I think my leader went to both of the northern 
constituencies and visited a lot of the communities and families. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was a very trying summer. You have 
smoke around your community on a regular basis and families 
being moved out because of the danger. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
looked . . . At the time, we didn’t want to do any of the political 
work that was necessary. We said, after everything’s settled 
down, we need to begin to see exactly how the Saskatchewan 
Party dropped the ball when it comes to protecting these 
northern communities. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out that firefighting teams in 
northern Saskatchewan were cut by the Saskatchewan Party. 
There was a lot of positions that were cut within the SERM 
[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management] forest 
fire protection branch, Mr. Speaker. There was a tremendous 
amount of qualified people that were let go, and many of those 
people had years and years and tons of experience, Mr. Speaker. 
What happened was the Saskatchewan Party terminated those 
positions. Mr. Speaker, what they’ve also done is they also 
reduced the budget. 
 
I don’t know. Again you look back at this, and they reduced the 
budget from typically what is a $110 million firefighting 
budget. They reduced it to 55 million. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they wanted to again tout the fact . . . or tout their main 
message that the budget is balanced. So where do you cut? You 
cut the forest fire program by $50 million and, all of a sudden, 
you’ve got a balanced budget. That was their reasoning. But we 
all know typically and traditionally that the firefighting budget 
in northern Saskatchewan is going to stay $100-plus million 
each year. Why? Because we have a thing called global 
warming, Mr. Speaker. It is a fact of life, and people in northern 
Saskatchewan realize that. 
 
But they didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t . . . They 
reduced the budget to 55 million. They also fired fire tower 
personnel that were out there actually watching for fires, Mr. 
Speaker. They fired a lot of the firefighting crew, Mr. Speaker, 
which was really unfair. They reduced a lot of equipment and 
authority that many of these fire bases could have had and could 
have really reacted sooner and quicker if they had that authority 
to stop some of these fires from spreading. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were very ill-prepared, very ill-prepared 
for what people in northern Saskatchewan actually knew was 
going to happen last year, and that, because it’s a dry year and 
that the fire season was upon us, and that it was going to be one 
heck of a fire season. And that’s why I made the member 
statement today about incorporating indigenous knowledge as 
we look towards trying to prevent catastrophes of this sort, 
when we look at the forest fire season that impacted northern 
Saskatchewan. 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7289 

So another example, Mr. Speaker, of how the Saskatchewan 
Party is able to find $100 million for a Japanese John Black 
lean exercise, but cuts the firefighting program, cuts the 
personnel, cuts the equipment and the authority lines for the 
northern bases. And cuts and cuts and cuts to a point where 
these guys are trying their very best to deal with the fire 
situation with half the resources that they’re left with, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why we really, really are very supportive 
and very, very respectful and very appreciative of the work that 
many of these forest fire fighting crews have done in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they’re professional enough, many of the people that work 
with the firefighting program in northern Saskatchewan are 
professional enough not to be critical of their own department. 
But they know, they know that the Saskatchewan Party dropped 
the ball when it came to the issue of preparing these 
communities and providing them with the proper resources to 
protect our communities, protect lives, protect property. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, of all the people that lost hundreds of dollars 
if not thousands of dollars relocating their families to the South, 
and those families that lost cabins, Mr. Speaker, that lost cabins 
that they’ve had in their family for years and years, these are the 
people that really paid the price. It was not the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. It was those people in those communities 
that really struggled. And the only people that really stood by 
them were the SERM firefighting crews that had meagre 
resources and yet done a tremendous job. 
 
And what happens at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker? The 
Minister of Finance turns around and blames northern 
Saskatchewan’s forest fighting costs and not his 
mismanagement of our funds, Mr. Speaker. And I said to the 
people in the North, that’s exactly what he’ll do. He’ll come 
along and he’ll blame northern Saskatchewan for the deficit that 
we have, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fallacy, 
because the bottom line for mismanaging our finances rests 
with him and the Saskatchewan Party, not the northern people 
and the forest fire fighting season, because we knew exactly 
what it was going to cost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he still had the audacity of saying, oh no, it 
wasn’t us that were mismanaging the finances; it was the 
northern people that cost us this deficit, so now I’ve got to fix it. 
And that’s the furthest from the truth, Mr. Speaker. The 
northern people, the northern people knew exactly what was 
going to happen. They were apprised of this, Mr. Speaker. And 
what they wanted to do is find some reason to weasel out of the 
fact that they couldn’t manage their way out of a wet paper bag 
when it comes to the finances of this province. So what do they 
do? They blame the northern communities and northern people 
because of the firefighting costs when they knew very well they 
didn’t allocate enough resources to the forest fire fighting 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are actually talking about a number of issues 
around the action that’s necessary for the environment. We 
talked about training people in northern Saskatchewan. People 
in the North were kind of basically smiling, because after all the 
fire season happened and after all the costs that were typically 
part of the firefighting program were backfilled by the 
government . . . and that’s why they claim they went into the 

deficit. And after the fire season, because they have a green-up 
kind of a period where the forest begins to green up, and 
obviously winter going away and spring coming in and more 
warm, moist conditions, and of course the trees begin to green 
up and there’s less and less challenge of firefighting costs once 
the forest’s in its green-up phase. 
 
Well then, Mr. Speaker, what happens after all that crisis, about 
two or three weeks later, they started training northern 
firefighters. After half the North burned down, the 
Saskatchewan Party must have got a memo from someone 
saying, let’s train northern forest fire fighters because they’ll be 
able to fight the fire. But this of course happened several weeks 
after the fire season was basically settled down. And again, I 
can point out to the people in the North who were kind of 
smiling and laughing on that one, because they said, oh my 
goodness, they trained 130 people. They trained 130 people 
after the fire season was over. That’s what you call poor 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of people in the province and 
the people in the North knew that as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again the question that we would ask today 
as a member of the opposition, I would ask this question to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We cannot afford four more years of 
the Sask Party government. We simply cannot afford them 
anymore. And the question we ask is, how can the people trust 
them with health care and seniors’ care when we see example 
after example of people coming to the Assembly telling the 
people of the province and telling the Sask Party the challenge 
we have with health care and, Mr. Speaker, also with the 
financing and also with education. How could we trust them to 
build a future? Because obviously today they’ve run out of 
steam. They’ve run out of ideas, and they ran out of money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why they’ll not go forward in an election with the 
budget because they don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to 
know exactly how bad their budget is. And the Saskatchewan 
Party blew through record revenues in good times. In good 
times, they had record revenue. Money’s gone. Money’s spent. 
Where did it go, Mr. Speaker? That’s the question we have on 
this side of the Assembly. 
 
And the other question we have is, how much more have they 
put us in debt to P3 and borrowing that the people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know? Because the taxpayers are 
paying that, Mr. Speaker, and they continue paying that to 
utilities, to university charges, through higher costs of food and 
higher costs of fuel, and the list goes on and on and on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the Saskatchewan Party 
have had their fun in the sun. I think it’s time that the people of 
Saskatchewan send them a message that we’re tired of your 
arrogance. We’re tired of your mismanagement. We’re tired of 
the fact that you have placed our province in a precarious 
situation, not only when it comes to the economy but of the 
future costs of borrowing through things like P3s. And we’re 
just basically tired of the fact that the Saskatchewan Party have 
lost their way. They’re a tired, old government that’s seen its 
best days because of the record revenue left behind for them by 
the NDP and the people of Saskatchewan. Now that the 
money’s gone, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
floundering. They don’t know what to do. 



7290 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

But I know one thing that they will not do is they’ll not come 
forward before the next election with a budget because they 
don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know just how bad 
the finances are of our province. They’d much rather go into an 
election without the people knowing that because the people of 
Saskatchewan would quickly find out that they have 
mismanaged our economy, mismanaged our finances, and really 
squandered the opportunity for growth that we had as a 
province. 
 
It’s something that the NDP would not have done, Mr. Speaker. 
We have continued capitalizing and building on people like 
Romanow and Calvert’s legacy. That would have been the 
proper thing to do, Mr. Speaker. Instead all we’ve seen is 
misplaced spending, whether it’s the John Black lean program 
or the P3 model or just spending on things like limousine 
services and travel scouts. Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the 
people of Saskatchewan voted for, and I think you’re going to 
find out fairly quickly that they’re going to send the 
Saskatchewan Party a message. Because things have changed. 
They have changed for the worse, and the people of 
Saskatchewan that are paying attention to this know this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why the NDP have a resurgence of ideas. They have 
a lot of confidence and they continue building an alternative to 
that government, Mr. Speaker, because we have a great plan 
that’s inclusive of everyone and we’re going to deal with issues 
that matter to families. That’s our directive from our leader, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will continue to build on that vision that he’s 
had. And this way, Mr. Speaker, we believe if they 
acknowledge the people of Saskatchewan, they acknowledge 
their challenges, and that we also share with them our vision as 
a party, our vision as a party and the importance of really 
dealing with what matters to people, Mr. Speaker. We think that 
will pay off. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also know that the people of 
Saskatchewan are very stoic and strong people. They will also 
share with us the challenges that we have to meet when we 
become government, because we obviously will be able to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan what the Saskatchewan Party’s 
been hiding all these years. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that as you 
acknowledge people and you share with them your vision but 
you also challenge them to share the burden of making 
Saskatchewan a better place — because we all have to do our 
part, Mr. Speaker — I think that leaves them with hope. That’s 
exactly what our leader speaks about, is recognizing 
Saskatchewan’s people’s challenges, being forthright, and 
serving as public servants should, serving to the best of your 
ability to be inclusive of everyone dealing with what matters to 
people, Mr. Speaker. And that, I think, in the long run will 
provide them with hope, and that’s exactly what the NDP wish 
to do. 
 
It is a complex business. It is a strategic process that we have to 
undertake. But all the issues that I spoke about — whether it’s 
inclusiveness of students, making sure that we deal with the 
environment as well as the economy, making sure that we deal 
with the debt that’s being left behind, and making sure that we 
protect our Crowns, build on health care — these are all issues 

that the NDP and our leader talk about in caucus on a regular 
basis. Because he constantly reminds us what’s important to 
Saskatchewan is what we want to represent and what we want 
to build upon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that we brought forward, 
but the bottom line is this. As I wrap up my comments, the 
bottom line is this: there’s no Speech from the Throne this fall 
because the Saskatchewan Party government does not want to 
go into the next election with the budget that is before them, 
because they’re ashamed of their mismanagement and they have 
squandered the opportunity that they’ve had for the last eight 
years of record revenue. They have squandered the growth 
opportunity for Saskatchewan, and they have compromised the 
taxpayers of this province for the next 20 or 30 years based on 
the debt they’ve piled on and their P3 rent-a-school schemes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
People of Saskatchewan are bright. They know what’s going 
on. They’ve seen this act before, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 
going to start sending the Saskatchewan Party a message that 
enough is enough. You’ve mismanaged this province long 
enough. We don’t want no more four years of the Saskatchewan 
Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s time for a renewed, reinvigorated, and visionary NDP 
government with a new leader, a new agenda, a new plan that 
respects people, that’s inclusive of everyone. And, Mr. Speaker, 
above all else, Mr. Speaker, is to share the opportunity all 
throughout the land, not special friends or insiders that the 
Saskatchewan Party currently catered to, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
exactly what they’re doing today. And, Mr. Speaker, I tell them, 
shame on them, because the bottom line, the bottom line is 
you’ve squandered an opportunity. 
 
I’ve stood up in this Assembly for a number of years that 
they’ve been in power, eight years. And every single time we 
had the opportunity to tell them, don’t mess up the economy, an 
opportunity that was handed to you, Mr. Speaker, what do they 
do? They mess up and squander the opportunity handed to 
them, handed to them by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve squandered that. 
 
We know that on this side of the Assembly. We see evidence of 
that every day through some of the examples that I brought up, 
Mr. Speaker. And I say, shame on them. The people of 
Saskatchewan and the taxpayers know very well that whether 
it’s debt, it’s considered deferred taxation. And whether it’s a 
P3 rent-a-school model, that’s also deferred taxation. Debt is 
debt is debt. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I don’t know what more we can say to the Saskatchewan Party, 
but I’ll say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance 
is going to have a difficult time explaining to organizations like 
the chamber of commerce, organizations like the small business 
associations, of the people that are aware what’s going on, the 
think tanks that are out there. He’s going to have to explain how 
they’ve squandered the opportunity that was presented to them 
eight years ago. And how, after eight years of record revenues, 
we have more debt piling on, more debt coming in the future 
through P3s, and no rainy day fund. And oil at where it is, Mr. 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7291 

Speaker. I can tell you that this is not the leadership that 
Saskatchewan people wanted. 
 
And I think they’re going to send the Saskatchewan Party a 
message next election that we had enough of that silliness. 
We’re going to go back to the NDP where we can provide a 
visionary plan, a plan that deals with what matters to people, a 
plan that balances many people’s interests, a plan that builds on 
our strengths, Mr. Speaker, and a plan that we’re going to have 
to share. The challenges of some of the decisions made by the 
Sask Party, everything from John Black’s expensive lean 
project and hiring senseis at $6,500 a month to tell us how to 
speak Japanese. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have misplaced priorities. They have really 
ignored a lot of issues that were of grave concern. And today 
now we see that the people of Saskatchewan are again ignored, 
when we don’t have a Speech from the Throne to see where the 
Saskatchewan Party is going. We don’t have a budget for next 
year, Mr. Speaker, because they want to hide what they’ve 
done. And the people of Saskatchewan ought to know that the 
Sask Party and their leader have changed dramatically for the 
bad. And we can’t have four more years of Sask Party rule, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On that note, the NDP are ready. We are going to work very 
hard in our caucus and in our leader. We have had a lot of 
discussion on what a smart growth strategy would look like, on 
how we would develop an environmental agenda to make sure 
young people are engaged, of how we would use best practices 
from across the country, Mr. Speaker, from across the country 
to really build a strong Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, of how we 
would try and get out of the bad deals that the Saskatchewan 
Party has mortgaged our future on, such as P3s. The list goes on 
as to the opportunities that we think we have as a governing 
party to really bring change and effective change, Mr. Speaker, 
and to point out that the conservatives do not have a monopoly 
on how to build a good economy because they never have 
developed a good economy. 
 
In the history of Saskatchewan conservatives, Mr. Speaker, 
every good economy in the province of Saskatchewan 
historically was developed with the people by an NDP 
government. So we have our history. We have our background 
and we have the confidence to move forward to again build the 
economy that we think needs to be built, and that is to be very 
respectful of things like the environment, inclusiveness, and 
really engaging the educational challenge that we have to build 
a labour force, and, Mr. Speaker, protecting the Crowns, having 
a good health care system. These are all components of what we 
think Saskatchewan should look like in the year 2016 and 
beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of issues that I want to speak of, and I 
hope to do that over the next five weeks. But I’ll finish with 
this, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party are hiding from 
their debt, Mr. Speaker. They’re hiding from their 
mismanagement. They’re hiding from what their agenda is on 
the Crowns. They’re hiding from their failure in health care. 
They’re hiding for their failure for not providing supports at the 
right critical time. They’re hiding from their failures of having 
our universities and municipalities laden with debt. We all 
know that the property tax in these cities are going to go up and 

small communities are going to go up. 
 
They’re hiding from the fact that they have not helped the 
communities resolve basic issues such as water and sewer 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. They’re hiding from the fact that 
they have placed many northern communities at risk because 
they’ve cut programs within the forest fire fighting costs 
because they wanted to appear to balance the budget. But they 
borrowed 700 million but said it was okay because it’s 
operational debt, not debt in general. We couldn’t figure out 
what the minister meant by that. Debt, to us, is debt. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan cannot afford four 
more years of the Saskatchewan Party government. They have 
changed. They have mismanaged and squandered the 
opportunity. It’s time for a fresh new premier and an 
invigorated team, Mr. Speaker, that will respect what the people 
of Saskatchewan have to say, and we’ll deal with issues that 
matter. And, Mr. Speaker, we will have a smart growth strategy 
for Saskatchewan that’s inclusive of everyone. 
 
On that note, Mr. Speaker, I have said what I wanted to say on 
this particular motion. I think it’s a shame that we’re not having 
a Speech from the Throne. But as I said at the outset, we want 
to make sure that people of Saskatchewan know exactly what’s 
plaguing the finances of our province, compliments of the Sask 
Party government. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the House is the motion 
moved by the Government House Leader: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, the subsequent sitting days of the fourth session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature shall be in accordance with the 
conditions set out by this order as follows: 

 
(1) That the Assembly will sit from Wednesday, October 
14th, 2015 (sessional day no. 67) for 24 sitting days, 
concluding at the time of the daily adjournment on 
Thursday, November 26th, 2015 (sessional day no. 90); 
 
(2) That the rules that govern the conduct of business 
within the parliamentary calendar shall not apply, in 
accordance with rule 5, sittings outside calendar periods; 
 
(3) That the Clerk of the Assembly shall publish a 
schedule that shows the days on which the Assembly 
shall meet, in accordance with this order; and further 

 
That when this Assembly adjourns on November 26th, 
2015 (sessional day no. 90), it shall stand adjourned to the 
date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven days clear notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



7292 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 
debate and have a discussion, a further discussion on a new bill 
that’s been proposed, Bill 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing 
Act. 
 
I guess I’d like to start out with just some opening comments 
and talk about health care. And I think health care is pretty 
important to many individuals, families, our communities. It is 
crucial that you have good health coverage, and people in this 
province expect that from a government. 
 
So when I look at this, I was thinking a little bit about this and 
my grandfather and just the days as a . . . And I look at him as a 
veteran, a very proud man — and I’ve said that before in this 
House — very proud Métis man who wanted to make sure his 
family had the best quality of life. And I think about the 
homestead, the farm where we spent many, many, many days, 
summers with the family. And I think about health care in 
general and people in those days, back in the day, whether it’s 
the ’40s, the ’50s, and the struggles that farm families had back 
then, people who truly lived off the land. And I say lived off the 
land because it was survival for them, whether you had a small 
homestead or maybe you had a bigger . . . maybe you were a 
number of families together farming. But at the end of the day, 
health care was crucial. And back then, families struggled to 
make sure that there was health care provided. 
 
And you know, you talk about stories; you hear some of, I 
guess, our seniors. You can talk about those back in the day 
with the struggles, and they’d talk about health care and the 
struggles that went on. Some of the stories are pretty sad, where 
if they didn’t have the resources or the ways and the means to 
take a loved one to see a doctor, or if it was a 
pay-for-health-care at that time, to pay for that. So you hear 
different stories of many pioneers talk about the issues that 
faced them. 
 
And I guess over time people have come to a . . . even myself. 
And I’m going to go back and forth a little because I think it’s 
important to talk about the quality of health care that we as 
Canadian citizens want to have, we as Canadian citizens want 
our children, our grandchildren to have, our parents to have. 
And time and time again we’ve seen some challenges in this 
province. And you know, I’m going to get into that a little bit 
here and there, but I know for myself, I want to go to a hospital, 

and we talk about today we’ve seen our leader talk about wait 
times and, you know, families that struggle with that. 
 
And we see the challenges, when we have a government who 
had such opportunity to fix the health care system. And whether 
that was back in the day, the vision of the people of our 
province was to come forward to make sure everyone had 
access to health care, and I guess you could say affordable 
health care, you know, health care in general so that your loved 
one was taken care of. And we’ve watched how that has 
evolved in Saskatchewan. We know the story. People have 
come to expect a good quality of health care. 
 
And there are great, I think about great opportunities for our 
young people too, and I talk about whether they’re training to 
be nurses, doctors, to stay in our province. People want that. So 
we want our community members to stay in the province 
whether you’re in the rural, the urban, the North. We want 
people to have opportunity to training. So we want to make sure 
that there’s nurses, that there’s doctors, that there’s caregivers 
to provide the health care that we’ve come to expect or to make 
sure that we want our loved ones to be able to be taken care of 
in a certain way. 
 
And I think about some of the challenge that face some people, 
and I’m going to get into MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] 
and talk about where they’re going with that and the plan. And 
we’ll talk about Alberta, and where they’re going, and we’ll 
give some examples of that. We are seeing some of the data 
information that we’re being provided. There’s questions 
because yes, we want to make sure health care is provided, and 
I say that in the sense of you want to make sure that it’s 
covered. And when I say covered in the sense of, you go to a 
hospital, you want to make sure your loved one . . . 
 
And I think about my grandkids. You know, if one of them 
should be sick, you know, gets sick, and you go to see a doctor, 
you want to make sure that the health care is the best that you 
can provide for that grandchild or your child or your parents or 
caregiver. You go to a health facility, you want the best. You go 
see a doctor. You want to make sure that Saskatchewan people 
. . . And I think it’s in Canada, we’ve seen where it came from 
and how it evolved and the coverage has . . . And having said 
that, Mr. Speaker, thinking about the quality health care that 
people talk about and want to make sure they have, we’ve come 
to a certain standard. We want it in a timely manner. We want 
our loved ones to be taken care of. 
 
And I start thinking about the MRIs. And you know, they 
introduced this bill 179. They brought it in, and they’re talking 
about now going ahead. And we’ll go through the process of the 
minister introducing the bill, MRIs. It’ll be a facility in the 
province that they’re wanting to bring in. There’ll be a licensing 
fee and a way in. They talked about, if you look at the bill, they 
talk about regulations and the areas that they’re going to make 
sure that . . . And I guess there is a lot of questions, and people 
will have questions about where they’re going with this, with an 
MRI, and have, you know, somebody licensed, not a health care 
facility. It’s going to be a private I guess facility, organization, 
or a business that’s operating MRIs in our province. 
 
And we look at Alberta and there’s an example, Alberta. What 
went on in Alberta? You know, you would think, okay, well if 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7293 

that’s private, you can pay. You get in a line and you go and 
have your MRI; this will help you get a surgery or get medical 
attention that you need. And some of the data and information 
that’s being provided is that’s not what’s happened. It has not 
improved, people that get into . . . So when we look at that, you 
know, there’s different ways to look at it. Some will question 
that. Some will say maybe it is better over there. You know, I 
have no proof of that. I can just go by what I hear, what people 
talk about. 
 
But when I think about our province and I think about 
Saskatchewan going in this direction, and I think about, you 
know, you’re going to pay for your MRI, we look about the 
most vulnerable. And if somebody can pay to have an MRI and 
they can get ahead of the line, get to the doctor sooner, let’s just 
give an example of a list of, you may have a doctor or a surgeon 
who has 100 patients waiting for an MRI. And if somebody was 
to get an MRI, would this mean that you pay and you, whether 
it was Saskatchewan or you go somewhere and you pay for it 
and you get an MRI, would this mean that . . . you know, and 
that’s the questions people are going to ask.  
 
Will an individual who has an MRI, if the surgeon receives that 
MRI and he says, well this patient’s got their MRI. These 100 
don’t. We’re still waiting for whatever reason. They haven’t 
come forward. Will they jump ahead of those individuals? And 
those are tough questions people want to ask. And I know you 
have the most vulnerable that maybe couldn’t afford to pay for 
that, you know. And it’s fair . . . I think about my own 
grandchildren; maybe some of my kids could afford it. Some 
can’t. Does that mean that they would jump ahead? And those 
are questions that people would ask. And I would hope not . . . 
that you know, there is a system in place that would take care. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And I have not heard from government yet, and maybe we will, 
that there is ways that they’re going to undertake to ensure that 
that will never happen in our province, that somebody who can 
pay will go ahead of somebody — and that is the question — of 
somebody who is more vulnerable. We know that there are 
some out there, and that’s fine. But I guess what the concern is, 
Mr. Speaker, is for the most vulnerable. We talk about that, the 
most vulnerable that need their surgeries, need an MRI. And I 
think about that, and I’ve talked about there might be, you 
know, there may be different circumstances. And then when I 
think about why has the government brought this forward? Who 
do they consult? I don’t know. And those are questions that I 
think the public wants to know, and I think we have a right to 
ask these questions, and we have. We’d better make sure that 
we’re asking those questions as an opposition. 
 
But I think further the government should be asking . . . And I 
don’t know, maybe the minister will share with time or we’ll 
find out. Who did they consult? Who came to them with the 
idea saying this will be a better way of doing MRIs in the 
province of Saskatchewan? And I don’t know what information 
they’re providing to the government to say we would like to go 
ahead. And you know, I’m not sure that this is the way to go. 
I’m not saying that . . . I don’t have all the answers. But there’s 
a lot of questions, and I know people will have questions. And 
they’ll want to make sure, they’ll want to make sure that their 
health care of their family and their loved ones . . . And if they 

can afford to pay for it, to get in that lineup of the MRI to have 
it first. They want to make sure that they’re taken care of. 
 
And I think about talking a little bit about individuals and those 
that, you know, of the most vulnerable. And I talk about that, 
that they’re not left behind. Who is left behind? And you hope 
that they’re not left behind, if they can’t afford, you know, to 
pay for this, that they’re not left behind. And those are some of 
the challenges, Mr. Speaker, that I think we need to ask 
ourselves as a province. We don’t want to leave anyone behind. 
 
We’ve seen how this government likes to leave people behind 
when they’ve had record revenue. For year after year this 
government has had record revenue. The good people of our 
province have provided this government with a record revenue 
for different ways, whether it’s through taxes, whether . . . And 
my colleague talked about it earlier. There’s many ways. 
 
This government has taken the record revenue, and we have 
seen what they’ve done with it, and how they’ve wasted, 
whether it’s the lean . . . We see that, and we wonder about it. 
Well if you could spend money there. Smart meters. You know 
we see the way the government’s going with wasting the dollars 
and tax dollars of hard-working men and women and 
community members of our good province. We’ve seen how 
this government has wasted so much. And they can say, well it 
was our ideas. It was their pet projects they wanted to go ahead 
with it. But at the end of the day, it is the people of this 
province that suffer and pay the price. 
 
And I mean government, when it’s election time, may pay the 
price. And we may have individuals who will not support them 
anymore and send them a message. Let’s hope that happens. 
My colleague has talked about that. You know, he gave some 
good insight into, I guess, election coming up and the way 
government is handling . . . And he talked about having, you 
know, a budget, and that’s important with dollars. Government 
has the dollars, and the government of the day decides where 
those dollars go. Whether we’re going to have . . . 
 
When I think about this, Mr. Speaker, it’s like, when I think 
about the dollars that a government is allocated to utilize, and if 
other provinces have done MRIs, private ones, and it’s not 
taking care of the wait times and it hasn’t dealt with that, or 
they’re waiting longer for MRIs, if that’s happening, why do we 
go back? And any other province that you want to look at, and 
if it’s not working, why would you want to go there? 
 
And if it’s not making it easier and the wait times for MRIs are 
not going to make it where individuals get their MRI and they 
get their surgery or whatever requirements of treatment that 
they need from the physician, a surgeon, whoever — when I 
look at that, governments had the money. Why don’t they take 
our public system that we have in our province and . . . You 
know, there are struggles. We’re hearing that every day. 
Government decides how budgets are going to be, and the 
health regions carry on the health. And we’ve heard, even today 
in question period, we’ve heard many concerns from seniors, 
from individuals, from families who have suffered, who have 
suffered because of the lack . . . and the waiting time. And you 
know, our heart goes out to those individuals and anyone who 
suffers. When you go to a health care, you’re expecting a 
certain care and attention in a timely manner, and if that doesn’t 



7294 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

happen, it’s sad. And you think of the families, and my heart 
goes out to them. 
 
But having said that, this government has had such an 
opportunity to provide the best health care in the province when 
we’ve had a record revenue year after year since they’ve been 
in power. You know, we talk about, and my colleagues talked 
about, the previous government getting things ready — the 
NDP, prior to the government coming in in 2007. You know, 
they had it handed to them pretty good. And I know they’ll say, 
oh no, that’s not so, and that’s fine. The people of our province 
when you talk to them, they know it. You can’t. It’s not going 
to be smoke and mirrors, and you’re not going to . . . People 
don’t buy it. They understand it and they know the tough work 
that was done. And the good people of our province did the 
hard work to get things where they are today. 
 
But you know, I want to go back to talking about the priorities. 
And if the government wanted to make it a priority to have 
MRIs and having the wait times on MRIs so that you, 
Saskatchewan residents, can get in and have an MRI, honestly I 
believe the government, and the government, the Sask Party 
government of the day, could fix that. They could address that. 
We’ve seen what they’ve done with 40 million, with the lean, 
the smart meters. The list goes on of stuff that they have spent 
on their pet projects. We see that time and time again. Having 
said that, utilize, make a system better. So if it means we’re 
going to train more, do we have to have more MRIs, you know, 
what would it take? How come they’re not talking to 
individuals or finding out? And has the government looked into 
that? Like I don’t know because they don’t share a lot with us. 
Everything’s so secretive. But I’m hoping that they did a lot of 
consulting with individuals, with doctors and whoever. And I’m 
hoping, and that’s all I can say. I’m hoping they’ve done their 
due diligence, which we’re all supposed to be doing in this 
House. And that’s why we represent the people of this good 
province. And it is an honour to serve the people of this 
province. 
 
So when I think about that and I think about individuals and 
whether, you know, you would have to make that tough 
decision on whether you can afford to pay for a private MRI, or 
should we all have access to MRIs in a timely manner, is that 
the government . . . It isn’t because the government hasn’t had 
the resources. Let’s be very clear. Let’s make no mistake about 
that. It isn’t because the government did not have the resources. 
Our province did well. They had record revenue year after year. 
Did they? Well, you know what? They have again . . . And I say 
this because it’s their priorities, their priorities. 
 
Whether I look in the rural, the urban, the North, we talked 
about it today. Education is another area where this government 
has had record . . . When you look at the government previous 
and the challenges that they had, to clean up, a mess to clean 
up, now here’s a government who has such opportunity to help 
the people of our province, to make sure things are right, to 
make sure that individuals have the best health care, have the 
best quality of life. That’s what people want from this province, 
whether it’s seniors . . . And we’ve seen the record, and we’ve 
seen the many families coming to this Legislative Assembly so 
hurt and so unhappy and dissatisfied with the way their loved 
one was being taken care of by this government and the way 
this government is doing it. And it’s wrong. It is wrong when 

you have so much opportunity to see individuals, families, 
suffer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, when you think about the quality of 
life that our seniors should have, that our grandchildren should 
have, the next future . . . And we talk about our future. And I 
hear many people when they’re campaigning talk about the 
future, the future generation. But once they get in again, if they 
are so lucky to win, then I see . . . And exactly this government, 
it had such opportunities that it could have fixed. 
 
And if MRIs are a problem, again I go back to this. Why aren’t 
they taking the opportunity to correct it with the resources that 
they have had if they really wanted to correct it? And I don’t 
know who they consulted or who came forward. And I said this 
earlier, Mr. Speaker: who spoke to them about why we want 
private MRIs versus the public? And if it is because we need to 
train more staff, then train the staff. Why can’t we provide that 
in our province to make sure? Like, why does it have to be a 
private or . . . Let’s fix it. If it’s a problem, if the government’s 
saying . . . and that’s why I’m assuming they’re doing this, 
because they’re saying it’s a problem. 
 
If they know it’s a problem, why didn’t they fix it when they 
had all the money? Now they don’t have as much money, 
they’re claiming. And we see all of that. And my colleague, the 
member from Athabasca, you know, said some facts that I think 
the public needs to know about. 
 
And I think the public is starting to ask questions. And you 
could say what . . . You know, individuals can say, well I don’t 
think the public is really paying much attention. They are. Mr. 
Speaker, the public is paying attention and they want some 
answers. 
 
Now I don’t know if they consulted with the . . . When you look 
at our public health care system, we have a union. Have they 
talked with the unions? Do the unions support this? Do the 
health care workers, they support it? Have they consulted with 
them? Do they think it’s good? Who have they talked to? Who 
have they consulted with? That would be interesting and I 
would like to . . . And hopefully we’ll get that information at 
some point because it’s, like I say, it’s trouble to get the 
information. We’ve seen that today. Some of the documents and 
reports, you know, in a timely manner so the public and for all 
of us as members of the Legislative Assembly can deal with and 
figure out, is this the best thing for Saskatchewan people? 
 
So when I think about that and the challenge that many . . . I 
guess if you look at a family that’s suffering an illness, and 
there are many of them, and, you know — it’s for whatever 
reason — want the best care. And they should get the best care 
in the province of Saskatchewan with the resources and the 
opportunity we have. And many of them I think are starting to 
see that there’s problems. 
 
When I go visit loved ones or I visit people in the health care 
system, whether they’re in the hospitals . . . And the staff that 
are in there, the front-line staff are doing a great job. They’re 
doing all they can. They’re trying to provide the best care they 
can for our loved ones. And I thank them for that. They’re 
doing their best. They’re overworked. There are not enough 
staff. We see the cuts. And why is that, when we have a 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7295 

province that’s doing so well? 
 
And this government’s solution is get the lean in there. Well 
I’ve heard many health care people talk to me and tell me about 
the lean and what it’s not done. So when we think about the 
challenge that many people face, who do they go to? You have 
a government who’s supposed to provide all these. 
 
We pay our taxes and they do. Many people, they work hard. 
Some people are working two and three jobs to make ends 
meet. They’re struggling to pay their rent, to provide groceries, 
provide prescriptions, the drugs, the medicines that they need to 
take care of themselves. 
 
Now when we think about that, and here’s a government that’s, 
like I’ve said, has had such an opportunity. If they really were 
serious about fixing the problems, they could have. And it’s 
their priorities, but they have other priorities. It’s not the same 
priorities that I would have, and I don’t think it’s the same 
priorities that they would have with many people in the 
province. They may think so. That’s fine. They’re the 
government of the day. 
 
The people of our province will elect a government of the day 
to take care of the business, to run the affairs of our province, to 
make sure we provide the services that Saskatchewan people 
come to expect, and good services. And we do, we have some 
great workers. We have people who work for our ministries 
who do a great job. They’re endless. 
 
But when I go back to MRIs, and I think about this and all the 
health care people that are out there doing what they can try to 
do, and I don’t know if the minister or the ministry did their 
homework to make sure . . . And I’ve said this: why? Why? I’m 
assuming and I’m hoping that they would do this, they would 
do their due diligence to find out. Why always do something 
after other provinces have done it? And if it doesn’t work, then 
why does Saskatchewan seem to follow after the fact? 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I think about the P3s. Now they want to go. Every other 
province is bailing out of them. Auditors from other provinces 
are saying this is the wrong way. It’s costing, it’s going to cost 
more to the taxpayers, and then we see this government go 
ahead with it. Just fire away. It doesn’t matter. It’s something 
that they want to do, so they’re going do it. 
 
So we see that. Saskatchewan and the so-called province that 
people in this province have come to love. Many of us say we 
love our province. We love Saskatchewan. We’re very proud. 
We’re proud of what our province has to offer people. But 
having said that, and I say this, I think, pay attention to the 
public. When people start asking some tough questions, they 
want some answers by the government, and I mean they want 
answers. They want to contact their MLAs. They want to talk to 
government. They want to know that their loved ones and their 
family are being taken care of. 
 
And the dollars, the hard-earned dollars that they earn. Many, 
like I’ve said, some of them work two jobs, three jobs to make 
ends meet, to pay the rent. I know many of those individuals 
who are very proud, who work hard, but they want their dollars 

to be taken care of when the government has them. And they 
hear about the waste. And I mean, my colleague went through a 
list today of the waste and priorities that this government wants 
to go ahead with and push ahead with when it doesn’t . . . 
 
And you wonder why and, honestly, you wonder why. What’s 
driving them to do these things, these pet projects, and what’s 
going to make it a quality of life? It doesn’t make our quality of 
life any better. But they push ahead with it. They push ahead 
with it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s the challenges. And they’re going 
to do some door knocking, and they’re going to hear from the 
public. And you know, you hear people talking out there, and 
many people will tell me this — and they have — when I’m 
talking to them. They supported this government. They 
supported the Sask Party. They said, you know, I did for two 
terms, but I’m really starting to question. When I have people 
tell me that, they should pay attention. 
 
And I want to make sure that we ask the questions when we talk 
about health care. And there’s many areas of the health care. 
It’s not just MRIs that we want to look at. They’re going to 
focus on the MRIs. And there must be a reason why, and I don’t 
know. They’re not going to share it with us, but they’ll do the 
reasons. And I’ve asked this: who did they consult with? Who 
exactly is asking for MRIs to come into the province? And what 
information did they share? 
 
And maybe there is information, reports, or data that says it is 
better to go this way. I’m not sure that that is so. I haven’t seen 
anything. And again, I don’t know that government is so willing 
to share everything. They share when they want in a timely 
manner when you ask, even when you ask for information that 
you need to make an informed decision. And taxpayers want to 
make an informed decision. 
 
And we talked, my colleague talked about the budget, that 
we’re going to the polls. We’re going into a provincial election. 
After this federal election on the 19th, we’ll be getting ready to 
go into a provincial election come April the 4th. But people 
aren’t going to really get to see the finances. And I look at that, 
you know, and I think about that. My colleague, the member 
from Athabasca, talked about that. And he said about the true 
picture of the finances, the public, will they get it? And where 
are we at? Well the people aren’t going to know until after the 
election. 
 
So having said that, take some of those dollars, the 40 million 
for lean, you know, the smart meters. Take some of those 
dollars maybe, and you could have utilized some of those 
dollars to make sure that we have more staffing to do MRIs in 
our health facilities; to make sure that, in the House, it’s a 
system that’s working. And if there are areas where we can 
improve education, let’s sit down as Saskatchewan people and 
let’s fix it. 
 
We know we can fix it when we work together. Saskatchewan 
people are very proud. We have the resources. Well we had the 
resources. There isn’t much left. You know, when you go and 
you look at what’s left . . . And I know my colleague talked 
about the debt, and you see a government who, to balance its 
budget it cuts, you know, the firefighting services. It cuts, and 



7296 Saskatchewan Hansard October 13, 2015 

everywhere that it wants to cut, it cuts. And it’s scary, it’s scary 
to see where this government will go to balance its budget. And 
it’s many people that have suffered from the cuts that this 
government has come out with, and we wonder why. Like the 
rainy day fund, where has all the money gone? People are 
asking that. 
 
Like we’re supposed to have so much opportunity, you know. 
We’re supposed to have so much opportunity in our province. 
And at the end of the day, you know, they can heckle all they 
want, Mr. Speaker, and say what they want, but the people will 
ask those questions, come a time. We’ve said that. We’ve sat in 
this House. I’ve been here awhile and people will start asking, 
well where exactly? 
 
It’s their priorities as a government. You have won that. The 
people have entrusted you with an opportunity. They’ll expect 
you to take care of that, and they will, they will do their 
evaluation on this government. And I don’t know, you know, 
they can mock all they want. They can do what they want, but 
at the end of the day the people of our province will decide. 
Come election time they’ll send the message. And when you’re 
not listening to the people anymore, when you’re not taking 
care of the business that needs to be taken care of and their 
priorities and what matters to working men and women and 
people in this province, you’ll get a message. You’ll pay a 
price. You will pay a price for that. 
 
But having said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, this 
government, it’s an old government. We know that. They’ve 
got their little area they want to go look at, where looking after 
. . . Oh well I guess they have their friends, and there’s certainly 
a small group of individuals that get taken care of, but the rest 
of us in this province will struggle. We’ll continue to struggle. 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the good people of this 
province, I know when they’ve had enough, when they’ve had 
enough they’ll send the message. And maybe there won’t be as 
many members on that side of the House. And all the laughing 
and the mocking they’ve done, there’s nine members on this 
side of the House as opposition trying to do the business we’ve 
been asked to do, they may get a message. And if I was them, I 
would pay attention to it, but whatever. 
 
Having said that, I want to go back to the MRIs and how 
important, you know, that it is to have that service should you 
need that service, should you need that service to be provided in 
a public facility that you go . . . And no one’s put ahead of 
anyone else and those most vulnerable that can’t afford to pay 
are not disadvantaged or lesser or less opportunity.  
 
And I’m worried about that. I know people wonder about that. 
What will happen? We see at the government’s privatization 
where they’re going. They do it very quietly, and some people 
don’t even realize it’s going on. Some are, people are talking 
and my colleague talked about that. People are paying attention. 
They’re watching what’s going on and that’s the concern that 
many residents have. And I hope that they come forward come 
election time to say that. Well the government denies that it’s 
not willing to privatize, and we see where they’ve sold off 
things. And my colleague talked about that, things that were 
sold off, that this government is selling off and looking at 
selling off. Who knows where it’s going to go? But we’re sure 
worried. And I know a lot of the unions have expressed their 

concern about privatization. We look at P.A. and we look at the 
laundry services. We look at the corrections facility. 
 
So that privatization, anytime you say that, government, this is 
good for you, people are a little concerned, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t exactly trust the way it’s put to them. And they have good 
reason to be worried, and I guess wonder what the 
government’s up to. And they have to ask those tough 
questions, whether it’s our families, whether it’s the working 
men and women, our seniors. We have seen how many in our 
province have been treated. 
 
So if this government’s going to focus on a certain area and 
privatizing, and if that’s their agenda why they want to go to the 
MRIs . . . And I talked about the different areas that this 
government has quietly, quietly are selling off, and we’ll see 
where they’ll go. And I hope the good people, and I know the 
people of our province, the good people of our province will 
know what these guys are up to. They’re not going to pull the 
wool over their eyes. You can only do it so long. 
 
You’ve been entrusted with an opportunity, and I mean this. 
The people have entrusted you and they’ve asked you, please 
take care of the business. Make sure we have opportunities to 
do MRIs. Make sure that our loved ones are, when they go to 
emergency, that they have the care that they’re supposed to be 
provided. Make sure that our loved ones in our long-term care, 
that it’s being provided. 
 
Make sure that we can afford to live and pay our bills, utility 
bills. You look at the cost of utility bills. You look at the 
different areas where government . . . You know, under the 
previous, it was affordable. Our province provided bundles and 
the cheapest bundles of utilities in the province. And that was 
amazing to hear people talk about that. Now we see, I know 
back home even our electrical bill, it’s unreal how high it goes 
up, up, up every time. Who pays for it, for the mistakes they . . . 
And I go think about the smart meters, and the mistakes that go 
on. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, this bill bring forward, 
government at the end of the day will go ahead. They have their 
majority. They’ll do what they want. But I hope the good 
people of our province look at this. And there are questions that 
people want to ask. And I know my colleagues will continue to 
ask some questions, and we’re going to debate this bill. It’s not 
done. It’s not going anywhere. But at the end of the day we’ll 
take an opportunity. We’ll ask the right questions, well 
hopefully the due diligence that the government has done. 
Hopefully they’ve done that, that they’ve consulted with 
everyone they’re supposed to. I don’t know who they would 
have consulted with, and maybe the minister will share that and 
maybe they won’t. Government shares what they want. 
Sometimes you have some of those members on the other side 
who do a great job, and I give them credit. They share that 
information as the minister with the ministry, and I say, thank 
you. 
 
But it’s not always that way. It’s not always that way. 
Sometimes it’s a little tougher to get the information when 
you’re asking for it, not just for us, for the public. We as an 
opposition have a job to do. It’s to hold the government to 
account, and we try to do that. And I think today in question 



October 13, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7297 

period . . . And my colleague has talked about it. We will 
continue to do that, ask some of those tough questions. 
 
But at the end of the day, I’m just about winding up to end of 
the day here and quit, you know. But having said that, the 
government is going to be asked the tough questions. Are they 
going to go ahead with this? Are they going to make sure that 
the public . . . Because the public’s going to have some, has 
concerns about the way they’re bringing this in, Mr. Speaker, 
the way they’re bringing it in. They’re worried about private 
health care. Is that where this is going? Like who knows where 
they’re going to go? I have no idea. It’s their agenda. They’re 
moving forward with it. So where does it end? Where does it 
end? 
 
Because we see the challenges that our province is going . . . 
We see the challenges, families and some of the loved ones 
have gone through. And I’ve talked about, whether it’s seniors 
. . . So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will 
have an opportunity to ask some questions and debate this bill 
again, and we’ll have committee, but at this time, I’m prepared 
to adjourn debate on Bill 179. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7265 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7265 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7266 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7266 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7266 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7266 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Wes Funk 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 
 Citizens Unite During Forest Fires 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 
 International Day for Disaster Reduction 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 
 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 
 Co-operatives Week 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7268 
 Physician Numbers in Saskatchewan 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7268 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7268 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Emergency Room Wait Times 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7268 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7269 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7270 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7271 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7271 
 Release of Reports on Seniors’ Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7272 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7272 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Who Will You Help Campaign 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7273 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7273 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership Free Trade Agreement 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7274 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7274 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7275 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7275 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7275 
MOTIONS 
 Legislature Sitting Days 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7276 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7276 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7278 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7292 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


