




















































Hansard: October 27, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 74A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7489 

 October 27, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this point I would like to introduce, in the 

Speaker’s gallery, Provincial Auditor Judy Ferguson who took 

office on June 1st, 2015, and her husband, Mike Ferguson. Also 

Mr. Ron Barclay, the Conflict of Interest and the Lobbyist 

Commissioner, is present with us. And I would like to remind 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] that there will be 

a reception in the Saskatchewan Gallery starting at 2:30 this 

afternoon for Ms. Ferguson. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to have 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, in your gallery, I’d like to introduce a 

number of representatives from the Regina Sexual Assault 

Centre who are with us today: Sandra Mitchell — maybe you 

could give us a wave — Kristina Kaminski, and Debbie House 

who I don’t think has quite made it up to the gallery yet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education, the Minister of 

Corrections and Policing, and I had the pleasure of meeting 

with these committed individuals this morning. They presented 

a brief to us about ending violence and sexual assault against 

women. Mr. Speaker, as you know, there’s been a focus on this 

issue in recent weeks, yesterday with the announcement of our 

domestic violence death review committee and, earlier this 

month, the launch of the public awareness campaign, Who Will 

You Help? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to continue the work on this very 

important topic to protect the women in Saskatchewan against 

violence and sexual assault. And while it’s a focus of our 

government, Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work that 

needs to be done, and to do that we need the help from 

dedicated and passionate people like those joining us today. So 

I wanted to thank them for their suggestions that they provided 

the ministers this morning. 

 

Some find, Mr. Speaker, the issue of sexual assault and abuse 

difficult to talk about, Mr. Speaker. We don’t on this side of the 

House. The dialogue that we’re having is the foundation of the 

solutions which we will find, Mr. Speaker. So on behalf of the 

government, I wanted to thank these individuals and all others 

involved in this very serious topic. I thank them for their 

commitment to the women of Saskatchewan. And I’d ask all 

colleagues in the legislature to welcome these guests to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the minister in welcoming the folks from the Regina 

Sexual Assault Centre here today: Sandra Mitchell, Deb House, 

and Kristina Kaminski. The Leader of the Opposition and I had 

an opportunity this morning to sit down and have a discussion 

with these women as well about the work that they do, and 

some recommendations they think are very important in ending 

violence against women and girls and sexual assault — very 

good recommendations with great merit coming from people 

who work on the front lines and know what would make a big 

difference in changing the culture of violence against women 

and girls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to thank these women today for the work that they do, 

and everybody who is involved with the Regina Sexual Assault 

Centre for all that you do in your work in changing a harmful 

culture. Particularly as a woman and a mother of two daughters, 

I’m especially grateful for the work that you do, so thank you. 

I’d like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 

folks to their legislature. 

 

And while I’m still on my feet, I would like to join you, Mr. 

Speaker, in welcoming our relatively new Provincial Auditor, 

Ms. Judy Ferguson, and her family and her colleagues from the 

Provincial Auditor’s office to our legislature. 

 

I have had the privilege of working with Judy the last couple of 

years while she was the Acting Provincial Auditor and I was the 

new Public Accounts Chair. Her support and guidance in 

helping me learn my role, and a bit about her role, has been 

very useful as I’ve grown in that job. So welcome and 

congratulations to Ms. Ferguson on her appointment and 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I also would like to welcome Ms. Ferguson to her 

Assembly here today. I’m the Vice-Chair of Public Accounts, 

and I’m sure it’s been a real treat for her to work with me. Later 

this afternoon we’re looking forward to the tea, and welcome to 

your Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, 47 grade 8 students from Ethel Milliken Elementary 

School here in Regina. And they’re accompanied by their 

teachers, Kristopher Jan and Janice Hiebert, as well as the 

interns, Steven Carston, Derek Haberstock, and Megan Donald. 

And I ask all members to welcome this fine group to the 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



7490 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 

[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 

we know that this province lags behind others in securing the 

rights of gender- and sexually diverse students, and that gender 

and sexuality alliances, GSAs, play a pivotal role in providing 

inclusive, anti-oppressive learning environments and offer 

reprieve from bullying and assault. 

 

And we know that GSAs offer opportunities to improve 

attendance and retention rates, generate meaningful 

relationships in schools, and reduce homophobic and 

transphobic bullying. And, Mr. Speaker, we know this 

government must act so that under no circumstances are gender- 

and sexually diverse students denied the right to form GSAs in 

their schools. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call on the government to take immediate and meaningful 

action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 

Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right of 

Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 

in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 

and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 

their full potential. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these people signing this petition come from 

the city of Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand in my place today to provide a petition as it 

relates to cellphone coverage in northern Saskatchewan. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 

service and coverage for northern communities like St. 

George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 

Point, and Sled Lake and to provide similar quality of cell 

coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. This 

would provide support to our northern industries as well as 

mitigate safety concerns associated with living in the 

remote North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all 

from throughout Saskatchewan on this particular page. The 

people that have signed this page are primarily from Dore Lake, 

and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 

care here in this province. The petitioners point out about the 

increasing number of stories we all hear in our offices, and just 

in talking to people about the adverse effects of chronic 

understaffing in our seniors’ care facilities that include 

unanswered calls for help, residents being left on toilets for 

hours on end, and seniors not receiving things like baths for 

weeks at a time, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Canora, 

Sturgis, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition from citizens in the province of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the high cost of post-secondary education in 

the province. As one cause for concern, Mr. Speaker, they point 

out that the average Canadian student in 2014 graduated with 

debt of over $27,000, not including credit card and other private 

debts. In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the provincial government to immediately increase 

the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 

with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 

used to lower tuition rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 

from Regina and Milestone. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Action Toward Ending Sexual and Domestic Violence 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re joined in the gallery today 

by a number of community leaders from the Regina Sexual 

Assault Centre. They’re here today to call for real, meaningful 

action to put an end to sexual and domestic violence in our 

province. Saskatchewan has the shameful distinction of leading 

the provinces when it comes to sexual assault, domestic 

violence, and murders by intimate partners. We need to put an 

end to this. 

 

Last week I called for our province to follow the lead of other 

provinces in establishing a domestic violence death review 

committee, and I’m pleased to see that now we’re seeing some 

movement on that. But we need to do much more to put an end 

to domestic violence. That’s why I fully support the 

recommendations made by the Regina Sexual Assault Centre 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7491 

today. I hope that the Premier and the government will support 

those recommendations as well as get moving on them 

immediately because enough is enough. It’s time to get serious 

about ensuring the safety and security of women and girls in our 

province. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking the members of the 

Regina Sexual Assault Centre for the important work that they 

do. And I ask all members to commit to taking the steps 

required to end domestic violence here in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to congratulate all the Saskatchewan businesses 

that were recognized at the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce’s 32nd annual Achievement in Business Excellence 

Awards in Saskatoon. 

 

This year’s ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] 

theme was Gold and Glitter, and the businesses featured set the 

gold standard for the quality of private enterprise in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the ABEX awards truly showcase 

the strength of Saskatchewan’s business sector and demonstrate 

how we continue to move forward and grow as a province. 

 

I am particularly pleased to say that it was a very good night for 

members of the Weyburn & District Chamber of Commerce as 

P.A.R. consulting of Halbrite, Saskatchewan won the 

Community Involvement Award. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

congratulate Minard’s Leisure World of Weyburn who won 

both the Marketing Award as well as Business of the Year. So 

congratulations to Susan and Gene. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year also, for the first time in ABEX history, 

the award evening was augmented by student achievement. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the Weyburn 

Comprehensive’s Palletable Projects Junior Achievement 

Company received the Canadian Chamber of Commerce 

Company of the Year Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Saskatchewan businesses that were 

represented with this year’s ABEX Awards. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

World Ostomy Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

acknowledge the outstanding work of the Saskatoon Ostomy 

Association. On October 17th I had the privilege of attending a 

barbecue held by the association to celebrate World Ostomy 

Day. 

 

World Ostomy Day is October 3rd. However, due to the 

sometimes unpredictable weather here in Saskatchewan, the 

barbecue was postponed until October 17th. It was held at the 

Saskatoon Forestry Park & Zoo, and many people enjoyed the 

hamburgers, hot dogs, cupcakes, and the beautiful fall weather. 

The theme for this year was Many Stories, One Voice. Across 

the globe, people were using the hashtag #MyOstomyStory to 

raise awareness about life with an ostomy. 

 

The Saskatoon Ostomy Association provides support and 

advocacy for people who have had or are about to have ostomy 

surgery. On a matter that’s highly stigmatized and rarely 

discussed, this group openly embraces those who have had 

ostomy surgery. They’re not embarrassed or ashamed to remind 

others that they simply have had a body part that didn’t work 

and as a result they now have an ostomy. 

 

They asked me as well to raise a concern that other provinces 

such as Manitoba pay full cost of the ostomy appliances while 

Saskatchewan pays half, and they can hope this changes soon. 

I’m honoured to carry their message into this Assembly and 

throughout the province to raise awareness and support those 

with ostomies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in applauding 

the work the Saskatoon Ostomy Association does across the 

city and this province. Thank you very much. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Construction Company Inducted into Business Hall of Fame 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 

this province is more globally connected than ever before, local 

companies with local roots still lie at the heart of our growth 

and prosperity. This weekend we were proud to see another 

locally born company recognized as the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce inducted Graham into the Saskatchewan Business 

Hall of Fame. 

 

Graham had the start in 1926, Mr. Speaker, when P.W. Graham 

& Sons began building stations for the CP [Canadian Pacific] 

Railway in Moose Jaw. Since then they have built hospitals, 

constructed the Boundary dam power station in Estevan, and 

are now taking the lead in a number of government projects, 

including two P3s [public-private partnership], Mr. Speaker. 

Right here in Saskatchewan, the Regina bypass and the new 

hospital in North Battleford is being built by Graham. 

 

As an employee-owned business, Graham knows the 

importance of community. Partnerships with the File Hills 

Qu’Appelle development, the University of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic are just a few of the ways they’re 

building a stronger Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government would like to repeat the accolades of their 

peers in the chamber and congratulate Graham and his over 400 

Saskatchewan employees on their well-deserved honour. 

 

While the opposition mistakenly portrays Graham as an 

out-of-province company, I’m sure even the members opposite 

will join me in this Assembly and applaud the strong history 

and future of Graham in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



7492 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Saskatoon Mayor Longest Serving in City’s History 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, he’s been called Canada’s favourite 

mayor, Canada’s most popular mayor, and even Canada’s 

craziest mayor in a fun way. I rise today to speak about mayor 

of Saskatoon, His Worship Don Atchison. Today Mayor 

Atchison becomes the longest serving mayor in the city’s 

history. He has now served a record of 4,384 days as mayor. 

Members in this House can certainly appreciate his long 

commitment to public service. Each and every day, our mayor 

does his job with passion and spirit. 

 

Mayor Atchison has guided Saskatoon for more than a decade 

of exceptional economic expansion and population growth. 

Saskatoon is one of Canada’s fastest growing cities and is now 

home to nearly 270,000 people. Mayor Atchison sincerely cares 

about every resident, every area, and every issue arising in 

Saskatoon. I have witnessed him many times making the effort 

to listen to residents regardless of whether their concerns are 

big or small. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our mayor is known for his eagerness to attend 

numerous functions and events. He has helped to shape 

Saskatoon into one of the best cities in the country. 

 

Today is an impressive milestone. For Mayor Atchison, 

leadership matters and his co-operative leadership philosophy 

has brought together governments and the private sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members this afternoon to join with me in 

congratulating a great ambassador for the city of Saskatoon and 

the province of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon’s longest serving 

mayor, His Worship Don Atchison. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Assiniboine Valley Medical Centre Opens in Kamsack 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

August 25th I was pleased to attend the opening of the 

Assiniboine Valley Medical Centre in Kamsack. Mr. Speaker, 

this facility was truly needed to better serve the public, as the 

old one had many issues and required extensive renovations. 

 

In 2010 a committee headed by Terry Horkoff was set up to 

research what would best serve the needs of Kamsack and area. 

In 2011 the medical services committee was formed, primarily 

to recruit physicians but also to plan for a new clinic. After 

consultation with the Sunrise Health District, it was determined 

that no space was available in the Kamsack Hospital, so plans 

went ahead to construct a new clinic on a parcel of land located 

across the street, which was donated by the town. 

 

Later in 2011, plans were drawn up by C.A. Reed and 

Associates of Yorkton, and in 2012 the job went to tender. 

Logan Stevens of Yorkton was awarded the concrete and grade 

beam work, and Zarchikoff Construction the balance of the 

construction work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the community has raised $1.6 million of this $2 

million project, and Mayor Rod Gardner has indicated it will be 

debt free very soon. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking the generous donors 

and congratulating the town of Kamsack for bringing this 

valuable project to fruition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Agriculture Month 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the 

Minister of Agriculture proclaimed October as Ag Month in 

Saskatchewan. This year’s theme for Agriculture Month is 

Stewards in Sustainability. 

 

We are celebrating farmers, ranchers, and agribusinesses and 

the way that they are exceptional stewards of the environment 

through innovation and practice. From using no-till farming 

systems to conserve moisture and prevent soil erosion, to using 

GPS [global positioning system] technology and drones to 

monitor crops, allowing them to only use crop protection 

products where necessary, Saskatchewan farmers are leading 

the way. 

 

There are many initiatives that are being rolled out through the 

Ag Month, from subthemes highlighting different areas of 

agri-sustainability to profiles of individuals who stand out in the 

industry and an exciting ag scholarship designed to get young 

people thinking about agriculture and the environment. 

 

While our government is working with farmers to move 

Saskatchewan agriculture forward, the members opposite don’t 

seem to like progress. In fact, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 

member from Saskatoon Centre even suggested we go back to 

the land bank saying, and I quote, “That was a pretty good thing 

happening.” Well, Mr. Speaker, evidently the members opposite 

weren’t out there farming and having to compete with the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] provincial government to buy farm 

land. Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t surprise me if the members also 

believe that we should go back to the horse and plow for a 

modern-day best farming practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people on this side of the House will stand 

shoulder to shoulder with our farmers, the best in the world, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provision of Surgeries 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I have a simple question for the 

Premier this afternoon. How many surgeries were done last year 

and how many surgeries will be done this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, I’d be happy to take that 

question on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7493 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to, in this year, see across the entire 

province of Saskatchewan well over 85,000 surgeries being 

performed in the province of Saskatchewan. That is down just 

slightly from roughly 87,000 surgeries from last year. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the important part of this is that that is up from the 

70,000 surgeries that were done under the NDP in the last year 

that they were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can inform the House of these numbers, and I 

think that all members of the public will be interested in these. 

The number of people waiting 18 months and longer for surgery 

in Saskatchewan today, there are 18 individuals. The number of 

people waiting 18 months and longer for surgery under the 

NDP: 2,600, Mr. Speaker. And I would be pleased to go on 

with this line of questioning, with further questions, because 

there’s a lot more good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, interesting. We see the minister 

revising numbers that he gave as recently as yesterday. Let’s 

look at what he said yesterday. He said: 

 

We’re going to see close to, I would say, 86,000 surgeries 

take place in the province of Saskatchewan this fiscal year, 

which is, you know, a little bit lower than the 88,000 that 

we would have seen last year.  

 

Not surprising, Mr. Speaker, we see the numbers wrong once 

again from this Health minister. According to the Ministry of 

Health’s annual report, there were actually 89,420 surgeries last 

year. So if, if — and that’s really called, it’s called into question 

the way we see these numbers shifting — if we could actually 

take the Health minister at his word that the number is . . . 

[inaudible] . . . 86,000 surgeries, even though right now he says 

85,000, that’s not a drop of 2,000 surgeries like he claimed. It’s 

actually a drop of over 3,400 surgeries at a time when the need 

for surgeries is going up.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these numbers are even worse as the minister 

changes his numbers on the fly, as he is so apt to do. So to the 

Premier: will we actually see 85, 86,000 surgeries this year, or 

is he cutting even more surgeries than the minister has told us? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can inform the House and the public this: we’re 

going to see a lot more than 70,000 surgeries in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, part of our plan, which is different from 

the Leader of the Opposition who yesterday had indicated 

publicly in the rotunda that he is not apparently in favour of the 

use of third party private surgical suites in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we are going to see in this year in Saskatoon 

nearly 6,500 surgeries in the third party private surgical suites 

and nearly 5,000 in Regina — 11,000 surgeries that are going to 

be done in the public system, publicly funded using affordable 

third party private surgical suites. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition is against that. Is he saying that 

he is against 11,000 surgeries being done for the people of this 

province, day surgeries using those third party organizations? Is 

he against the over 40,000 people that have been served in this 

manner? That is the difference between the Leader of the 

Opposition and the party on this side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see these shifting answers in 

this session from the Health minister and from the Premier. 

They’ll give one answer, then they’ll revise it in question 

period. They’ll give a different one in the rotunda. The next day 

in the House, they’ll give a different number altogether. We 

know that they’ve really struggled with the facts, and I asked 

very simply, how many surgeries last year? How many 

surgeries this year? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister claimed that there were 

just 200 people waiting longer than three months for surgeries 

here in Regina. The Premier claimed that that number was 

“somewhere between 3 and 400.” Well the true number, Mr. 

Speaker, is well over 800, four times worse than what the 

Health minister reported and more than double, more than 

double than what the Premier reported. 

 

Now if the minister is right — again big question marks about 

his accuracy with the numbers — but if he is right that the Sask 

Party is cutting 3,400 surgeries this year, that’s a 4 per cent cut. 

But that number doesn’t seem right, Mr. Speaker, because we 

know there will be 6 per cent fewer surgeries in Regina this 

year alone. 

 

To the Premier: what is the real number? How many surgeries 

are being cut throughout Saskatchewan this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Again, as I think the Leader of the Opposition knows, that this 

budget did include $48.8 million as part of our surgical 

initiative. That is going to see us perform well more than the 

70,000 surgeries that were performed on an annual basis under 

the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, what did that result in? Let’s keep 

this in perspective. We had the longest surgical waits in all of 

Canada. We had a backlog of nearly 28,000 people, 27,500 

people waiting for surgeries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would remind the members that in 2013 in 

committee, when the former Health minister tried to take credit 

for the beginning of the surgical network in this province, an 

official had to point out that at the rate the NDP were going in 

their surgical network, in their surgical initiative, it would take 

30 years to clear the backlog, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been able to 

do that with great success in five years, in part because we’re 

using third party private surgical suites which has seen, 

including this year, 47,000 people being served in these suites. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition can answer the question. It’s 

pretty clear: would he get rid of those? Would he get rid of 

those resources in the system, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, simple question to the Premier: 



7494 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

how many surgeries last year? How many surgeries this year? 

Nothing, Mr. Speaker. Simple question that the Health minister 

could have fielded, Mr. Speaker: where are the cuts all over the 

province? But no information. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, we see these cuts going on in the 

province because of the Sask Party’s decision to slash funding. 

Mr. Speaker, if the cuts that we see here in Regina are similar to 

the cuts across the province, then we’d actually be seeing a 

reduction of about 5,600 surgeries this year, despite the fact that 

the need for surgeries is going up. And that’s a point, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Premier keeps ignoring. So to the Premier: 

why won’t he just lay out exactly where the surgical cuts are 

happening? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again in the 

absence of the Premier, I’ll take the question. Mr. Speaker, I 

think what is important to note in this discussion is that over the 

last eight years the record investment in our health regions by 

this provincial government, including Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region, that their budget went from $593 million to this 

year $904 million, an increase of 52 per cent, including a $33 

million increase in their budget. The same is true for Saskatoon. 

It went from a $640 million budget to a $1.32 billion, an 

increase of nearly 62 per cent in that health region in just eight 

years. 

 

And what we’re seeing in terms of the record on this side of the 

House, as I said before, the number of people waiting 18 

months and longer went from 2,600 under the NDP to 18. The 

number of people waiting longer than a year for surgery, 97 

under this government, when it was 5,136. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a record on this side of the House that we 

are proud to defend when it comes to surgeries and our surgical 

wait-list, as opposed to the members opposite who really have 

no credibility when it comes to surgical lists in this province. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these answers from the minister, 

from this government will be no comfort to the thousands of 

Saskatchewan patients who will not be getting their surgeries in 

a timely way because of this government’s cuts to surgeries all 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know, we know that almost half of the 

surgeries in our province are done in Saskatoon. And here’s the 

situation in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker: 45 per cent of the people 

waiting for spine and back surgery are already waiting more 

than three months; 60 per cent of people waiting for brain and 

spinal cord surgeries are waiting longer than three months; 64 

per cent of people needing ear, nose, throat surgery are waiting 

longer than three months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are lives. These are people that are living in 

pain, that are missing work, Mr. Speaker. And it has been a 

simple question to the minister, to the Premier, the former 

Health minister if he wants to take it, Mr. Speaker: why can’t 

they say how many fewer surgeries this cut will mean for 

Saskatchewan patients, Mr. Speaker? 

 

These waits are getting worse because of this government’s 

cuts. Just since March, just since March when they cut, Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen a 50 per cent increase to the individuals 

waiting longer than three months. My question to the Premier: 

will he tell us exactly how many fewer surgeries he is funding 

in Saskatoon alone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the 

Premier, in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question. 

Mr. Speaker, timely access to surgery coming from the Leader 

of the Opposition, when in 2007 the number of people waiting 

longer than three months for surgery was 15,365; the number of 

people waiting longer than six months, 10,644. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today in the province of Saskatchewan, 91 per 

cent of people — and I’ll break that down for the Leader of the 

Opposition — 9 out of 10 people waiting for surgery are getting 

their surgery within three months. Ninety-nine per cent of 

people are getting surgery within six months, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not 12 months. It’s not 18 months. It’s not three years like it 

was under the NDP. And that’s the record on this side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last October SaskPower’s head 

of carbon capture stood in front of the new carbon capture plant 

and said, “This wonderful beast behind us is capturing 1 million 

tonnes of CO2 a year.” He didn’t say, it will hopefully capture. 

He said, it is capturing. 

 

And the government’s own news releases from April and 

August say that the facility, “. . . captures 90 per cent of CO2 

emissions, which is equivalent to taking about 250,000 vehicles 

off the road.” Again the government said captures, present 

tense. They didn’t say it will hopefully capture. Will the 

minister admit that the carbon capture plant has only operated at 

40 per cent of its much-touted capacity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the carbon capture facility 

down at Boundary dam 3 is a leader in technology. All you 

have to do is look at the quotes that people are saying about the 

facility from around the world. 

 

Duncan Kenyon from the Pembina Institute said, “. . . there are 

so many assets and such a vast infrastructure invested in fossil 

fuels, the short- and medium-term reality is that we need carbon 

capture. So . . . this is a big achievement, a [big] important step 

forward.” The Green Alliance highlights CCS [carbon capture 

and storage] as the only technology available to decarbonize 

heavy industry to the extent to meet carbon targets. 

 

As a result of the fact that the federal government has come in 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7495 

with much tougher emission standards, SaskPower took the step 

of building the facility. There has indeed been some start-up 

difficulties with it, to say the least, and that is not unusual, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In 2004, under the NDP government, there was a problem with 

the Cory cogeneration plant on start-up. There was a delay of 

about three months, Mr. Speaker, and cost overruns of about 20 

per cent. So this isn’t unusual in the start-up phase of it. Clearly 

we believe and SaskPower . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in committee on April 21st of 

this year, I asked, “What capacity is it running at right now?” 

And here’s the answer the minister’s official gave: “We are 

achieving over 80 per cent carbon capture at the present time.” 

The SaskPower minister was sitting right next to the official, 

and the minister did not correct that statement. But now we’ve 

learned the carbon capture facility functioned at only 40 per 

cent capacity last year, less than half of what I was told in 

committee. Why didn’t the minister give the accurate number 

when I asked about it in committee? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in the quote that the hon. 

member suggests right there, they say “at the present time” it is 

operating at that efficiency. It has operated at many different 

efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. That is the normal process for 

running up the process, the start-up process of a facility of this 

type, Mr. Speaker. It’s the exact same process that is done in the 

natural gas generating facilities, hydro facilities, any type of 

facility there is. There’s a run-in period, Mr. Speaker, where 

you . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Would the members who asked the question 

like to hear the answer? I would, and I’m sure the other 

members would, and the people watching on TV would like to 

hear the answer. So please let the minister answer. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

was saying, there’s a normal run-up period for these types of 

facilities. This is a very, very complex facility. They start out at 

a certain level. They run up from there. They back off from 

there in terms of it, to test and to further evaluate the 

efficiencies of the facility. Yes indeed, there has been some 

problems in the start-up of this facility, Mr. Speaker. At the 

time that the member was referring to, the plant was operating 

at that efficiency. It has operated at much lower efficiencies at 

times. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s extremely disappointing that 

the Sask Party has not been upfront with Saskatchewan people 

about the true state of affairs with its carbon capture 

experiment. We learned yesterday that this government 

captured just 400 000 tonnes of CO2 last year. That’s roughly 

40 per cent of its capacity. Something clearly is not right with 

this project. 

 

The minister was too scared to go out into the rotunda to answer 

media’s questions yesterday, so he sent an official. And what 

that official had to say was very concerning. He gave different 

answers about when the carbon capture facility might be at full 

capacity. He said, maybe by the end of this year. Then he said, 

within the next six months. And then he said, by the end of 

2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ask this minister what is going on with 

this project? When will it finally work at full capacity, and 

when can we stop hemorrhaging money to Cenovus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what the officials yesterday 

indicated is that the efficiency of the project is simply not where 

they would like to have it. They are working through it. They 

are working with all of the contractors associated with it to try 

and increase and improve the efficiencies. They are confident 

and they are of the belief that by the start of 2016, we’ll see 

much higher efficiencies than we have seen so far, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you look at the project, Mr. Speaker, indeed there was a 

shortfall in 2014 of about $12 million, slightly less than $12 

million. SaskPower in 2015 indicates that the net revenue to the 

corporation will be about $6 million, Mr. Speaker — $5 million 

of a shortfall and about $11 million of revenue. In addition to 

that, Mr. Speaker, there has been a sale. The sale of the power 

from BD3 [Boundary dam 3] has resulted in about $7 million. 

So $12 million in total, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder about a 

contract that seems to give away more than it gets. There’s a lot 

of serious issues about what they signed in the deal that they 

arranged. This government was planning, they were planning 

on getting about $20 million in revenue from CO2 sales last 

year, but instead Saskatchewan families were forced to pay 

Cenovus 12 million. They were going to get 20 million, but 

they gave away 12 million. 

 

Yesterday SaskPower confirmed that this government is on 

track to pay Cenovus millions and millions more again this year 

because this government’s carbon capture experiment is still not 

working even close to capacity. Will the minister tell us the 

exact amount of public money he intends to give to Cenovus 

this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of a 

take-or-pay contract, which is very common in the oil and gas 

industry . . . This is the type of project that we are involved in 

here, Mr. Speaker, a take-or-pay project with Cenovus. In . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 



7496 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

The Speaker: — If the government wants, I can give the 

members of the opposition more questions if you don’t want to 

listen to the answers as well. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in 2014 there was a loss of 

approximately $12 million. A payment was made to Cenovus 

because of the fact that the CO2 could not be delivered to them. 

In 2015 the revenue is about $11 million and the loss is about 

$5 million, so a net revenue to SaskPower of $6 million, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, the sale of the power from BD3 has resulted 

in a gain of about $7 million. So the total net revenue to the 

province of Saskatchewan is about $12 million on this project. 

To date, a loss of 12 million in 2014, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower said this 

year’s cheque for Cenovus will be “probably in the 5 to $6 

million range.” But we know we can’t trust those numbers 

because of what we see in the internal documents. 

 

A briefing note dated September 30th, 2014 said last year’s 

penalty to Cenovus would be 7 million. Then another briefing 

note dated October 6th, just seven days later, said the penalties 

to Cenovus would be in the range of 8.7 to 10 million. So at the 

end of it all, we know the actual penalty paid to Cenovus was 

nearly 12 million, $5 million higher than the initial estimate. So 

to the minister: how can we have any confidence in that the 

penalty this year won’t be 10 million or 12 million or even $15 

million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we are in the later stages of 

2015. It is known how much the facility, the Boundary dam 

facility has generated in terms of CO2 and has sold to Cenovus. 

They do a reconciliation at the end of every year to determine 

whether there is a pay or an increase to SaskPower. It is 

indicated at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, that the net revenue, 

the net revenue to SaskPower will be about $6 million based on 

the expected provisions within the contract, Mr. Speaker, based 

on the fact that there was $5 million of penalties but $11 million 

of sales, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I cannot understand why this minister is so 

happy to be paying penalties and being proud of it, Mr. 

Speaker. Yesterday SaskPower said they fully expected to be 

operating the wonderful beast at a significantly reduced 

capacity this year. The official said, “We fully expected these 

things to happen.” So if this was fully expected, then the 

question the SaskPower minister needs to answer is this: why 

on earth did the Sask Party lock us into a secretive deal with 

Cenovus with huge penalties built in if the government knew 

that the carbon capture facility would not function even close to 

full capacity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, while the NDP doesn’t like 

the fact that SaskPower’s involved in carbon capture and 

storage, around the world people certainly believe that this is a 

very, very important development, Mr. Speaker. The Green 

Alliance highlights CCS . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Green Alliance highlights 

that CCS is the only technology available to decarbonize the 

industry to the extent needed to meet carbon targets. The Clean 

Air Task Force believes CCS is one of the most important 

technologies for averting the worst aspects of climate change 

because fossil fuel use is increasing worldwide, not decreasing 

worldwide. The International Energy Agency has stated that 

without CCS, overall cost emissions would rise in 2050 by 70 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important project for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Indeed there has been some start-up problems. 

SaskPower officials believe that those problems are being 

sorted out at this point in time. And so far, Mr. Speaker, 

SaskPower, through the sale of CO2 and through the sale of 

power, has netted out about zero with respect to this project. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I find it incredibly disturbing that 

this minister is proud of the fact that they’re paying millions of 

dollars in penalty and proud of the fact that they’re not 

operating at full capacity. 

 

People’s power bills have gone up significantly under this 

government. So when we hear about the Sask Party government 

locking us into a ridiculous contract that has us, the people of 

Saskatchewan, cutting cheques for millions and millions of 

dollars to an Alberta oil company, that is incredibly disturbing. 

And it’s especially disturbing because SaskPower says they 

fully expected this to happen. So again, to the minister: why on 

earth did the Sask Party lock us into a deal that they knew they 

couldn’t fulfill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, while SaskPower may be 

paying Cenovus approximately $5 million this year, they are 

also receiving from Cenovus about $11 million, so a net amount 

of $6 million to the treasury of Saskatchewan. And I would ask 

the member opposite if she would certainly acknowledge that 

fact that that is exactly what is happening with respect to this 

contract, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This is an important contract within the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s very, very important in terms of climate 

change, Mr. Speaker. This is an initiative that is getting 

worldwide acclaim around the globe, Mr. Speaker, because 

people, academics, and governments all realize that this is an 

important step towards correcting the problems around CO2 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7497 

capture, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of this 

SaskPower has paid, yes, they have paid Cenovus some money, 

but they have also received in 2015 $6 million more than they 

paid out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what we know is that even the 

deal with Cenovus is suspect because they’re paying only 

around $25 a tonne when the actual market value for this carbon 

is much, much higher. So again we see a huge profit going to an 

Alberta oil company, and secondly we see that these huge 

penalties are built into the contract. This minister is happy to be 

paying millions of dollars in penalties to an Alberta oil 

company, and it seems like it was built right in. 

 

Now it’s true, if it’s true that this project has undergone or is 

still undergoing a massive overhaul — it’s a brand new project, 

this wonderful beast — that means that this government has not 

been forthright about the full cost of this project. And so to the 

minister: what’s the update? What are the true costs for this 

carbon capture experiment that is still not even close to working 

at full capacity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of the CCS project is 

about $1.47 billion. We received about $240 million from the 

federal government with respect to this, so a little over $1.2 

billion is the total project cost with respect to this project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Any time that SaskPower is writing a cheque, we are not happy 

about it, we can assure the taxpayers of this province. But we 

will also want to make sure the people of Saskatchewan 

understand that they are getting . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I could always deduct time from tomorrow if 

needed. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has sold CO2 to 

Cenovus to the tune of about a $6 million profit this year, Mr. 

Speaker, which is in sharp contrast to how the members 

opposite used to operate, Mr. Speaker. And you just look down 

the list. There’s some over $300 million of losses: $26 million 

in Big Sky . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Deputy Leader, the member for 

Rosemont, desire to have time removed from the opposition’s 

questions tomorrow? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’d prefer not. 

 

The Speaker: — Well then be quiet. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — When the members opposite occupied the 

benches on this side, they lost $15 million in Channel Lake, $2 

million in Guyana on a power company down there, $16 million 

in Chicago, Mr. Speaker, with NST. 

 

The fact remains is this project has been a good project for 

Saskatchewan and there has been net revenue . . . 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to question 981 and 982. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 981 and 982. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 183 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 

Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s good 

to join debate on Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 

(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. It’s interesting to 

join debate on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s not often that you see a piece of legislation come to 

this Chamber that is in fact court ordered, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

not often that you see a piece of legislation come to this 

Chamber that’s not just been court ordered, but Supreme Court 

ordered, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that is the case with this 

particular piece of legislation where, dating back to the early 

days of the Sask Party and before that, coming to power in 

2007, you know, eight, roughly eight years ago, Mr. Speaker, it 

was an interesting lead-up to that convention, and certainly in 

terms of the question of essential services, you had a then 

opposition that had a lot of different things to say about 

essential services. 

 

But when it came down to the eve of the election, they said, you 

know, there’s no need for essential services legislation. This is 

something that we have no call for at this time, and said one 

thing to the working men and women of this province, to the 

people of this province, before they were elected, Mr. Speaker, 

and then of course, after they were elected, came forward with 

Bill 5. And of course it wasn’t Bill 1. It wasn’t 2, 3, or 4. It was 

Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where it was on that, that 

government’s agenda. 

 

So the fact that they’d been saying one thing before the election 

as regards essential services legislation, and then doing 

something very different after they’d taken power, Mr. Speaker, 

again I think speaks volumes as to the way that this government 



7498 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

has gotten this file so badly wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of legislation that’s been again not just suggested by 

the law reform society or, you know, comes forward out of 

different platforms, but in fact has been ordered by the Supreme 

Court of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and that, you know, that needed 

to come forward by the end of this year, Mr. Speaker. 

Otherwise that government would be in contempt or would be 

falling short of what the Supreme Court had ordered of this 

government. 

 

It’s pretty telling what’s happened over the past eight years as 

regards to this government and as regards labour legislation. 

And even after that Supreme Court ruling came forward, Mr. 

Speaker, we had the Premier of the province at SUMA, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, in response to 

a friendly question off the floor say that, well they were going 

to consider using the notwithstanding clause of the constitution 

to respond to the essential services mess that they had created, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s interesting that even after the Supreme Court had ruled 

and had said, you’ve got a year to fix the mess that you’ve 

created; you’ve got a year to pay the costs to those that have 

had to take you to the highest court of the land to get their rights 

protected and recognized, Mr. Speaker . . . You know, and 

again as a side note, it’s interesting that you’ve got this 

particular regime, this particular Premier coming forward with a 

series of actions as regards working men and women in this 

province and as regards labour rights, that they’ve succeeded in 

enshrining the right to strike in the jurisprudence of this 

country. 

 

It’s always kind of interesting when you think back to the 

introduction of Bill 5 and its cousin Bill 6, but certainly with 

Bill 5 the battle cry back then, Mr. Speaker, was fair and 

balanced labour legislation. And I think the only people that 

believed that were of course the Saskatchewan Party caucus. 

But in terms of how that played out, Mr. Speaker, again using 

the battle cry of Fox News as your slogan, to go into a fight on 

labour rights, you know, interesting choice of words, Mr. 

Speaker. But they came forward with legislation that was so 

ham-fisted, so over the top, so egregious to effectively remove 

labour rights from working men and women in this province, 

that, you know, maybe it’s one thing to write up legislation that 

gets a big round of applause in the American legislative 

conferences of the big right wingers that, you know, that these 

guys like to hang out with. Or maybe it’s one thing to go out 

and say that, you know, for management side labour lawyers, 

you know, finally we’re going to stick it to the labour unions, 

Mr. Speaker, and take away the rights of working men and 

women. 

 

It’s one thing to do that, Mr. Speaker, but then of course they 

actually brought it into law. And alongside that, Mr. Speaker, 

again I’d remind you that this was brought forward after a 

period where we had members from those benches that are still 

part of that government, that occupied positions of great 

prominence in that government, saying that there was no need 

for essential services legislation. Again, just trust us. So you’ll 

forgive us, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t, if the trust has worn rather 

thin in terms of the way that this government says one thing 

before the election and then does something after the election. 

And in terms of the piece of legislation that we have in front of 

us today, there’s a, you know, there’s a job of examination that 

needs to take place. There’s the weighing of the work, and there 

is certainly some good work done by the folks that came 

forward to meet up with the court ordered requirement from the 

Supreme Court of Canada, again following on the way that this 

legislation was fought and that government lost in the 

Saskatchewan courts. But in the past there have been some men 

and women that have come forward from different walks of life 

that have done some good work on this, and we think that that 

should be recognized and appreciated. 

 

But in terms of how we got here in the first place, Mr. Speaker, 

it bears remembering and remembering very well how we got 

into this mess in the first place. And again that was when we 

had a government say one thing before the election, get elected, 

then do something very different after, and then be so 

ham-fisted about it and so, you know, tilted and unbalanced and 

unfair in how they went after the whole question of essential 

services that we see that mess continuing. 

 

In terms of the way that those eight long, expensive years . . . 

And you know, the meter’s still running on this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And you know, different members 

over there can get huffy about the way that this file was foisted 

upon the hard-working legal expertise in the Ministry of Justice. 

And if you hearken back to Bills 5 and 6, Mr. Speaker, the 

outside work that was done by contractors . . . And we know 

how much that government likes consultants. We know how 

much they like outside contractors because of course that work 

couldn’t be trusted to actual Ministry of Justice officials at the 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the way that this bill has come forward, the very costly and 

expensive way that this bill has come forward is a real story to 

be observed. I know that there are going to be other of my 

colleagues that want to participate in this debate, and as such, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 183. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 

(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 184 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 184 — The 

Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 

Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the debate on Bill No. 184, An Act to amend The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act. So I’ll talk a little bit about 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7499 

what this bill will do, Mr. Speaker. And it has a bit of a history 

here, over the last few years here in Saskatchewan, I think 

starting in about 2013 when SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] had proposed motorcycle rate increases that were not 

satisfying to most riders here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I can remember at that time, Mr. Speaker, there was a group 

called R-A-G-E, or R.A.G.E. [Riders Against Government 

Exploitation], Mr. Deputy Speaker, who if I recall correctly, I 

think motorcycle rates were going up to about $5,000 to 

register. I could be off on that number but it was quite 

exorbitant. I remember hearing from many riders who said they 

would have to park their motorcycles and they would not be 

able to register them. It got quite cost prohibitive, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for many riders. That started the process which 

triggered a motorcycle review committee. 

 

I can remember at that time too learning a little bit about . . . 

I’m not a rider, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have friends who ride 

motorcycles, for many reasons. Some like that it leaves a 

smaller carbon footprint, less expensive to operate. Some 

people just really appreciate the opportunity to sit on a bike and 

be a little bit closer to nature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 

many reasons why people ride, but people here, riders here in 

Saskatchewan were feeling like they were put behind . . . They 

wouldn’t have an opportunity to pursue their passion and, quite 

frankly, sometimes their more green mode of transportation. 

 

So all of this eventually triggered the motorcycle review 

committee, this raising of rates. And I can remember learning 

things about motorcycles that I had no idea. And I’m 

appreciative and glad that we’ve, in this Chamber, made some 

changes here this last year. You could get your learner’s licence 

on a motorcycle without ever having to demonstrate any 

capacity at riding a motorcycle. You could pass a written test 

and get on a bike, which was quite alarming to me and I think to 

many people who weren’t aware of that either, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So the bill that we have before us, Bill 184, An Act to amend 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, so starting in 2016, 

SGI will be providing additional choice in injury coverage for 

motorcycle owners. So motorcycle owners will have three 

options now. An additional option will let owners chose a 

reduced package for no-fault injury benefits for a lower cost. So 

there will be no-fault regular full benefit, no-fault injury 

benefits tort coverage, or no-fault injury benefits at a lower 

cost, which some would argue will make it more affordable for 

people to license their bikes. But also on the flip side, there’s 

some challenges around coverage. And I know the minister and 

SGI have cautioned riders to really think long and hard about 

that particular choice. 

 

So this third option, the no-fault insurance with the lower 

benefits, will be for owners who feel they require fewer benefits 

in the event of a collision. It does ensure that all motorcyclists 

continue to receive some level of insurance if they’re injured, 

which is good, Mr. Speaker. The reduced package of no-fault 

benefits will provide the same level of benefit as the tort 

product but with a limited ability to sue. So again I want to 

emphasize that the minister, in his second reading speech, has 

cautioned riders to really think long and hard about this option. 

 

And SGI itself has pointed out that, quote, in . . . Sorry. SGI in 

their 2015 news release from May 27th, “Motorcyclists to have 

further choice of injury coverage.” SGI says themselves: 

 

“Motorcyclists have asked for more choices in injury 

coverage, and government and SGI have listened,” 

Minister responsible for SGI Don McMorris said. “The 

new option is for motorcycle owners who feel they require 

fewer benefits in the event of a collision, and because 

there are fewer benefits, it’s a lower cost. It also ensures 

that all motorcyclists continue to receive some level of 

insurance coverage if they’re injured.” 

 

And the news release goes on to say: 

 

“The decision to opt for a reduced package of benefits is 

one motorcyclists should not take lightly,” said McMorris. 

“Motorcycles are smaller and more vulnerable than other 

vehicles on the road, and a collision or fall can result in 

serious injuries. If you own a motorcycle, I urge you to 

give this very serious consideration to ensure you have the 

right coverage to meet your individual needs, as well as 

those of your family, in the event of an injury.” 

 

So the government has introduced this option, recognizing that 

there may be challenges for those who choose this particular 

type of insurance and perhaps have their ability to earn income 

or support their family, may be limited in the event of a very 

serious accident or death if they choose this option. 

 

I just would like to point to the motorcycle review committee 

that talked about rates, point no. 5 under the motorcycle review 

committee, which I have to just again emphasize. This review 

committee which reported in January of 2014 grew out of . . . I 

believe it was in 2013. It might have been 2012. It all sort of 

blends together here in this place sometimes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But just in the previous year or so, SGI was planning on raising 

rates quite substantially, so that triggered a conversation about 

whether or not those increases in rates were fair. We have a 

system here in Saskatchewan where your insurance risk and 

your rate for licensing is determined by the kind of vehicle you 

drive or the kind of motorcycle you ride. And there were many 

people who don’t think that that’s fair. They think that your 

driving record should play a larger role in your insurance rate. 

 

So I’ll just point you to no. 5: 

 

Motorcycle rates and rate groupings 

Changes to rating by body style 

1. Motorcycle body style assignments change to the 

Insurance Bureau of Canada VINLink program 

 

63.8 per cent of participants’ feedback agreed and the 

motorcycle review committee gave that major support. There 

was one member who opposed it because he believes rates 

should be assigned solely based on rider actions and driving 

record, regardless of the type of vehicle being ridden or 

driven, because it is driver behaviour that directly impacts 

safety. 

 

So this is why we find ourselves where we are with this third 



7500 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

option for motorcycle riders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Tied in with this motorcycle review committee, there were also 

changes that happened actually just this . . . Well in 2014, I 

believe, the legislation was before us, which saw some very 

large changes actually. And as a mom, I don’t know if my kids 

will ever ride motorcycles but I will not, mostly because I’m a 

bit of a chicken. And I know many people who, I know many 

people who ride motorcycles. I have good friends who spend 

many, many hours on motorcycles. I know some members on 

the opposite side of the House really enjoy riding their bikes but 

it’s not a choice for me, and as a worrying mom I’m not sure if 

either of my daughters will be big fans of motorcycles or not. 

But I’m glad that some of these changes around safety have 

been made, which involve wearing more protective gear; again 

as I mentioned earlier, making sure that riders actually have to 

sit on a bike and demonstrate some capacity before they’re 

given a learner’s licence. That is very important. 

 

Some of the findings, I believe that most of the findings of the 

review committee were implemented, Mr. Speaker, so those are 

good things. This Bill 184 is again about adding a third option 

for riders to choose less coverage in insurance, and that came 

out of exorbitant rates that SGI had proposed a few years ago, 

Mr. Speaker. So again this bill will allow riders to choose 

no-fault insurance to a lesser degree or they will pay less for the 

insurance but they will get less. 

 

So I know that there will be an opportunity in committee to ask 

further questions about this and how the government came to 

this position, and we’ll look forward to that opportunity to ask 

those questions then. So with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate on Bill 184, An Act to amend The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 184, The 

Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 

2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 185 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 185 — The 

Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 

2015 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

as always I’m honoured to be able to arise in this Legislative 

Chamber to enter into the debate on the proposed bills the 

government is bringing forward. 

 

And this particular bill I guess the main feature . . . It’s not a 

long bill. There’s not a lot going on in terms of length but it’s 

making a consequential amendment to The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act, and it’s also 

amending The Traffic Safety Act. When the minister introduced 

the bill back in, earlier this month, he had a few things he 

wanted to share with us about what the intent of the bill is. And 

as he indicated, the most significant amendment is protecting 

data use through facial recognition technology. 

 

I think this is something we need to take a very careful look at. 

And certainly I’ve put in a call to the Canadian Civil Liberties 

Association to see what sort of civil liberties issues arise when 

it comes to facial recognition software. Obviously this is 

something that is a very powerful technology, and when you 

think about it, can be a very powerful invasion into your 

privacy if this software is pervasive and becomes used in a 

number of instances. You know, and I guess the question is, 

how far do you go with this type of software before it becomes 

intrusive and actually starts inhibiting people’s rights to 

privacy? So constitutionally, and I think through our civil 

liberties, there are a number of legal questions that will need to 

be addressed as we go forward with this type of technology. 

 

And so those are the kinds of questions I think we need to be 

able to get answers to here in the next little while. There 

certainly is a limited amount of time, I think, to even be able to 

ask those questions because of the speed with which the 

government is pushing these bills forward. Sadly, we don’t have 

a Throne Speech and we don’t have any idea where the 

government’s going on a go-forward basis, so we’re here 

debating bills and we won’t have enough time to really examine 

the full potential of the harm that this type of technology may 

cause to people’s privacy rights. 

 

And I think that’s something that’s very concerning. I know that 

the intent behind this is quite clear and I think is understandable 

from the government’s perspective. The minister has indicated 

that it’s an interesting technology. He says very interesting 

technology, in fact. And the way the data works is, you know 

. . . and I think I can even do it with my iPhoto. I can tell my 

iPhoto to recognize certain people in my photo library and 

they’ll pull out those faces and pull all the photos of that one 

person through some sort of facial recognition technology. So 

apparently it’s very sophisticated and it’s intended to provide 

better security. And better security is a laudable goal, but we 

always know there’s a tension between increasing security 

measures and decreasing people’s rights to freedom and 

privacy. 

 

So those are important values socially on both sides, and I think 

it’s the balance that the government needs to achieve that is the 

tricky part. And it’s also with advances in technology, is how 

much do we use technology to advance those goals of security 

when indeed they may be infringing on people’s rights to 

privacy. 

 

The minister has indicated that the goal of this is to help prevent 

fraud. It’s to help prevent identity theft and it will prevent 

people from getting multiple driver’s licences or IDs 

[identification], and somehow that it would improve road safety 

by preventing suspended drivers from being able to use a false 

identity to get a licence. 

 

Yes, those are possible outcomes of this type of technology. I 

don’t know what kind of issues we have right now with identity 

theft and multiple driver’s licences, if that’s a pervasive 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7501 

problem and if this is happening at a rampant scale, or is it one 

or two times a year. Those are the kinds of questions that we 

need time to ask and find out what the answers to that will be. 

We’re also wondering, well how many suspended drivers are 

using a false identity to get a licence? Is this a problem that’s 

presenting itself on a daily basis? Is it happening 10 times a 

day? Is it happening twice a year? 

 

So when we use this kind of technology, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we have to really balance it against the clear sort of invasion of 

people’s personal space. You’d be walking through a grocery 

store and you’ll have video cameras capturing your identity and 

perhaps disclosing it because it’s so easily done with this type 

of technology. 

 

[14:45] 

 

I know the minister has indicated that the government takes 

privacy very seriously, and I believe that to be true. But he’s 

saying, people trust us with their information. We have to trust 

the government with our information. If you want to fly 

anywhere these days, you need photo ID and it has to be 

government issued. So we have to be able to trust the 

government with the information we give the government. 

That’s clear, and I think the government does take that very 

seriously. And perhaps this technology will improve the 

security of driver’s licences and ID cards. Again, laudable goal, 

but I think it’s the balance of civil rights and our freedoms that 

has to be always measured. 

 

And it will be very interesting to see the evolution of this 

technology, not just through driver’s licences, but I think 

through other sources where government is asking for photo ID. 

Flying is a good example of that. 

 

And the minister did indicate that he did consult with the 

information and privacy officer, so that’s one step that’s very 

important and I’m sure any government would do that. But 

again, not all the angles are always immediately apparent and I 

think people are very interested in exploring the scope of our 

rights. And our privacy rights are very important. 

 

And certainly we’d like to be able to have the time to see how 

this is being used in other jurisdictions, where there are 

problems and possibilities of problems when it comes to civil 

liberties and freedom of privacy, which people also take very, 

very seriously in Canada and in North America, for sure. 

 

I know I probably watch too much TV, Mr. Speaker, and just 

the other day I saw, you know, a lawyer program about facial 

recognition software and people being falsely accused or, you 

know, malicious prosecutors going after the wrong person just 

to win the case. And I mean, that’s all stuff of TV for sure, but 

it makes you think. And you know, the possibility is certainly 

there. 

 

And I just want to share a quick story the other day about 

whether or not photo ID [identification] is even working. 

Because I was on a plane a few weeks ago and sat down, and 

there was a mix-up in the row in front of me. And there was one 

woman who was sitting in her proper seat, but the woman that 

was sitting beside her had the woman beside her’s name on her 

boarding pass. And she was actually on the wrong plane. 

And you have to wonder how on earth she was actually . . . 

didn’t even speak English. She had a Chinese name. But 

somehow her boarding pass had the woman next to her and she 

was on the wrong plane. But she would have had to show her 

picture ID. So I don’t know what on earth that agent at the 

airport could have possibly seen when she showed her picture 

ID, and her boarding pass had the wrong name on it essentially. 

 

So very curious, and you just wonder. Sometimes the system is 

only as good as the people that are operating it. And so these 

kinds of things always make you realize there’s room for 

human error and there’s also room for manipulation and also 

room for, I guess, bad intentions and bad intent and for criminal 

activity and things like that. 

 

So we really would need more time than I think that we have, 

Mr. Speaker, to fully explore the types of issues this bill 

presents. And I think we can just look to what happened with 

the essential services Act when it was rushed through and 

passed, and all of a sudden it ended up in the Supreme Court of 

Canada and it was reversed. So we certainly don’t want to see 

that happen here. 

 

But if it’s not examined properly before the bill is passed . . . 

We know it went to the office of privacy and the commissioner 

has looked at it, and from his perspective it appears to be in 

order. But I think, as I said, there’s always clever and unusual 

ways to look at things. And people with civil liberties concerns 

and freedom-of-privacy concerns are going to take a long look 

at this and may come up with some very interesting challenges 

to this particular bill. 

 

So I think again, the amount of time that we have to debate this 

may not give us time to properly survey it with affected third 

parties and certainly people who look carefully at civil liberties 

and freedom of your privacy rights. So that’s the one, I think 

the main aspect of this bill, and certainly one that will be very 

informative as we go forward. 

 

The minister is also introducing some other housekeeping 

amendments, he said. And he highlighted them as well in his 

second reading speech on October 20th just a few days ago. So 

one of the things he’s talking about there is stronger 

consequences for drivers under the influence of drugs and 

alcohol. So the changes here we’re talking about, it’s for “. . . 

immediate roadside licence suspension and vehicle 

impoundments for drinking, drugs, and driving.” 

 

And I think that anytime we’re talking about drinking and 

driving, Mr. Speaker, you can’t be tough enough on people who 

choose to violate those laws. People get killed as a result of 

drinking and driving. We know those numbers are going up in 

Saskatchewan. So it’s no secret to anyone who drives a vehicle, 

if they’re drinking, that it’s against the law. But it is also very 

dangerous, so I think the tough measures are required. And you 

know, I’m not sure how far we have to go to get people to 

completely stop, but it still seems to be an issue here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I remember when I grew up in a small town, we always 

had grad parties every year, and that was kind of a highlight, a 

social highlight for everybody in town. And we would go from 

grad party to grad party. So we’d go the Lafleche grad party and 



7502 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

then we’d go to the Limerick grad party and the Gravelbourg 

grad party and down to Glentworth grad party. And that’s what 

we did. And drinking was such a part of that culture when I 

grew up. And that was before they had MADD, Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving, before we had school buses arranged 

for kids to go to these parties. Every year there was two or three 

fatal accidents as a result of people drinking and driving, going 

home from these grad parties. 

 

So that was the culture we were in. I think it’s changed. Now 

I’ve raised city kids, so I don’t quite know what city kids . . . 

You know, I don’t know what farm kids are doing anymore. 

But from the sense I get from my nieces and nephews is that 

they take drinking and driving much more seriously than I did 

as a teenager. And part of it is because of stiffer penalties and 

losing loved ones and seeing these terrible, horrific accidents 

happen as a result of drinking and driving. 

 

So we see a course now. The length of the course is going to be 

. . . There’s a course that they have to take after certain 

infractions, and the time to complete the course is being 

extended a little bit just to bring it in line with other SGI 

problems. I think, you know, we know that maybe taking a 

course may not be enough, but at least we’re trying to make 

some changes. 

 

Another amendment he’s talking about here is for allowing the 

cancellation of an impounded vehicle’s licence plate. And I 

know my colleague yesterday raised some concerns about 

whether that’s a cost-effective method of dealing with this type 

of issue. So I know customers are unhappy when people . . . We 

take money for their licence even though their vehicle’s 

impounded, but they should have thought of that before the 

vehicle got impounded. I mean, it’s just the price you pay. So 

I’m not too sympathetic with the customers. I know I’m 

unhappy when I get a speeding ticket and I pay the ticket and 

then I get an additional fee on my insurance. It doesn’t make me 

very happy, but the fact of the matter was, I chose to speed. So 

kind of, too bad, so sad for me, right? And I think, you know, if 

the customers are unhappy about their vehicle being impounded 

and they still have to pay their fees, so be it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I guess the minister’s responding to unhappy customers in 

this context, and I guess they’ve convinced him that this is the 

right way to go. I’m not sure I agree with the minister on that 

one, but again if we had more time to consider this over the 

next few months it would be helpful, but we’re to respond to 

this in a very short order. 

 

The other, it looks like another change that they’re bringing in 

is allowing additional criminal code offences to be reported to 

SGI including causing death by criminal negligence, causing 

bodily harm by criminal negligence, and dangerous operation of 

a motor vehicle while street racing. And this would align in 

with the proposed changes to The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act, which I believe is also, yes it’s also being 

presented in terms of motorcycles in this session, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So what he’s saying here is that convictions for those offences 

would trigger the ability to sue the responsible driver for pain or 

suffering or bereavement damages. And I think that absolutely 

does bring more fairness. He’s saying it’s bringing more 

fairness to the scenario. But you know, the fault, if an innocent 

party is killed by somebody committing a criminal offense, SGI 

needs to know that. And I think that’s even more egregious, and 

absolutely our automobile insurance company should know 

what kind of crimes are being committed by people driving 

vehicles in order to ensure that we’re able to respond 

appropriately to the situation and the crimes that are being 

committed there. 

 

Another amendment he’s talking about in this bill is around 

vehicle ownership. And here the change is going to say that a 

person, an owner is a person registered with the vehicle in any 

jurisdiction. So this helps with clarity for issuing tickets to 

out-of-province vehicle owners for automatic enforcement, 

things like red light or speeding offences, right? Red light or 

speed offences. So these are the automatic enforcement and 

would be retroactive to 2006. 

 

I think it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I actually had to attend in 

small claims court this morning because somebody from 

Manitoba backed into my car. I raised it with SGI. I wasn’t able 

to actually get anything but their licence plate number as they 

drove away, and SGI wasn’t able to help me. I had to pay out of 

my own deductible if I wanted the repairs. So I had to go 

through the process of small claims to get that payment, the 700 

deductible from the person. I had their licence plate number. 

They refused to accept responsibility. So thankfully I won my 

judgment, and now I guess I’m hoping that SGI will help me at 

least enforce the judgment. So we’ll see what happens. I’ll keep 

you posted. 

 

But this is an area where I feel very let down by SGI, because I 

had to go through the whole court process myself in order to get 

the judgment so that SGI would now enforce it. And I’m 

thinking, what am I paying insurance for if I’m the one that has 

to chase down the offender, despite the fact I had their licence 

number and I was an eyewitness to them backing into me? 

 

So I just kind of wonder sometimes where the priorities are. But 

thankfully, you know, I was able and had the wherewithal to 

follow it up in small claims, and the defendant never bothered 

showing up. So it made it an easy case for me because I just got 

my order, but it certainly took me over 14 months to get to this 

point. So it’s a bit frustrating. So I don’t see that changing here. 

 

But anyways the minister has said there’s “an additional change 

. . . [requiring] some motorists to wear helmets and eye 

protection.” And then there’s, as he said, there’s quite a variety 

of small housekeeping amendments in addition to the facial 

recognition implementation of that technology. So again I think 

this is an important change to identifying people and people’s 

privacy rights are at risk. And I think certainly the Minister of 

Justice would be looking at his staff to provide opinions in 

terms of the constitutional issues that present itself. I think that, 

you know, watchdog agencies are going to take a close look at 

these types of things as well. 

 

I know my colleague yesterday, from Saskatoon Centre, raised 

a number of concerns that are being raised in the States about 

these types of technologies. I think, you know, part of it is a 

reaction to security, and we see such an emphasis on security 

these days. And maybe that’s just the times we live in, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I think we can never lose sight of people’s 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7503 

liberties and freedoms. And the balancing act is never easy, but 

it’s one that needs careful consideration. And so I hope we 

don’t see this bill in court at some point as a constitutional case 

regarding people’s freedoms. I’m hoping that the homework has 

already been done. 

 

But we certainly will continue to ask those questions, as we 

should, and consult with people when we can. Hopefully by the 

time we get to committee, we’ll have more questions for the 

minister on this bill and its impact on civil liberties. So at this 

point I think, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . you know, this is the 

extent of my comments and I would like to move to adjourn the 

debate on Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 

Measures) Amendment Act, 2015. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 185. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 186 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 186 — The 

Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I hear 

from the other side already. They’re waiting for some 

comments. You know, I appreciate that they do listen and they 

check Hansard the next day to make sure they’re accurate in 

what I say. And I will actually revisit the good old days of the 

’70s, but I do want to talk right off the bat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that I am talking about and I’m entering into the debate on the 

Act. 

 

The short title is The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment 

Act, 2015, but it’s got quite a long title, actually. I should read it 

into the record if nobody else has done that: An Act to amend 

The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act and The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2010 and to make related and consequential 

amendments to The Ombudsman Act, 2012 and The Planning 

and Development Act, 2007 to Strengthen the Integrity and 

Accountability of Municipal Entities and to Bring Municipal 

Entities Within the Jurisdiction of the Ombudsman. End of title. 

 

[15:00] 

 

That’s quite a handle. That’s quite a handle. It’s more than three 

names. But especially the last part: to strengthen the integrity 

and accountability of municipal entities and bring municipal 

entities within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman. 

 

So I think we are all aware, and we were all following this in 

the media, of what was happening and how it came to be that 

Justice Ron Barclay was seconded to do some work out in the 

rural part here and to make sense of what was happening, and 

we were glad to have him do that. And so now we have 

something that has been brought forward for us to take a look 

at, and we’re looking at legislative amendments that are based 

on Justice Ron Barclay’s inquiry into the RM [rural 

municipality] of Sherwood’s proposed Wascana Village 

development. 

 

It was quite a thing, and we have been following it in the media 

and it was one that had . . . The whole development showed 

how things can go really off the rails when there is no 

accountability, no transparency. And it was one that many 

people were wondering, how could this possibly be? How could 

this possibly continue? But yet they were all within the rules as 

they were at the time. 

 

So we’re glad to see that Justice Barclay did his work. And if 

some of us . . . And I have actually read the report and I was 

shocked at what actually was going on. I mean, it’s quite a 

thing. And sometimes people say, you know, reality . . . You 

can’t write a story like that. People would say it’s too, too, too 

far out there. But he did a great job of detailing the actual 

events and then making some recommendations, and I just want 

to give a hats off, a shout-out, and a very good thank you to 

Justice Ron Barclay for his good work. 

 

Sometimes we’re asked to tackle things that are difficult, that I 

know was stressful for many of the people involved. And it’s 

tough when you’re asked to recall events that you wish hadn’t 

happened or you weren’t sure what was actually happening. But 

in the light of day, these conflicts of interests and inappropriate 

actions came forward, and we finally got to the bottom of what 

was going on in the RM of Sherwood No. 159. 

 

And so I just want to take a minute and reflect on some of the 

comments the minister made, because that often gives us a good 

basis to go forward and think about what we want to be asking 

questions about in committee and, for the folks who are at home 

watching this, because the purpose of the second round of 

debates is to give time for people to . . . Maybe they haven’t 

heard that the bill is out and they want to get more information 

so they can go to the legislative website and look for Bill 186 

and take a look at it. 

 

It’s quite a thorough bill, but of course it needs to be. It needs to 

be thorough. It needs to cover all the bases, dot all the i’s, cross 

all the t’s. It’s got to be thorough. And of course, really, it does 

set out three . . . When the title talks about municipal entities, it 

really talks about the northern municipalities, the cities, and the 

municipalities Act. So they’re really tightening up three parallel 

municipal organizations or levels. 

 

And I think that’s an important note that, as a province, we have 

our conflict of interest guidelines and, you know, we file our 

annual reports and we have our annual meetings with the 

commissioner and we enjoy the conversations. We review the 

yearly activities. But also we know, and we’ve seen in the 

House where we’ve had the commissioner, and it’s been on 

both sides of the House where questions have been raised about 

behaviour on both sides of the House. And the commissioner 

has taken some time in the past, since I’ve been here, to reflect 

on that, and written reports. And so it’s an office that is well 

used and it is connected to the daily activities of what we do. 

 



7504 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

And we know that it’s a wise thing that if we feel that there’s a 

conflict of interest, to consult with the commissioner, to say: 

this is what’s happening, and is it a good thing that I should be 

involved or not be involved? Should I disclose information that 

may show a conflict? Or I’m a little nervous about something. 

It’s always important to resolve that. It’s always important to 

resolve that. And then when the commissioner says no, that 

there doesn’t seem to be a perceived advantage that you will 

receive in participating in this, that’s an assurance that we all 

feel much better about. In the case of the RM of Sherwood, the 

reeve seemed to be going ahead and not paying attention to 

what might be perceived from the public to be a real conflict, 

and we really need to make sure that we guard against that. 

 

So I do appreciate that the minister has brought this forward. I 

do have some questions about what has been left out of this. But 

first I’ll go through some of his thoughts. So he talks about how 

he has, through a single bill, introduced amendments to The 

Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, The Northern Municipalities 

Act, and to strengthen municipal conflict of interest provisions, 

and as well, that the amendments will be made to The Planning 

and Development Act and The Ombudsman Act. So it’s very 

thorough, very thorough, and as I said, that’s the way, that’s the 

way it has to be. 

 

So he talks about, “The proposed amendments balance local 

municipal autonomy with the need to reassure the public that 

government has been proactive and responsible in strengthening 

. . . [the] conflict of interest legislation in a way that’s effective 

and practical.” So we need to think about what does he mean by 

effective and practical because, you know . . . And Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you would have some experience with this, and I have, 

when I’ve lived in rural Saskatchewan, up north. It’s not easy to 

get people to be on boards. And they do. And I just want to take 

a minute and give a real shout-out to the people throughout this 

province who volunteer on any level of board. And they have a 

strong sense of community, and they do it out of the sense that 

they want to make their community better than it was before. 

 

And so this is something that you have to balance because you 

don’t want to go too far and make it too onerous so that you 

discourage people from volunteering because they might say, 

well I don’t mind filling out a one-page, you know, summary 

but there may be some private information that they don’t want 

to share or they feel in some way this information is not 

necessary. And again this is a thing that . . . 

 

And I don’t know. As I’m just talking about here, I’m 

wondering if the Privacy Commissioner’s been consulted on 

this because I always think there’s a balance between what you 

want to know and what you need to know. Often, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as humans, we’re very curious people and we often 

want to know an awful lot of stuff about a lot of things. But the 

question is, do we really need to know that? And this is where it 

has to be that issue about being effective. 

 

And I think this is important that we think about what is the true 

test in terms of your, you know, what you have to give out. And 

we’ve talked about that in terms of private information, even 

when it comes to disclosing personal addresses, that kind of 

thing, you know. And actually I raised with the Privacy 

Commissioner the other day about an issue on some of the 

forms of the Rentalsman where it says we’ve got to know the 

home address of the landlord or the tenant after the fact. And 

we go, well why do you need to know that? You just need to 

know a mailing address. Why do you need to know a home 

address? There’s always this issue of balancing, you know, and 

it’s important what we need to know and what we want to 

know. 

 

And so I’m curious to know and it doesn’t sound . . . And so we 

would have a question off the bat: has the Privacy 

Commissioner been involved in this at all in terms of is this fair 

enough? Is this a balance between the citizen who is stepping 

forward to offer his or her service in a leadership role in their 

municipality, and does it meet the reasonable test of what you 

need to know? And of course this is the question. This is the 

age-old question between want to know and need to know. And 

we wrestle with that all the time. We wrestle with that all the 

time. 

 

And he goes on to talk about, you know, “Since potential 

conflicts of interest are faced by council members in all 

municipalities regardless of type, amendments are proposed to 

all three . . . [municipalities] to ensure consistent rules and 

requirements for elected municipal officials [right] across the 

province.” And I think that makes a lot of sense. You have the 

three municipal entities, and if their rules are based on the 

provincial rules, then there’s a sense of the Saskatchewan style 

of doing this. And that makes a lot of sense. And so we’re glad 

to see that, and this is important. 

 

Now you can be consistent but again there are three, you know 

. . . And it’s interesting. People would say, well they’re all the 

same. And I’m sure that people would say no, they’re not the 

same. The Cities Act is very different. The people who live in 

the cities have a different kind of twist than those who live in 

rural Saskatchewan and those who live in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I think though that that doesn’t mean that you have to 

create inconsistencies, but you have to allow for some 

differences. And so we’ll be asking, so what are the 

differences? Particularly, you know, I can see between a 

northern and a city official, there might be some necessary 

allowances for some differences between them so they can be 

consistent but yet allow for some unique differences because of 

the type of geography that they live in and that type of thing. 

 

I think the challenge will be for all of us though is, how does 

this, what does this do for getting people to step forward? I 

know, for example, you know, it’s becoming more and more 

. . . And it’s interesting. During the past election we’ve had a 

record number of people who’ve stepped down in the federal 

election. I think the number was 22 about three weeks before 

the midway point. And people were talking about, they’ve 

never seen so many people step aside even though they had 

filed all their papers and the parties had vetted everyone. But 

even so, 22 people had stepped down, and they have never had 

this happen in a federal election before. And it was because of 

public embarrassment about a statement they had made or 

something they had found or something. They hadn’t done all 

their homework. And of course, in this day and age it’s pretty 

hard to do all your homework when you’re dealing with social 

media and perceived conflict of interest and that type of thing. 

 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7505 

And so here again we have an issue. And it was funny. I was 

listening to CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], or 

watching CBC. They were talking about this when they were 

saying about, how do we get the best people to step forward to 

serve in leadership roles? And yet we have so many people at 

the last minute, even after all the signs have been printed. And 

in one case in British Columbia, the candidate has already, her 

name was going to be on the ballot regardless. 

 

Was that a Conservative candidate in British Columbia? And 

her name was already on the ballot. There was no way. She had 

withdrawn. But it was too late to do anything about it. But for 

some reason, she had withdrawn. But it really shows how 

important it is that we talk about how do we develop that 

leadership, and how do we help people vet themselves. 

 

But what happened on this CBC news item, they were talking 

about how people need to be sort of self vetting. There has to be 

sort of this self-analysis about, are you willing to have what you 

say show up the next day in the news, or for my example, to 

show up in the member’s statement the next day if people were 

listening? How many were listening? I was just wondering if 

anyone was listening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A little silence over 

there. I thought they were hanging on every word I said. But I’ll 

try to speak more controversially, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But at any rate my point is, my point is that it’s getting harder 

and harder to get people to step forward. But at the same time, 

we have to make sure we have really, really good people step 

forward who can stand to have what they say showing up in the 

light of day the next day. 

 

So he talks about the three main purposes these amendments 

achieve. And first he talks about the specific recommendations 

and observations from the Barclay report with the legislative 

changes that effectively raise the bar for municipal officials. 

And that’s a good thing. And we’re glad to see that this is 

actually moving fairly quickly, you know. 

 

I think of now the proof will be in the pudding here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because I don’t know when this bill comes into force. 

We had, for example, in this session, that when we came back 

in November of 2011, boy everybody was in a rush to get the 

lobbying bill passed, eh? We had to get that lobbying bill 

passed. We had to move on that lobbying bill. You know, it was 

on fire. It was crazy how the government side was saying, we 

have to get that done. And we worked extra hard. And I know 

my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana worked very hard on that 

bill in the early months of 2012 because for some reason that 

had to happen. 

 

And of course we know that in fact it started out with a great 

fanfare but took two or three years to actually put into effect. So 

we’re hoping that this is much better and much stronger right 

off the bat. So we look at this and we think about this. 

 

And he talks about raising the bar for municipal officials. And 

that gets back to my point about how do we develop leadership 

in our cities and our rural areas, in our North, right across the 

province so we can have people at all levels of government. 

And I mean provincial and federal too. We want to have the 

best people representing us in all parties, in all parties. So that 

actually, you know, I mean this is a challenge that we have. 

 

And if I can speak frankly, I think that when we look at our 

candidates, we want to make sure we have people that we feel 

really good representing us no matter what the outcome of the 

election is, right? Now some of us may say, I will only accept a 

certain candidate representing me, whether they’re New 

Democrats or Conservatives or Liberals. But at the end of the 

day when the vote is taken, we’ve got to get behind that person 

and say we really appreciate that person, and we’re going to 

accept that person as our MLA, our MP [Member of 

Parliament], our city councillor, our reeve, you know, all of 

that. But because it’s what makes our community tick. But 

we’ve got to have people who have the capacity to do the best 

job they can. 

 

So I’m hoping that this can do that. And you know, it’s 

interesting, and whether you’ve had people come forward in 

your riding from some of the rural communities, you know, 

concerned about the level of capacity some of their fellow 

councillors may have. We’ve had it. We’ve had it, and we’ve 

not had any way of dealing with this. And this is really, really 

important. 

 

So I think this could be really a bit of a game changer here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So we’re really hoping that it improves the . . . 

like they say, raise the bar right across the province. But I hope 

that it doesn’t do it by disqualifying others who might not be 

willing to step forward. 

 

Second, he says he wants to “. . . improve the ability for 

government, through the minister and cabinet, to address 

situations of municipal conflict of interest that may arise in the 

future.” And I think that’s fair enough. I think conflict of 

interest, and of course that’s what Judge Barclay was aiming to 

get at, and we hope that does happen. And he has, the minister 

has identified a really important area, talking about conflict of 

interest issues that may arise in the future. 

 

I wonder though, some of the times that we’ve had concerns is 

during the election period of these RMs. And I won’t speak of 

the North because I’ve never had anybody contact me about a 

situation in the North. But I mean even yesterday, you know, 

with the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], 

there was some issues you read in the paper about rules around 

elections and some perceived things not going well. 

 

But I have had people contact me about some of the elections 

and some of the concerns in rural Saskatchewan. I have 

contacted the minister at the time about those. And of course 

there’s very limited action that you really could do unless it was 

extremely, extremely obvious, where you might get into a 

ministerial review. And those situations are very, very rare. 

 

But in the case of some of the RMs where, you know, that the 

people . . . You’re not dealing with the number of voters like 

you might in a provincial or federal. You’re dealing with tens or 

hundreds of people voting. And so you have a situation that if 

there is a perceived wrongdoing in an election, you know, it 

happens pretty quick and it’s pretty hard to undo. 

 

And so I would have liked to have seen maybe some 



7506 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

consultation with Elections Saskatchewan in terms of how they 

could be used in municipal elections, especially in a way to be a 

bit of a fairness or almost a bit of an ombudsman role in terms 

of elections. I think that would have been a bit of a proactive 

piece of work here because I know one area we often have a lot 

of complaints about are the elections: the elections aren’t 

perceived to be fair, that they’re not run as well as they might. 

And so I think that there’s some real work here that he could 

have done. 

 

And then finally he says that he “. . . will expand the Provincial 

Ombudsman’s mandate to review and investigate municipal 

matters, including conflict of interest and code of ethics 

matters.” And so this will be a very interesting one. I know 

we’ve often had concerns about issues that have been raised. 

You know, in my particular circumstance, it’s a city issue, and 

there’s been no way to get some feedback or some address, 

some way to resolve the issue. And so this could be very 

helpful. 

 

Now it will be interesting to see how this is applied and whether 

or not there will be limitations. I know for example, the Privacy 

Commissioner in my city has kind of felt a little stymied. The 

city has not responded in a really positive way to a provincial 

organization coming in and being there. I mean they’ve been 

fairly good, but sometimes they do argue, I think, a bit about 

jurisdiction. And whether or not this might be the case with the 

Ombudsman or if there is a specific ombudsman set up or a 

specific person within the Ombudsman’s office who is set up 

just to look at municipality issues, that would be an interesting 

circumstance, and I think that would be a good idea. 

 

And so we’ll see how that plays out and whether or not they can 

play out with all the issues that may come forward. Or will they 

be only limited to conflict of interest issues? And so I think it’s 

really important . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I was going for 

it, just fit right in there. 

 

And so it’s important that we look at this. And I’m really 

excited about that, but I think that some of the other officers 

could have played a helping hand a bit in this in terms of 

privacy, again taking a look at it in terms of meeting the bar in 

terms of need to know, want to know. I think that that would 

have been reassuring. And again the elections folks, because I 

think they need to be somewhere that if there is a perceived 

problem, perceived unfair advantage that there is nowhere to 

turn really in a municipal issue. And so I think that might be 

one area too. 

 

So I think this is good. I think this is reasonable to go for. We 

will be taking a look at it though. We’ll have questions in 

committee. And we think that these kind of requirements are 

reasonable; again though, we have to make sure that they’re not 

too onerous. And I do see, it’s interesting as municipalities 

become . . . You know they used to have three-year terms, now 

they have four-year terms, sort of like us. And now they’re 

going to have the same forms like us, and for some that might 

be just a reasonable thing. Others, I think it will be interesting 

to see the impact on this. 

 

And as I said, with the federal election where we saw so many 

people just deciding to bow out, even at the last minute, if 22 

bowed out during the campaign, how many bowed during the 

pre-election period? How many didn’t get past the vetting? I 

know each party does a pretty thorough vetting. The parties 

were saying that on TV, and I would assume that’s the case 

with all parties. It’s only a reasonable thing to do. It’s a pretty 

common practice. 

 

And so I think that this is the kind of bill that has a lot of 

potential. It’s the unintended consequences that we’ll be 

looking at. And of course the worst unintended consequence 

will be of course that we start to have less and less people 

stepping forward because they just can’t be bothered to file the 

forms. And somehow we have to make it so that it’s not 

onerous, that it’s reasonable but it’s done. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, as is often said, you can file 

all the forms in the world you want, but at the end of the day 

people have to act with a basis, a self-policing way to make sure 

that they act in a way that’s fair and balanced when they’re 

dealing with their different issues that’s on the agendas of our 

municipalities, that they do that as a daily basis and that they 

have the wherewithal of self-monitoring to know that this is a 

time for me to identify to my colleagues that I’ve got a conflict 

of interest. And I step back, and then people move on very 

quickly. This happens all the time. 

 

And so this is what we talk about and I think the minister 

hopefully talked about when he was talking about the 

development of capacity. And somehow there has to be a way 

of helping the folks who are stepping up in leadership roles 

develop the capacity to understand how they can be really 

effective leaders. And part of it is to know how to be fair and 

balanced and when to step aside when there is a potential 

conflict. 

 

So I think that there’s a lot of potential in this bill, and we really 

hope that the unintended consequences will be minimal. And 

we sure think that this is something that needs to, once it’s 

passed, needs to be in place right away so that people can be 

starting to take a look. I know the municipal elections are 

coming up next fall, and we have questions about what will this 

mean for that. Hopefully it’ll be in place for that so people 

know that it will be in place for folks who will be elected, so 

that if it isn’t then it’s another four years lost and wasted. We 

don’t want to see that happening. We want to make sure that 

this is happening right, right away. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that other members want to 

get up on the floor and speak about other issues. Mr. Speaker, I 

found it hard to tie this back to the ’70s because . . . I will tie it 

back to the ’70s. 

 

You know, what I will say, you know this all started with a very 

good premier, Premier Blakeney, who was one of the best. He 

really had a way, he had a special talent in terms of 

administration. And I think that we can all sort of take a look 

and we can take a look to the ’70s. And I’ve got to tell you, we 

hit a low spot in the ’80s when it came to how we had . . . what 

was happening in terms of conflict of interest and behaviour of 

members. That was a low spot and I think we can all admit that. 

We can all admit that. And of course the ’90s . . . But here we 

are in the ’10s, and I think that we can move forward and use 

this legislation to make the best of us. But let us not go back to 

the ’80s. The ’70s was pretty good; a lot of good things were 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7507 

happening in the’70s. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of Bill 186, 

amendment to The Municipalities Act, The Cities Act, and The 

Northern Municipalities Act. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest 

Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 187 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it’s 

my pleasure to enter into discussion this afternoon around the 

matter of farm land ownership in Saskatchewan. And certainly, 

you know, this is in some ways speaks to the heritage and 

history and well, certainly as well the future of Saskatchewan 

when you look at legislation that impacts farm ownership in 

Saskatchewan and impacts on farm families and on ranching 

families across this province. 

 

The changes are certainly welcomed that we see in Bill No. 

187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. You 

know, certainly we’ve been bringing this matter to the attention 

of government for a long, long period of time. The concern that 

foreign capital, foreign purchase of farm land in Saskatchewan 

was a valid concern, as well identifying the loopholes in place, 

the inconsistencies that allowed a transaction for one pension 

fund to acquire land while others couldn’t, all while 

undermining the ownership rules and the economic futures of 

farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it’s important for us when we look at farms in 

Saskatchewan, we look at land ownership in Saskatchewan, to 

identify that certainly farmers and ranchers, land owners across 

Saskatchewan, take a great pride in those tracts of land. They 

take great pride in that operation. They take great pride in the 

stewardship of that land. And you know, I think it’s still true 

that many of us have a strong family connection to the farm, 

and if not currently, not more than one step or two steps 

removed from that farming history in this province. 

 

We are looking at the risk of your farm land and undermining 

this important asset and aspect of our economy with foreign 

acquisition. The illegal foreign acquisition of farm land, it’s a 

big concern. And so we’ve been bringing this matter to 

government, pressing government to make it a priority, make it 

something that they care about, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we are 

pleased to see some changes here at this point in time. But 

certainly during this period of time, where I think we’ve had 

lots of concerns identified to many of us as it relates to foreign 

acquisition, illegal foreign acquisition of farm land, there hasn’t 

been a whole lot of action by the government. 

 

And in fact in one purchase, just one transaction — setting 

aside what other potential transactions have occurred across 

Saskatchewan — in just one transaction, over 100,000 acres 

were purchased by a pension plan. And as I say, this was, you 

know, the pension plan utilizing really a loophole in the 

legislation. And it was an inequity and it was an inconsistency 

because of the way that that pension plan acquired that land. 

Other pension plans certainly weren’t able to do that as well. 

 

And you know, it was a concern to us and to Saskatchewan 

people that land was being acquired by pension plans, and 

certainly a concern that there’s land that’s alleged to have been 

acquired illegally by foreign interests and foreign capital with 

some pretty complex schemes, Mr. Speaker, around how the 

capital arrangements and what the benefit was, you know, 

through an agreement to the land. 

 

And you know, certainly the Farm Land Security Board in this 

province is an incredibly important tool, a very important board 

to ensure the integrity of the laws of Saskatchewan and to 

ensure the integrity of farms and ranches across Saskatchewan, 

to ensure that they’re not undermined by illegal foreign 

acquisition, Mr. Speaker. And you know, this matter has been a 

big concern across Saskatchewan for the past number of years. 

And government hasn’t given it the attention that it deserves 

while potentially a large portion of land across Saskatchewan 

has been acquired either by skirting around rules, not adhering 

to the intent of the legislation, or potentially illegally, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what we see in this legislation is an improvement around 

providing some of the tools to the Farm Land Security Board. 

Certainly they needed more robust support to ensure that they 

could fulfill their role and to ensure the laws of Saskatchewan 

were adhered to. And this legislation provides more authority to 

the Farm Land Security Board. That’s good. 

 

It increases fines for individuals and corporations found to be 

breaking the laws, Mr. Speaker. Certainly that’s important as 

well. And it also puts in place measures that will cause 

statements of, you know, declarations of capital or of where the 

dollars are coming from, Mr. Speaker. And that’s important. 

 

And I believe there’s some sort of provision — and this is, you 

know, an aspect that’ll be important for committee to have fully 

understood — I believe there’s some measure around 

suggesting that this will empower the Farm Land Security 

Board to cause, in a circumstance where there’s question or not 

enough information or cause for concern with a transaction, this 

will allow the Farm Land Security Board to cause and compel 

the entity that’s potentially purchasing or trying to acquire the 

land to prove to the board that they are in compliance with the 

laws. And I think that that’s where we hope that this legislation 

is strong enough. We’re not sure yet that it is. Certainly a 

statutory declaration is one aspect. But you know, a full 

disclosure of the legal arrangements or any attached benefits or 

interests on the transaction are critically important. 

 



7508 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

What we’re talking about, if you chat with folks that are 

concerned about this issue and have knowledge in finance and 

agriculture, are pretty complex schemes or in some ways rather 

simple schemes at times too, Mr. Speaker. But it’s been a 

concern for us and Saskatchewan people that this government 

has sat idly by while these schemes have been potentially 

utilized to at least, by way of the spirit and intent of the law, to 

break the law and to acquire land by way of foreign interests, 

Mr. Speaker. So we believe that the disclosure of all 

arrangements and the capital behind it are something really, 

really important. 

 

You hear of . . . You know, we want to make sure that this 

legislation is as robust as it can be to prevent what’s commonly 

known as swaps, Mr. Speaker, something that, you know, 

certainly those in the agricultural community have been 

concerned about — a tool that, a legal agreement that those that 

are trying to skirt the rules, if you will, Mr. Speaker, to acquire 

land as a foreign entity are utilizing, Mr. Speaker. So we do 

look forward to committee time with this piece of legislation, 

because it’s critical that we get it right. 

 

Finally, after a long period of time, this government has seemed 

to identify that there’s a problem on this front, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

too bad, Mr. Speaker, that as Saskatchewan people were 

speaking up in coffee shops and town halls across 

Saskatchewan, that this government sat idly by while, in one 

case, over 100,000 acres of Saskatchewan farm land was 

purchased. 

 

And while we still don’t know the full extent of what may have 

occurred with illegal foreign acquisition of farm land in this 

province, it was frustrating as well, Mr. Speaker, to have a 

review conducted by government. It was, at one point we 

thought, maybe an admission that government was going to 

finally take this issue seriously. And they put forward some sort 

of personnel towards an investigation apparently. But there was 

no real public reporting out on that, no real transparency and, I 

understand, a very narrow scope of review within that 

investigation itself. 

 

Currently as legislation stands of course, Saskatchewan, 

Canadian residents, or Canadian entities can own, you know, 

can own farm land in Saskatchewan. Those below, you know, 

that don’t comply on that front and under, can own under, I 

guess, 10 acres, Mr. Speaker. But when you’re looking at the 

important role of agriculture in this province, the proud history 

of farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan, and certainly their 

importance as well to the future of this province, it’s important 

that we get this right. 

 

Now I know some of the amendments that are being brought 

forward by government include pension plans. Administrators 

of pension fund assets and trusts will be ineligible to buy farm 

land. And I guess on that front, Mr. Speaker, the question would 

be, where was government as, you know, with due respect, 

those that were pretty close to senior leaders of this 

government, when they were actively involved in that large 

transaction, Mr. Speaker, that concluded with the sell-off of 

over 100,000 acres to the Canada Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker? 

And I don’t think, this legislation certainly doesn’t go back and 

answer questions about who knew what when, and why 

individuals that are so close to the Premier and cabinet, why 

they were conducting, you know, this sort of a process, how 

that was simply, I guess, allowed to go on, Mr. Speaker. And no 

changes to cause them to divest that or anything identified in 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the question is why, when it was apparent that there was 

a problem with certainly those that are very close to this 

government, Mr. Speaker, why weren’t there actions then? Why 

did they wait? Why did they sit on their hands? And why, when 

Saskatchewan people have been identifying this issue, farmers 

and ranchers across Saskatchewan, for a very long period of 

time . . . I hope members opposite have heard this, because 

certainly I’ve heard it all across this province, Mr. Speaker, for 

a long period of time. But significant concerns about the 

potential of foreign capital coming in and acquiring land in 

Saskatchewan, skirting the laws in place, and the Farm Land 

Security Board quite simply not having the tools to enforce the 

law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve been saying for a long period of time, we’ve been 

trying to put this directly on the agenda of government to take 

seriously. We’ve been identifying the issue to government and 

we’ve been saying simply, let’s enforce the laws that are in 

place here, make sure that there’s mechanisms in place to do so. 

And you know, as we move forward through committee and 

we’ll, you know, as we study the legislation, we’ll make sure 

that this legislation is as robust as it can be. If there’s 

opportunities to strengthen it, certainly we’ll do that. Because 

this is important to the people of the province. 

 

And just in closing, Mr. Speaker, you know, certainly we can 

think of farm land from an agricultural community, certainly 

from an economic perspective, and there’s no small players in 

this province on that front, Mr. Speaker. An impressive force 

economically. But we also need to look at who that is, Mr. 

Speaker, and the pride that exists within farms and within 

ranches all across the province, the proud part of our history 

and heritage that farms and ranches play within this province, 

and certainly identifying that if not managed well and if a 

neglectful government allowed, you know, foreign capital and 

foreign interests to take over the land of this province, it would 

certainly compromise and undermine the future of this 

province. 

 

So it’s been frustrating, Mr. Speaker, for those of us that have 

been raising this issue for many years, Mr. Speaker, to see the 

inaction and idleness of government. But certainly we welcome 

some of the changes that we see here today. And we’ll certainly 

follow this through to committee and continued consultation 

with Saskatchewan people to make sure that this piece of 

legislation is as strong and as effective as it can be to allow the 

laws of Saskatchewan to be upheld. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

And at this point I’ll adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 

2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:45] 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7509 

Bill No. 188 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 188 — The Best 

Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 188, An Act to amend certain Acts 

respecting Awarding of Contracts, or as the title in this very 

brief bill says, an Act that may be cited as The Best Value in 

Procurement Act, 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill is really a short bill; it’s one page. It 

includes amendments to two pieces of legislation, The 

Highways and Transportation Act, 1997, and The Public Works 

and Services Act. And effectively what it does . . . And I think 

it’s worth taking a look at what has actually changed. The 

present legislation which is in existence right now . . . And I’ll 

first go to The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997. It states 

that, in section 55 which has the heading, “Authority for 

awarding contract to other than the lowest bidder,” so section 

55 says: 

 

Where, in the minister’s opinion, it is not expedient or in 

the public interest to award the contract for construction of 

a public improvement to the lowest bidder, the minister 

shall report the matter to and obtain the authority of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council before awarding the 

contract to any person other than the lowest bidder. 

 

So, end of the quote of the legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

section 2 of our Bill 188 takes that particular clause, which is 

now there in The Highways and Transportation Act, and 

changes it. 

 

And I think I need to state what the bill or what section 55 of 

the existing Act means. Basically it says if there’s a contract 

and the minister or the people in the department providing 

advice to the minister think it’s not appropriate to give the 

contract to the lowest bidder, rather than just not give it to the 

lowest bidder, they have to report the matter — in other words, 

create a written record — and send it to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council which is the cabinet. And the cabinet then 

has to authorize that change in the contract. 

 

And so it’s quite a complicated process, but I think the most 

important part about the process is that it’s public. Because 

when it’s done, there will be an order in council which 

everybody can see which says, these are the contracts or these 

were the bids that we’ve got. We’ve chosen this contract. It’s 

not the lowest bid, but for these reasons we want to accept it. 

And then you end up having a written record in an order in 

council. 

 

Now what does the legislation do that we’re looking at today? 

What has the minister proposed? Well what he’s proposed is 

this wording which is a little different, a little different process. 

And it says, “Awarding of contracts.” And basically section 

55(1) says, “Subject to subsection (2).” So subsection (2) says, 

“The minister is not required to accept any tender.” Which, I 

guess, that’s reasonable. So subject to him not or her not being 

able to require to accept any tender, the minister shall: 

 

(a) obtain competitive prices for the construction of all 

public improvements through the public tender process 

mentioned in section 53; and 

 

(b) award the contract to the bidder whose bid, in the 

opinion of the minister, offers the best value taking into 

consideration all or any of the factors described in the 

tender documents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, effectively we now have a process which is 

controlled by the minister, the opinion of the minister, and we’d 

like to think that the opinion of the minister will be well 

informed by civil servants, but there is no public nature to this 

and it doesn’t have to go to cabinet and it doesn’t require an 

order in council. So effectively we’ve got a process which 

allows for the term “best value” in the opinion of the minister. 

 

Now we’ve been talking about a few contracts in the legislature 

the last few days where we hope that best value was obtained in 

the contract but the one that we heard about, SaskPower, 

they’ve obviously got some clauses in there that are causing a 

great deal of difficulty and a great deal of expense for the 

public. And so the question comes whether this freeing up the 

process, if I can put it that way, here is of benefit or the best for 

the public. And part of that question becomes, okay, where and 

how will this information become public? 

 

And I think that it deals with some of that issue of how to 

capture local interest or local expertise, some of the other 

things, but it does it in a way that maybe isn’t as transparent as 

it could be. And we know from the number of questions that 

we’ve had over the last couple of years on the contracting 

practices of the government that to give a more secretive 

process to contracting is maybe not the best thing for all of us. 

 

So then the second part of this bill, which is section 3, deals 

with The Public Works and Services Act. And once again it 

repeals subsection 9(3) of The Public Works and Services Act. 

And just for the record I’ll read what the existing legislation, 

what the law is today, and it says: 

 

If, in the minister’s opinion, it is not expedient or in the 

public interest to award the contract for construction or 

alteration of a public work to the lowest bidder, the 

minister shall report the matter to and obtain the authority 

of the Lieutenant Governor in Council before awarding the 

contract to any person other than the lowest bidder. 

 

Now for somebody who is listening very carefully, what they 

will note is that the only difference in the wording in legislation 

in The Public Works and Services Act from The Highways and 

Transportation Act is that in The Highways and Transportation 

Act it uses the word improvement, so it calls it a public 

improvement. In the public works Act, it calls it a public work. 

So the difference in words is work and improvement. And so 

practically they’re both about a task that needs to be done and a 

contract to be obtained. 

 

And so then the legislation itself that we’re looking at today 

goes and takes the same wording as is in the old legislation. 

And once again the only difference in section 3 from section 2 



7510 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

is that it references public works, so the word “works” is 

different, whereas in section 2 it uses the word “improvement.” 

So it’s not a dramatic change in the actual wording of the 

document. 

 

But I found it quite curious when I listened to the minister 

describe this legislation, and he basically says that we’re going 

to deal with a number of concerns that are there. But the part 

that surprised me was when he said . . . This quote is on page 

7467: 

 

Credit for beginning this process, Mr. Speaker, begins 

with the Premier. It was him who listened to the concerns 

of local businesses and responded by creating Priority 

Saskatchewan as a branch of SaskBuilds in June of 2014. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we know here in Saskatchewan is that 

in the summer of 2013, just over two years ago, it was pretty 

obvious that the number of manufacturing jobs in Saskatchewan 

were shrinking and there were concerns by various 

manufacturers. In fact it was the steel manufacturers, the people 

working in putting together steel products for buildings and 

bridges, that I think first raised the question. And so what was 

happening was that these rules in the legislation were forcing 

some of the choices made by governments. 

 

And so one of the owners or managers of Supreme Steel put it 

this way. He said, “Procurement policies that force municipal 

and provincial governments to accept the lowest-priced bids 

have become problematic.” And then, “There’s no new 

competition in Saskatchewan, but there’s certainly a lot of 

interest coming from out of province and out of country.” And 

then he goes on to explain that Supreme Steel had to lay off 40 

steel fabricating workers and he’s having to get that steel from a 

Chinese company. So in other words, jobs are disappearing. 

 

And what we were seeing was that there were things happening 

with some of the bidding processes that were not good for 

Saskatchewan. And so I know that on this side of the House we 

worked with these people and raised questions, raised issues, 

and it was then almost, well a year later where the Premier 

came forward and said to SaskBuilds, well you better add this 

into your mix, and then some things happened. 

 

But this legislation was now just introduced, but my colleague, 

the member from Regina Rosemont, introduced legislation 

almost a year ago — November 17th, 2014 — and this was 

legislation for a better procurement policy. And basically it was 

called The Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses in 

Government Procurement Act, and it’s aimed at ensuring 

businesses don’t keep losing government contracts when 

they’re being, it seemed like, continually being handed out to 

other provinces and other countries. And effectively the 

argument was that the lowest bid was just taken. There wasn’t 

any review of the Saskatchewan content. There wasn’t a review 

of what kind of effect the bids would have on the jobs of 

Saskatchewan people. And we were basically saying as 

opposition that if the government could adopt our legislation, 

we would have a more robust system that recognized that there 

are important factors that are in favour of a Saskatchewan 

company getting some of these bids when the government is 

procuring various products. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that there was pressure from the 

steel fabrication industry on the government, but government 

was not doing anything, so this proposed legislation was put 

forward in November of last year. And basically this legislation 

was set up to replace the very simplistic and lowest initial bid 

policy of the government, which is in the existing legislation 

that I just described, and replacing it with a more sophisticated 

system that would have the factors used in procuring products 

for Saskatchewan people outlined in the legislation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And basically there are nine factors that were included in this 

bill, and I think it’s important to put them on the record because 

they do show a comparison to the very simple trust-us kind of 

legislation that the minister’s brought forward with something 

that would be more substantial, more open, and more 

transparent. 

 

So the factors in the procurement bill which was introduced by 

the opposition — the Act was called The Fairness for 

Saskatchewan Businesses in Government Procurement Act — 

are: (1) the initial price, (2) the quality of the goods or service, 

(3) the product history, (4) the supplier experience, (5) the 

warranty, (6) the delivery schedule, (7) the final total price, (8) 

the local knowledge and local net benefit, and (9) previous 

performance on government contracts as specified in any 

applicable performance review. And so, Mr. Speaker, this 

proposed legislation had all of those factors outlined. 

 

Now what we know from the comments of the minister, some 

of these factors are to be included in some of what’s happening 

here. But it’s not in the legislation; it will be somewhere else. I 

assume it will be in informing the opinion of the minister. It’s 

not always clear what that is. It will no longer have any method 

of going to cabinet around the approval of that contract. 

 

What we also knew when we introduced the legislation just 

about a year ago, we knew that our Premier had been quite 

critical of provisions in other provinces that required local 

knowledge in the contracts. And this was a bit of a surprise to 

us, but I think it’s more of a surprise to the Saskatchewan 

businesses who were trying to put in their information to get 

contracts in Saskatchewan. 

 

But what we also knew was that at that point the CETA 

[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement] agreement, the comprehensive economic and trade 

agreement with Europe, with the European Union, included a 

clause around local knowledge. And we also knew that the 

province of Ontario had a clause like that in their procurement 

policy. And so our recommendation as an opposition was that 

we should make sure that we have something like that in what 

we’re doing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now sometimes when the opposition has a good idea, the 

government picks it up and runs with it. We thought this one 

was well thought out. We developed it with the community, and 

that the government may want to move it forward and solve this 

problem a year ago. Nothing happened. There was no interest, 

as far as we could tell, in doing that. 

 

And now a year later, we have legislation that has the title, best 



October 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7511 

value. It doesn’t say, best value in the opinion of the minister, 

which is what the legislation says. It just says, you know, best 

value procurement policy. And we still don’t have all of these 

provisions set out in a legislative form or in a transparent way 

as to how this is going to work. 

 

So it strikes me that once again we have a piece of legislation 

where the government knows they’ve got a problem and they 

want to put something on the record that sort of leans towards a 

solution, but it doesn’t really deal with all of the issues that are 

there. In other words, Mr. Speaker, it’s a political response, 

rather than a practical response, rather than a transparent 

response. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are always concerned when that is the 

kind of short-term answer that we get from the government. We 

think that our Saskatchewan businesses are very capable. As 

long as they know the rules, as long as they know what kind of 

things that the government needs, they are good at meeting 

those particular needs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty with the type of legislation that 

the minister has brought forward here is that it’s kind of late. I 

mean in the last while that this discussion has taken place, there 

have been a number of very important large contracts that have 

been let and the decisions have been made on them, and many 

of them have gone to people or businesses outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And the public needs to be reminded 

of how some of these decisions have played out. 

 

We know . . . and we can go through a few of them. We know 

that in Prince Albert the laundry services have been shut down 

— the province-wide laundry business has gone to the K-Bro 

company out of Edmonton — and that the processes that are 

here are not there. 

 

We know that the 1.8 billion or $2 billion bypass is being run 

out of a Paris-based Vinci company. We have many questions 

about that. The public have many questions about that. And 

what we know is that there are many unanswered questions and 

in fact, the contracts themselves don’t even appear to be clear 

enough to even answer simple questions like how to plow the 

snow or cut the grass or do some of those things which have 

been provided by Saskatchewan people up to this point. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s another one. 

 

A third one is the whole SaskPower contract that they outsource 

to Grid One operation in Texas which is then based out of I 

think someplace in Pennsylvania. And we know all of the 

difficulty that that’s cost and the cost that’s there. We’re still 

waiting to hear about the amounts of money that were paid and 

supposedly going into research of various kinds about getting 

proper power meters for Saskatchewan. But once again, it’s a 

contract that’s got quite a few difficulties. 

 

Then we go on to the prison food services have been contracted 

out to a company called Compass which is based out of the 

United Kingdom, and we’re still waiting to see how that one 

works. What is of specific concern there is similar to the issues 

that were raised the last couple of days about the SaskPower 

contract which is, there are certain standards around how many 

meals to deliver and things like that. If there’s not sufficient 

delivery of meals, the government pays a penalty. We’re not 

sure what those contracts are like and we’re looking forward to 

getting more detail about that. 

 

We also know in the environment area that the fishing and 

hunting licences business has all been outsourced to a US 

[United States] -based company. 

 

And the one that’s I think caused a lot of consternation to our 

engineers and architects and building contractors in 

Saskatchewan is the whole P3 school project, where you have 

so many schools lumped together that projects that were 

manageable with Saskatchewan businesses are now being dealt 

with by larger international companies. And in fact a company 

from Milwaukee is the coordinator of all of those projects, and 

once again it’s work that’s outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

And another relatively recent announcement relates to the North 

Battleford hospital where the maintenance for that hospital over 

30 years, or whatever number of years it is, has been outsourced 

to a United Kingdom-based company called Carillion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a whole number of these kinds of 

contracts that really needed to have the light of day shone on 

them so that the public can understand what kind of 

commitments are being made and we can understand what the 

penalty clauses are. Our concern is that there are the kind of 

SaskPower CO2 plant kind of penalty clauses in many of these 

which we don’t know about, and we won’t find out about it 

until we’re able to get some more information from individuals 

who are concerned about this. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have legislation which, the title here is 

The Best Value in Procurement Act, but I think it needs to say 

the best value in the opinion of the minister procurement Act, 

and that opinion of the minister issue needs to be much more 

public. It needs to be much more transparent and it needs to tell 

us what kinds of commitments we’re ending up with that are 

causing us difficulty. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s I think a sad commentary on the kind 

of skills we do have in drafting legislation in Saskatchewan. It 

is possible that there could have been a much better value in the 

better value Act. In other words, we could have had a better 

value in procurement Act if the instructions had come from the 

government to do that. Instead, we have this better value in the 

opinion of the minister Act, which leaves us in the dark, which 

leaves us as taxpayers paying a lot of money that we won’t 

know about probably for decades. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I have quite a few concerns about this 

legislation. I know that each day we learn a little bit more about 

some of the contracts that have been entered into by this 

government, and I’m not sure that this Act is going to be of any 

advantage in getting better information as we proceed forward. 

 

But I know some of my colleagues want to add some more 

discussion to this particular legislation, so at this time I would 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 

2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



7512 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2015 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:13.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7489 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7489 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7489 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7489 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7489 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7490 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7490 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7490 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7490 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Action Toward Ending Sexual and Domestic Violence 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7490 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7491 

 World Ostomy Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7491 

 Construction Company Inducted into Business Hall of Fame 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7491 

 Saskatoon Mayor Longest Serving in City’s History 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7492 

 Assiniboine Valley Medical Centre Opens in Kamsack 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7492 

 Agriculture Month 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7492 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Surgeries 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7492 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7492 

 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7494 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7494 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7497 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7497 

 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7498 

 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7500 

 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7503 

 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7507 

 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7509 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


