




















































Hansard: October 29, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 76A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7539 

 October 29, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I request leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today in our legislature and to you and through you to all 

members of this Legislative Assembly, I wish to introduce His 

Worship Mayor Michael Fougere, Chair of the Board of Police 

Commissioners, city of Regina; Regina police chief, Troy 

Hagen. Also in attendance, the team from the province’s 

Internet child exploitation unit, more commonly referred to as 

ICE. From Regina we have Staff Sergeant Ron Weir, provincial 

coordinator; Inspector Darrin McKechnie; and Constable Peter 

Froh. From the Saskatoon office we have Sergeant Deb 

Altrogge, Sergeant Darren Parisien, Constable Lindsey Wall, 

Constable Shannon Parker. From the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] we have Corporal Cory Patterson, Corporal 

Paul Fischer, Constable Dennis Wildbore. And from Prince 

Albert we have Constable Chris Lair. 

 

They are all here today, Mr. Speaker, because we are 

reconfirming the funding this government provides to targeted 

policing initiatives in Regina. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all 

members to welcome them to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the minister opposite and certainly welcome these leaders 

to their Assembly here today. To His Worship, the mayor of 

Regina, Michael Fougere, to Police Chief Hagen, thank you for 

joining us here today. And to those members and leaders within 

police forces, the civic polices, the Regina police, and the 

RCMP who are engaged in the work around child exploitation 

and engaged in ICE, thank you so such for your leadership and 

your work. Every parent in Saskatchewan thanks you for what 

you do. That work is critical, and any work we can provide or 

any way we can be supportive, certainly we’re prepared to do 

so. So thank you for being here. We’re proud to welcome you 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery there are 22 students along with their teacher 

Mrs. Carrie Kiefer from A.E. Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw. 

Mr. Speaker, A.E. Peacock Collegiate is a remarkable school of 

great staff and even better students. They’ve got great scholastic 

programs, as we’d expect, including their welding program, 

which I’ll talk about a little bit more in a member’s statement a 

little later on. But also they have excellent programs in their 

sports programming, their theatre, their track and field, and 

much more. So welcome to the students, and we’ll be meeting 

later this morning. I ask all members to welcome Mrs. Kiefer 

and the grade 12 students of A.E. Peacock Collegiate to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too want 

to join the member from Moose Jaw in welcoming the folks, the 

students from Peacock, and my own nephew up there. He’s here 

to see the proceedings, and so I welcome him and all the 

students here to the Assembly. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, today I’d like to introduce the 

executive director of SaskMusic, Michael Dawson. Give us a 

wave. Michael was appointed to the position of executive 

director at SaskMusic in February of this year. 

 

Mike has been an excellent addition to the team at SaskMusic. 

He’s had extensive experience across Canada with tour 

booking, artist management, sponsorship management, and 

marketing and promotion. In addition to his behind-the-scenes 

work in the music industry, Mike is also a lyricist and 

multi-instrumentalist with the band Library Voices. Library 

Voices has a new album coming out next Friday called Lovish, 

and I’m looking forward to listening to it. 

 

We’re lucky to have such knowledgeable, dedicated leaders at 

SaskMusic, and I know that Michael, the board, and staff at 

SaskMusic will continue to do exceptional work supporting and 

promoting Saskatchewan artists. I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all 

members please join me in welcoming Michael to his 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in with the 

minister to extend the opposition’s welcome to Mr. Dawson 

here to his Legislative Assembly. Certainly he’s no stranger to 

Saskatchewan stages in his role as a musician, and I know he’s 

been up to Ness Creek a few times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He’s also taking on the important leadership of a very important 

organization in Saskatchewan music scene. And SaskMusic has 

been doing this job for many years very, very well and certainly 

serves a very important role in the representation of 

Saskatchewan artists in Saskatchewan and beyond our borders, 

Mr. Speaker. So again on behalf of the official opposition, 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly and congratulations on 

the good work. 

 



7540 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all the members of our legislature, I’d like to 

introduce three very special constituents from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow: Trina Nicolson and her two children, Tye and 

Taysia. Trina’s actually my CA [constituency assistant], and we 

all know the great work that our CAs do back at home so we’re 

able to do our work here in the legislature. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like all members to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Yesterday I had the opportunity to introduce my wife 

in the legislature. She must have enjoyed the question period so 

much that she’s back here today, and she brought her CEO 

[chief executive officer] with her as well. 

 

I’d like to introduce Prabha Vaidyanathan. Prabha, if you would 

stand and be recognized. Prabha is the CEO of Women 

Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. She was born in India, moved 

to Canada to Ontario, then to Manitoba, and now calls 

Saskatchewan home. She found out that this is the place to be, 

and we welcome her. I know Women Entrepreneurs had an 

excellent meeting in Moose Jaw yesterday. The member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow had a chance to attend. 

 

Thank you, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. I ask 

all members to do the same, to welcome them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to join with the House Leader opposite to introduce and 

welcome these two members to their Assembly. We very much 

appreciate when the guest that’s here today again, Trish 

Cheveldayoff, is here because the House Leader sort of has a 

level of decorum that’s different, and we appreciate that. 

 

But we very much appreciate both Prabha’s and Trish’s 

leadership for Women Entrepreneurs. Certainly the support you 

provide across Saskatchewan is important in providing support 

to exceptional entrepreneurs in this province. And certainly 

when we look to entrepreneurs, we need to recognize that 

they’re key drivers in this economy. 

 

So it’s my pleasure to welcome Prabha and Trish to their 

Assembly. And it’s noteworthy to also thank Prabha for her 

leadership to the accounting profession in this province over the 

past number of years as well. Thank you for being here. Thank 

you for your contributions to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you, seated in the west gallery, 

Muhammad Fiaz. Muhammad is our candidate in Regina 

Pasqua for the Saskatchewan Party. So I know that Muhammad 

and his team have been out knocking on doors, meeting with 

people, working very hard to ensure that he is going to be a 

sitting MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in the next 

election. So welcome to the Legislative Assembly, Muhammad, 

and I know I look forward to having you become one of us on 

this side of the House. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of GSAs [gender and 

sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And we know that 

this government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 

schools for sexually diverse students or students being bullied 

because of their sexual identity or sexual orientation, and that 

gender and sexually diverse students are four times more likely 

than their heterosexual peers to attempt suicide. 

 

And we know that GSAs offer opportunities for gender and 

sexually diverse students to assert their needs and have their 

voices heard, and that these alliances offer opportunities to 

improve attendance, retention rates, generate meaningful 

relationships at schools, and reduce homophobic and 

transphobic bullying. And this government must act so students 

have simple, easy-to-understand information about gender and 

sexual alliances in their schools, how to form GSAs and who 

they should talk to in order to form their GSAs. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 

action to pass the respect for diversity, students’ rights bill 

and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 

students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 

foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 

deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 

full potential. 

 

And [Mr. Speaker] as in duty bound, your petitioners will 

ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 

care. The petitioners point out that it was this government that 

removed the regulations requiring a minimum standard of care 

for seniors. And the petitioners also talk about short-staffing 

that’s resulted in their loved ones often going out with the care, 

going with the care they . . . They could use much, much better 

care, Mr. Speaker, is the bottom line. That chronic understaffing 

in seniors’ care facilities has led to unanswered calls for help; 

people sitting, left unattended on the toilet for hours on end; and 

infrequent bathing, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: to cause the provincial government 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7541 

to immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care, including creating more spaces 

and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher standards of 

care in public facilities, private facilities, and home care; 

ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care 

facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 

standards of care; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Cupar. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 

today to present a petition by residents in the province of 

Saskatchewan concerned with the high cost of post-secondary 

education, particularly around tuition levels. The petitioners 

point out that the average Canadian student in 2014 graduated 

with debt of over $27,000, not including credit card and other 

private debts. In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the provincial government to immediately increase 

the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 

with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 

used to lower tuition fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 

from Preeceville, Lumsden, Raymore, and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

University of Regina Alumni Awards 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. On October 

1st I had the pleasure to attend the University of Regina’s 

Alumni Crowning Achievement Awards Dinner. Each year 

these awards recognize University of Regina alumni who have 

made significant contributions in academia, sports, and the 

community. 

 

In the order that follows, Mr. Speaker, the winners were: 

Outstanding Young Alumni Award to Cherish Jean-Baptiste, 

who does tremendous work in the public sector and in the 

community, Mr. Speaker. Barry Clarke was recognized with the 

Dr. Robert and Norma Ferguson Award for Outstanding Service 

to the University for his many years of helping to support 

Cougar athletics on the campus. 

 

Dr. Kristian Baker was recognized with the Distinguished 

Professional Award for her cutting-edge contributions to the 

world of science. And the multi-award-winning Jim Hopson 

was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award for his many 

years of work in education and of course at the helm of our 

beloved Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

Rob Deglau received the Distinguished Humanitarian and 

Community Service Award in recognition of his many years of 

service as a city councillor here in Regina and for his work over 

the years at the North Central Community Association. I’ve 

known Rob for more than 20 years, and I know that our 

community is richer because of his tireless work in the fight 

against poverty, crime, and racism. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing and thanking all of 

the award recipients for the work that they do to make 

Saskatchewan even better. And I want to say thank you very 

much to the University of Regina administration and the alumni 

association for providing this excellent opportunity every year 

to celebrate the success of the University of Regina graduates. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Funding for Regina Police Service and Internet 

Child Exploitation Unit 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 this 

government promised 120 police officers in the province, and 

our government delivered on that promise. Since ’07 this 

government has invested over $95 million in targeted policing 

grants and initiatives throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has reconfirmed this commitment 

to community safety once again with our municipal policing 

grant of $4.6 million for the Regina Police Service. These funds 

will be invested in initiatives like enhanced community 

policing, enhanced investigative policing, missing persons, the 

combined forces special enforcement unit, serious habitual 

offender comprehensive action plan, and the Internet child 

exploitation unit, which is here with us today. 

 

The ICE unit, which will receive just over $1 million in funding 

for all units across the province to ensure that the most 

vulnerable in our communities, our children, are kept safe. Over 

the last five years, the ICE unit has been able to rescue six 

children in Saskatchewan, six children who without the ICE 

unit would not have had the opportunity to grow up and live full 

lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

thanking Regina Police Service and the ICE unit for all the hard 

work they do in keeping our communities safe and our children 

safe. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Writer Wins Governor General’s Award 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure today to 

rise in this Assembly to recognize one of our province’s most 

prolific and decorated authors. Earlier this week, Saskatoon’s 

own Guy Vanderhaeghe was named as the winner of the 

Governor General’s Literary Award for his short fiction 

collection, Daddy Lenin and Other Stories. This is the third 



7542 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

time he has won this award, and when he travels to Ottawa in 

December to receive the award from Governor General David 

Johnston, he will join an elite group of only three other 

Canadian authors who have won this illustrious award three 

times. Guy Vanderhaeghe’s previous two awards were given for 

his 1982 collection of short stories, Man Descending, and his 

1996 novel, The Englishman’s Boy. 

 

The jury for this year’s award praised Daddy Lenin and Other 

Stories as “the work of an assured writer who needs no 

pyrotechnics to keep us reading. Each story is superbly crafted, 

razor-sharp, wickedly funny. The reader is carried along in the 

hands of a master, a seasoned professional at the top of his 

game.” 

 

And I would certainly encourage all members and those 

watching today to stop by their local libraries and bookstores 

and grab one of Guy Vanderhaeghe’s books. They truly are the 

best of the best when it comes to Canadian literature. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Guy Vanderhaeghe on his well-deserved award 

and in wishing him many more years of awards, success, and 

world-class storytelling. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Youth for Christ Hope Dinner 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

stand in this House today and acknowledge another successful 

Youth for Christ annual Hope Dinner fundraiser. I had the 

privilege to once again attend this great event with several of 

my colleagues, including the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health and the members from Biggar, Moose Jaw North, and 

Cypress Hills. 

 

This year’s theme was Not Alone and emphasized how the 

various programs that Youth for Christ offers are impacting the 

lives of young people from across the province in a positive 

way. Some of the programs they offer include school programs 

impacting an average of 150 youth per week, housing for 

vulnerable youth, serving of healthy meals, and their Gymblast 

program. 

 

At the dinner, several young people shared their stories of how 

these programs have changed their lives and given them hope. 

Mr. Speaker, the one story that particularly stood out to me was 

that of a First Nations young man who had lost his parents at a 

young age and had been subjected to bullying and abuse most 

of his life. It was through one of the housing programs offered 

by Youth for Christ that he experienced hope for the first time. 

This young man felt that he had no purpose in life and he was 

close to giving up, yet through the YFC [Youth for Christ] 

program and its volunteers, this young man’s life was 

transformed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this house to join 

me in congratulating Youth for Christ on another successful 

banquet fundraiser and thank them for their hard work in our 

communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

Rescue Squad Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 17th, I 

was pleased to speak at the Sirens & Sapphires Gala, honouring 

the Lloydminster Rescue Squad’s 30th anniversary. The 620 

well-dressed guests walked the blue carpet, celebrating the 

efforts of past Rescue Squad celebrities. It was a great night, 

and the event raised at least $100,000 for the Rescue Squad, 

which will go towards training and equipment as well as 

ensuring they have a home. This is a great indication of how 

much our community values and appreciates the great work 

they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since its founding in 1985, this organization has 

grown in the number of volunteers who are committed to 

providing emergency services to Lloydminster and the 

surrounding area. The Rescue Squad has responded and given 

their expertise to vehicle collisions, water rescues, snowstorm 

searches, and local fires. It takes a special kind of person with 

great passion and commitment to their community to do this 

type of work. 

 

I also had the distinct honour to present Chief Norman Namur 

with the fire service’s Exemplary Service Medal, a 20-year 

service award. Norm is one of the founding members of this 

squad, and his outstanding leadership has guided the growth 

and success of the squad for the past 30 years. 

 

All the members of this volunteer squad demonstrate the best of 

Saskatchewan. I ask all members to join me in thanking all the 

organizers and volunteers on such a fantastic event and 

congratulating the Lloydminster Rescue Squad on a fantastic 30 

years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Donation to A.E. Peacock Collegiate 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

congratulate the students and staff of A.E. Peacock Collegiate 

in Moose Jaw. Earlier this week, Peacock Collegiate was 

selected as one of ten schools across Canada to receive funding 

from the Canadian Welding Association Foundation. 

 

The funding is a donation of $50,000 over 10 years to enhance 

the school’s welding program. Welding teacher Martin Holzer 

was very pleased with the funding donation and said, “This 

opens up other opportunities . . . now we’re going to get a piece 

of equipment in that’s the latest technology in welding.” Mr. 

Speaker, what an honour it is to have a school from our 

province be recognized and selected to receive this funding, 

funding that will advance our students’ learning and lead to 

greater outcomes for them in the future. 

 

Ms. Deborah Mates, director of the Canadian Welding 

Association, was also very supportive and had this to say, “We 

wanted to be able to build on their programs, because the more 

they could offer to students the better the experience is at 

secondary, making it more likely they’re going to move on to 

do an apprenticeship.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

A.E. Peacock Collegiate and thanking the Canadian Welding 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7543 

Association for their generous investment gift and the support 

of our students. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Pharmacists Provide Free Flu Shots 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to note in 

this House this morning that my hon. colleague the Minister of 

Health will receive his flu shot early this afternoon at the 

Medicine Shoppe on Grant Road in an event put on by the 

Pharmacy Association of Saskatchewan and chamber of 

commerce. This vaccination is a simple way to protect yourself, 

your family, and others from influenza. 

 

Public health staff have been busy making sure our residents 

have easy access to the free flu vaccine. Starting this year, 

Saskatchewan residents also are able to get their free flu shot at 

participating community pharmacies. It makes it easier, 

especially for busy families, seniors, or people living in rural 

and remote areas who may not be able to attend traditional flu 

clinics on scheduled dates. 

 

We’re pleased that pharmacists will provide this important 

service and support our dedicated public health staff in 

protecting our residents’ health as they play a key role in a 

patient’s health care experience. Our government is proud to 

work with pharmacists to provide this great care. I want to 

thank them for their expertise and the great work they do each 

and every day. I would encourage my colleagues in this House, 

as well as the people of Saskatchewan, to get vaccinated this 

fall. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

 

Mr. Broten: — Yesterday the Premier continued to say that the 

carbon capture plant was operating at full capacity on day one, 

back when he had his big celebration out at Boundary dam last 

October. But we need to compare what he said to what the 

internal documents show. Here’s a note from a month and a half 

after that big grand opening: “Capture plant has yet to achieve 

full load.” The capture plant has yet to achieve full load. So not 

once, not once in that month and a half did the plant capture 90 

per cent of emissions. Not once. 

 

So the question for the Premier is this: should we trust what he 

says or should we trust the internal briefing note from 

SaskPower’s head of carbon capture? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the member has just 

stated is incorrect. Mr. Speaker, even if the plant is running at 

some level of operation overall for the year less than 100 per 

cent, when it’s running, when it’s turned on, it’s capturing at 90 

per cent. For all of the CO2 that goes through the amine, that 

goes through the technology, 90 per cent of the CO2 is captured. 

That’s how we know the technology works. 

 

There are some challenges around mechanical issues at the 

plant. There have been, Mr. Speaker, since the start-up. When it 

starts up again, I’ll repeat, it runs at 90 per cent capture, Mr. 

Speaker, which would put us on track to capture 1 million 

tonnes a year which will be sold to Cenovus. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that it works because 400 000 tonnes of CO2 have already 

been captured and sequestered and sold and, as a result of that, 

this year we’ll even turn a profit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] were 

instrumental in the province of Saskatchewan — and I give 

them full credit for this — in bringing the Canadian Light 

Source to the University of Saskatchewan. But when it first 

went into operation in September of ’03, it didn’t work 

perfectly. In fact progress was delayed several months. They 

called it the commissioning year. Here’s the reasons why. It 

was difficult to correct the orbit. Injection efficiencies were 

poor. It was giving the wrong polarity, and there was a large 

obstruction across the centre of the chamber. That’s pretty 

straightforward I guess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The point is this, though. The point is on these major research 

and development scientific projects, on these major projects, the 

first year is the commissioning year. It’s going to operate. It’s 

going to ramp down again for the adjustments to be made, for 

the improvements to be made. And while it’s operating, it 

captures 90 per cent of the CO2. The CO2 that goes through the 

technology is captured at 90 per cent. We know this because 

we’ve already captured 400 000 tonnes of CO2 and sold them to 

Cenovus, and there’ll be a profit frankly of $5 million at the end 

of the year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has got a lot more 

explaining to do based on answers like that when what he is 

saying is in complete contradiction to what internal documents 

show time and time again, Mr. Speaker. Briefing materials 

prepared for the 2015 spring session, 2015 spring session, 

clearly say that the project should be able, should be able to 

operate at full capacity by March. Should be able to operate at 

full capacity. 

 

But you know what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker? That was after, 

after the mid-February news release which says the project was 

exceeding expectations. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

You know what the Premier said yesterday? Well he was 

adamant as we hear again today, Mr. Speaker, adamant that the 

project was operating at a full capacity, capturing 90 per cent of 

emissions when that news release went out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So either we believe the briefing materials prepared by 

SaskPower for the 2015 spring session or we believe the 

Premier. We can’t trust both, Mr. Speaker, because they tell 

very different stories. To the Premier: which one is right? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well we’ll try this again, Mr. Speaker. 

When the plant is turned on — as it has been through the 

commissioning year and it has been ramped down as well — 

when it’s turned on and CO2 is passing through the technology, 

through the amine, 90 per cent is captured. That’s the fact. 



7544 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

Cumulatively over the year, 40 per cent has been captured, and 

that’s why we have the 400 000 tonnes that have been sold to 

Cenovus. 

 

So these are the facts, and I think officials that have been here 

from SaskPower have reiterated that these are the facts, Mr. 

Speaker. Moreover we know that in a number of days the 

mechanical problems at issue, not an issue with the technology 

but mechanical problems, will be addressed. They are being 

addressed currently by the engineers and the plant is going to 

move to full operation again in November. 

 

I hope members will support it, because you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? In our province we rely almost 50 per cent on coal. 

The member will know this. We rely 50 per cent on coal to 

generate electricity in the province of Saskatchewan. And we 

have two choices now: we can either clean it up or we can shut 

it down. The NDP in Alberta have said they’re going to shut 

down coal. Kathleen Wynne has said she’s shutting down coal 

in Ontario. We would like to know what members opposite 

have planned. What’s their position on coal? Because if they’re 

not in favour of this technology to clean up coal, there’s only 

one other choice vis-à-vis federal regulations, and that’s to shut 

it down. 

 

So the member should stop laughing, because there are jobs at 

stake. What is his position on coal? Does coal have a future 

should he ever be the premier of this province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what is at stake is a $1.5 billion 

project that is not working, and a complete lack of transparency, 

Mr. Speaker, from this government. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

ratepayers that will be digging out of this hole because of the 

failure of this government to get it right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier said several times yesterday that 

whenever the unit is turned on, it’s capturing 90 per cent. And 

unbelievably, he’s saying it again today, Mr. Speaker. 

Yesterday he said, “When the unit is running, it captures 90 per 

cent from the outset.” And he repeated that many times, and 

we’ve heard it again. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that contradicts, that contradicts what the 

Sask Party president said two days ago, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 

the Sask Party president said the absolute best, the absolute 

best, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve been able to achieve is a 78 per 

cent capture rate — the absolute max. That’s what the 

SaskPower president said, Mr. Speaker. So again to the 

Premier: who are we supposed to believe? Should we believe 

him or should we believe SaskPower’s president? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to watch the 

member opposite’s rhetoric again and correct the record, 

because he just stood up and inferred that there would be costs 

borne by ratepayers as a result of any of this. And I want to be 

very clear. All costs associated with the fixes that are required, 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the members 

want to hear the answer to the question that they’ve asked. And 

they’ll want to know that all costs associated with the fixes 

required are covered under warranty, Mr. Speaker, or will be 

submitted as a result of the legal process that’s under way. So 

the taxpayers, the ratepayers will be kept whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve indicated, I’ve indicated that when the capture plant is 

turned on, it operates at 90 per cent capture. That’s the target. 

That’s what we’ll achieve. As the engineers notice any kind of 

drop-off in that, there are repairs made; there are adjustments 

made. That’s completely consistent with what the original goals 

were, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this is an important question. And this technology is, it’s 

transformational. It’s world-leading technology. We have every 

confidence it’s going to work. The engineers do. And it’s 

important that it work. There are jobs at stake, that it would 

work. The federal government has provided regulations that 

would shut down our coal industry in this province. We know 

other NDP governments are shutting down their coal industry 

rather than cleaning it up. 

 

There are 500 people working in Boundary dam in 3, 4, and 5 

today. There are 400 people mining coal in this province. 

 

We have two choices. We either clean up the coal with this 

technology or we shut it down and we say goodbye to those 

jobs and watch electrical rates go up. Is that his position? His 

critic has said she wants to move away from coal. We have it on 

record. Is that his position? Does he want to abandon coal? Is he 

going to pay for it in jobs, and will Saskatchewan people pay 

higher power rates as a result? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, hilarious to see the Premier in full 

flight here and completely skirting, Mr. Speaker, whether or not 

we should be trusting what he said or what the SaskPower 

president said, Mr. Speaker, because two different stories. 

 

Here’s exactly what SaskPower’s president said just two days 

ago, Mr. Speaker, when they put him out in the rotunda. And 

perhaps we’ll hear more today, Mr. Speaker, about that as well. 

But this is what the SaskPower president said two days ago: 

“The plant was designed to capture 90 per cent of emissions. At 

peak capacity it will remove 3240 tonnes a day.” He went on: 

“We’ve had that plant operating at 26 to 2800 tonnes per day 

for periods of time. So we’re up at that 80 per cent capture rate 

or close to it.” 

 

A max of 2800 tonnes per day, Mr. Speaker, is 78 per cent 

capacity, which isn’t anywhere near what the Premier just said 

in this House and what he has said, Mr. Speaker, previously 

outside. In fact he, over and over and over, said that this unit 

has been capturing 90 per cent of emissions from the outset 

whenever it’s turned on. So again to the Premier: who should 

we believe? SaskPower’s president or the Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower president, Mr. 

Monea, the president of CCS [carbon capture and sequestration] 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7545 

division at SaskPower have . . . consistently say, and say today, 

that this technology is going to capture 90 per cent of the CO2, 

Mr. Speaker, and . . . Well the Leader of the Opposition’s 

yelling from his seat now and we’re trying to provide him 

answers to his questions. 

 

Here’s another question he might want to ask. When he ran for 

the leadership, when he ran for the leadership and became 

leader of his party on March the 9th, he said this, and I quote, 

“wants to make our province a world leader in safe, 

environmentally friendly, and economic viable carbon capture 

and sequestration by equipping our current power plants with 

mechanisms to safely capture and sequester CO2 emissions, 

permitting SaskPower to profit from its knowledge.” That’s 

what he said in March when he became leader. Three months 

later, in May, the critic for SaskPower in the Melville Advance 

said, “At one point the NDP supported carbon capture, but has 

since moved away from it, while the SaskParty still supports it.” 

 

So what’s the position of the NDP? Are you committed to 

trying to clean up the coal? Because if you’re not, the only 

option that we have is to shut down the power and to shut down 

the mining, costing 1,000 jobs and driving up rates in this 

province. That’s what we’ve seen in Ontario. The NDP in 

Alberta are going to do it. Yes or no, does that leader support 

the use of coal, the mining of coal, and the use in electrical 

generation in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask that members on both sides of the 

House allow the person asking the question to be heard, and the 

person responding to the question to be heard. I recognize the 

Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is 100 per cent about the 

credibility of what we are hearing from the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskPower said two days ago, 

“We’ve had that plant operating at 26 to 2800 tonnes per day 

for periods of time. So we’re up at that 80 per cent capture rate 

or close to it.” In reality it’s 78 per cent. 

 

On repeated occasions, the Premier, right up until today, Mr. 

Speaker, says it’s capturing 90 per cent whenever it’s turned on. 

My question to the Premier: does he dispute what Mike Marsh, 

the president of SaskPower, says? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I note that my friend, the 

Leader of the Opposition, has dodged a pretty important 

question and then repeats the same question which I’ve already 

answered. 

 

Here’s the other thing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member from Saskatoon Centre is chirping from his seat. He 

ought to listen to this now. Here’s something else that the critic 

for SaskPower, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, said. She 

said this is . . . speaking of BD3 [Boundary dam 3] . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Here’s what she said April 16th. This is the 

Leader of the Opposition’s critic now for SaskPower. She says 

this about Boundary dam 3: 

 

This is way too expensive of a technology for 

Saskatchewan ratepayers to be responsible for. It’s 

extremely expensive and we know that there are many 

other ways to generate electricity and get rid of our 

emissions without focusing on coal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the questions that have been asked by the 

opposition on the project are absolutely fair. So is this question. 

There are thousands of jobs in this — well 1,000 jobs, direct 

jobs — in this province that rely on coal mining and they’re 

IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] jobs at 

Boundary dam 3, 4, and 5 that rely on coal power, that rely on 

this government moving forward with a technology that will 

clean up coal. We either clean up coal or, by federal regulation, 

we’ll have to abandon it. 

 

Now the NDP, his counterpart in Alberta, have said they’re 

going to phase out coal. We haven’t given up on coal yet 

because of this technology. We’re going to carry forward. 

We’re going to clean up the coal so we can operate it, so we can 

market the technology internationally. There’s plenty of interest 

already, Mr. Speaker, as China and India continue to build coal. 

 

The question in this debate is, what’s his solution? If he’s going 

to shut down that coal-fired generation, what does he say to 

those IBEW members, those jobs? What does he say to the 

miners’ jobs and ratepayers of electricity who will face much 

higher costs under a plan like that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s telling that we just saw 

the Premier stop using this 90 per cent figure, Mr. Speaker. And 

no, no clarification, Mr. Speaker, if we’re supposed to be 

believing the Sask Party president’s story or the Premier’s 

story, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . We see a lot of bluster, 

Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the facts. But we see the facts, Mr. 

Speaker. We see a very different story. 

 

The Premier’s also claiming, he is claiming that he has no idea 

about serious design flaws with this carbon capture project. 

This is what he said yesterday: “I didn’t know it had 

fundamental design flaws.” Mr. Speaker, but that doesn’t add 

up one bit, because we know a briefing note prepared two days, 

two days in advance of the grand opening, said the project had 

“serious design issues” and “fundamental design issues and 

serious design deficiencies.” This was a briefing note two days, 

Mr. Speaker, before the grand opening. 

 

Does the Premier, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, 

actually expect us to believe that he never read that briefing 

note or that no one bothered to tell him that there were serious 

design issues with this project? Does he expect us to believe 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with any major science 

project — and we’ve already referenced the synchrotron project 



7546 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

in Saskatoon — there’s a commissioning year. There are 

difficulties that are experienced. There are those in the 

organizations that will offer up what those risks and difficulties 

might be, and then there’s the final decision to go forward. And 

we made the final decision to go forward with the project on the 

best advice of engineers at SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. We made 

that decision because we believe that coal, at about 50 per cent 

of the generation of our electricity in the province, needs a 

future. We were aware of federal regulations with respect to 

coal that will shut coal plants down. And if there are no coal 

plants, there’s no coal mining. That’s a lot of direct jobs. 

 

We also have seen in other provinces who have shut down coal, 

rates have gone through the roof for homeowners and for 

businesses. Coal needs to be part of our mix, along with 

renewables, along with natural gas, Mr. Speaker, along with 

hydro. Coal’s going to be part of the mix in the province 

because of BD3, because we moved ahead with technology that 

is working. 

 

The question is simple to the Leader of the Opposition: does he 

agree with the leader of the NDP in Alberta? Is it his position 

we should shut down coal? That’s the position of his critic. She 

has said we should move away from coal. Is that his position? 

And if he’s prepared to say that in Regina, will he go down to 

Estevan and say it there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely unbelievable we’d 

have these responses from the Premier. He gets a briefing note 

two days before a grand opening, talking about serious design 

deficiencies, and he expects us, Mr. Speaker, to believe . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member for Arm River-Watrous 

come to order please. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is not believable in the least 

bit that he wouldn’t have been told or wouldn’t have read this 

information. Okay, but even if, even if we’ll believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that he didn’t read a briefing note of September 2014, 

and even if the minister and the many officials didn’t bother to 

tell him about serious design flaws back then, surely, surely he 

would have seen the February 17th, 2015 briefing note or at 

least he would have been told about it. This note talks about 

very serious legal action, and it says: 

 

Despite advising SNC-Lavalin about these deficiencies, 

SaskPower has had to correct many of the deficiencies 

itself. In addition, SaskPower has had to perform work that 

is within SNC-Lavalin’s responsibilities. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

The above noted breaches by SNC-Lavalin have resulted 

in SaskPower incurring substantial, additional costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the Premier actually expect us to believe that 

he wasn’t told about serious design problems and deficiencies 

and significant legal issues with SNC-Lavalin? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to my hon. 

friend, and I’ve provided this answer already, that all costs 

associated with the fixes required by the commissioning year 

events are covered under warranty or are going to be recovered 

in court. So ratepayers won’t pay, and obviously there’s remedy 

for the company as well. 

 

I’ve also received and I appreciate the note from the president 

because the . . . of SaskPower, not the Sask Party. The hon. 

member was quoting him a lot, Mr. Speaker, moments ago 

about the 90 per cent figure. I want him to listen carefully. The 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, those who would subscribe to the . . . or 

ascribe to this position he’s stated, are confusing the efficiency 

of the amine capture process, 90 per cent, with the volume 

capacity of the plant which is reduced because of the 

mechanical issues, which is what we’ve been saying all along. 

The capture is 90 per cent. 

 

Well he was quoting . . . He says that he doesn’t believe it. He 

was just quoting the president of SaskPower. He believed him 

then when it suited his political needs, and now that we’ve 

clarified it from information from the president of SaskPower, 

he says, I’m really not interested. You know who’s not 

interested in this particular line of questioning without some 

clarification on coal and on the future of coal in this province 

under an NDP government, heaven forbid? The people of 

Estevan and area, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

— who note, for the record, that the critic for SaskPower has 

said they want to move away from coal, that she doesn’t think 

there’s any interest in carbon capture. We’ve got lots of quotes. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says, well there might be, but 

from this line of questioning and his lack of clarification on the 

issue, we’re left to wonder what the NDP would do if ever they 

were in office. Would they do as Premier Notley in Alberta has 

said she would do? Would they shut down coal in the province? 

You either clean it up or shut it down. What’s his position? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what a complete joke, these 

responses we’re getting from the Premier, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

getting story after story that’s conflicting with one another, 

stories, Mr. Speaker, that don’t match with the internal briefing 

notes whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier’s actually 

expecting us to believe this. 

 

It’s incredibly hard to believe the Premier because this is a 

project, this is a project that he has been incredibly close to. He 

has travelled the world bragging about it. He’s hosted 

delegations. He’s attended every possible meeting and he’s 

visited this facility a lot. So when the Premier says, “I didn’t 

know it had fundamental design flaws,” “I didn’t know it had 

fundamental design flaws,” that’s pretty hard to believe. 

Because the internal documents are so clear. 

 

Now maybe he wasn’t paying attention to the right details or 

maybe he’s just forgotten what he was told, Mr. Speaker, or 

maybe he doesn’t want to share what he knew and when he 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7547 

knew it. But, Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people have a 

right to know the truth. So what is the Premier’s explanation for 

apparently not knowing about fundamental design flaws with 

this project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this from this 

member before where he would use words like joke, like he just 

did in his preamble, in terms of the answers provided. The 

answer that I just provided with respect to the 90 per cent figure 

comes from the president of SaskPower. I mean honestly, a 

moment ago he was quoting the president of SaskPower and 

now he stands up and basically calls the president of SaskPower 

a joke or his answers were a joke. I don’t think that’s 

acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is an important debate that this will lead to. First of all, 

the work will continue on the plant. They’re going to be at full 

operational capacity here soon and then we’ll have more debate, 

I’m sure, and questions. But what won’t be resolved, what will 

not be resolved is, what is the NDP’s position on coal? 

 

Here’s what the SaskPower critic, the MLA for Saskatoon 

Nutana said. She said, the article in The Estevan Mercury is, 

and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Cathy Sproule . . . MLA for Saskatoon Nutana, has 

opposed SaskPower’s implantation of CCS technology 

and said many other companies across the world have 

“abandoned” the idea of retrofitted . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — If the member for Saskatoon Centre wishes to 

continue talking, I will recognize him when the Premier is 

finished his response. So I expect him to be on his feet. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, The Estevan Mercury, 

February of this year, I’m quoting: 

 

Cathy Sproule . . . MLA for Saskatoon Nutana, has 

opposed SaskPower’s implantation of CCS technology and 

said many other companies across the world have 

“abandoned” the idea of retrofitted coal . . . power plants. 

 

That’s what the member said, that she pointed to other countries 

that are abandoning even an attempt to clean it up. 

 

There’s a simple question here. What is the NDP’s position? Is 

it worth trying to clean it up? Is it worth making sure BD3 is 

successful, so we could make sure coal is part of the mix, make 

sure rates are affordable for Saskatchewan people, keep people 

working, offer this technology to places like China and India 

that are burning coal, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the fight on 

climate change? Is that worth it, yes or no? Clean it up or shut it 

down? What’s his position? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

You. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to ask a question. The Premier’s been seriously 

deflecting and not answering questions. We want to know, 

when did he know about the design flaws in the project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for the question. We’ve 

obviously canvassed the issue about the 90 per cent. I think 

perhaps the Leader of the Opposition will want to explain later 

why he discounts the explanation from the president of 

SaskPower. 

 

We know the project is coming back into full operation soon, as 

the mechanical problems are dealt with. We know the 

technology captures 90 per cent of the CO2. We know this is 

world-leading, transformational technology for us here in 

Saskatchewan so that coal could be part of the mix, so that 

coal-burning countries around the world can clean up their own 

energy profile, can use our technology in the fight against 

climate change. 

 

Here’s what else we learned from question period today, Mr. 

Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition, four months from an 

election campaign, cannot stand in his place and answer directly 

whether he thinks coal should be part of our mix or not. He 

couldn’t answer the basic question: clean it up or shut it down? 

Those are the only two choices we have because of regulations 

coming. We either clean up coal here or we shut it down. 

 

We think we need to have it cleaned up and, as a part of the 

mix, that we can keep rates down for our businesses and our 

families across the province. We need to keep those people 

working in plants and in the mines. That’s our plan on this side. 

BD3’s a big part of that. Mr. Speaker, once again I encourage 

him, outside in the rotunda and especially down in Estevan, to 

let the folks know there, will he clean it up? Will he agree that 

we should clean it up or does he want to shut it down, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 

Consideration of Carbon Capture Project 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 

like to seek leave under rule 61 to move a motion of urgent and 

pressing necessity. If there is unanimous consent to do so, I’d 

be prepared to move the following very brief motion: 

 

That this Assembly instructs the Crown and Central 

Agencies Committee to reconvene at the earliest possible 

opportunity to question the Premier, SaskPower minister, 

and officials, and review internal documents and records 

so Saskatchewan people can know the true state of affairs 

with the government’s carbon capture experiment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Under rule 61, the member has requested 

leave to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. She 

has explained the motion. Is leave granted? 

 



7548 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The nos have it. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’m comfortable sitting here all afternoon if 

you want to. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 983 through 997. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

983 to 997. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 998 and 999. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 998 and 999. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answer to question 1,000. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered response 

to question 1,000. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

delighted to be moving a motion related to the tangible, real 

successes that we’ve seen for people in Saskatchewan when it 

comes to reducing surgical wait times in Saskatchewan. 

 

I thought what I’d do, Mr. Speaker, is I’d start with a brief 

summary of some of the work that’s been undertaken, then I’d 

move on to perhaps some of the experiences we’ve seen 

previously under the NDP and why this is so important at this 

stage of Saskatchewan’s political development because, as we 

have a contestation of ideas coming forward in the coming 

months in the form of a provincial election, these issues will no 

doubt, and correctly so, receive increased attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, importantly, our government has invested more 

than $285 million, more than $285 million in dedicated funding 

into the Saskatchewan surgical initiative and enhanced surgical 

services. As a result, surgical wait times in Saskatchewan are 

now among the shortest in Canada. That provides us an 

opportunity to compare where we’ve come from, the number of 

people waiting now today compared to 2007. It’s an apt 

reference point. 

 

So more than 18 months, waiting more than 18 months, that 

number is down 99 per cent from more than 2,600 patients to 

18. There is more work to do, but that can only be seen as a 

fundamental and transformative improvement. Those waiting 

more than a year, down by 98 per cent from 5,136 patients to 

97. Again we know there’s more work to do, but this is an 

exponential improvement. Those waiting more than six months, 

that number’s gone down 95 per cent; from 10,644 patients to 

just over 580. And those waiting more than three months, that 

number’s moved down 83 per cent; from 15,365 patients to 

2,587. We know there’s more work to do, but these numbers 

demonstrate that we have seen a fundamental shift take place, 

not simply in philosophy but in results, real results for people 

across this province. 

 

So when we actually have a sense of what’s helped foster and 

facilitate this . . . I notice the member from Saskatoon Nutana is 

especially interested in this, and she ought to be because when 

we think about the dollars that have been invested, that’s an 

important infusion. 

 

But when we also think about some of the changes, one of those 

changes is the engagement of private surgical clinics within the 

public system since 2010. So through these private surgical 

clinics, we’ve seen over 47,000 surgeries completed, in fact 

here in Regina, more than 19,000 and in Saskatoon, more than 

27,000. And as far as private diagnostic services, those 

provided by private diagnostic clinics, over 14,600 CT 

[computerized tomography] scans provided in 2014-15 alone 

and over 3,000 MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] provided in 

2014 and ’15 alone. Those are significant improvements, and 

we’ll get into what those improvements have meant and what 

they represent across the province and also hear some anecdotes 

from individuals. 

 

But that 2007 reference point to have these improvements 

actually provides us an opportunity to think and remember and 

recall where we were, the NDP record. In 2006, Saskatchewan 

was deemed to have the longest wait time of any province in 

Canada. In fact in the 1999 election campaign, the 

Saskatchewan NDP was re-elected on a promise to cut the 

wait-lists by 30 per cent over four years. That was a promise in 

1999. 

 

[11:00] 

 

How did they do? Rhetoric and reality. So the rhetoric was the 

promise of reduced wait times by 30 per cent. And how did they 

do? Those wait-lists actually increased by 61 per cent. So the 

member from Nutana and in fact her colleagues and indeed her 

leader have an opportunity to reflect on the improvements, have 

an opportunity to weigh in. 

 

And when asked recently, on October 26th, just a few days ago, 

a simple, straightforward question by a member of the media 

. . . The question was, would you cut private surgical clinics? 

Would you cut private surgical clinics? The leader of the NDP 

said this: “The same gains or better gains could have been made 

by building capacity within the public system. That is certainly 

my preference.” That’s a curious phrase: “That’s certainly my 

preference.” Maybe it’s an ideological preference. Maybe it’s 

an idiosyncratic preference. Maybe it’s his own personal 

preference. Maybe there’s a lack of understanding on the 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7549 

empirical record. 

 

And that’s why this debate is so important because we’re not 

simply talking about numbers; we’re talking about our 

neighbours. We’re talking about people right across this 

province. And that’s important because when we think about 

the surgeries performed or offered in three months across the 

province, the Sun Country Health Region has performed or 

offered surgeries 100 per cent of the time within three months; 

Five Hills Health Region, 100 per cent; Cypress Health Region, 

100 per cent; Sunrise Health Region, 100 per cent; Heartland 

Health Region, 100 per cent; Kelsey Trail Health Region, 100 

per cent; Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 88 per cent; 

Saskatoon Health Region, 88 per cent; Prince Albert Parkland 

Health Region, 94 per cent; and Prairie North Health Region, 

100 per cent. Province wide, an average of 91 per cent. 

 

So when we think about these results, it may be fair to say, are 

we seeing practices like this from other provinces? And in fact, 

we are. We’re seeing that private clinics are operating in British 

Columbia, in Alberta, NDP Alberta, in Ontario, and Nova 

Scotia. And so as we look across the country, we see that this is 

consistent with practices undertaken in other provinces, and we 

see real results for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So let’s go back. It’s worth having a look back before 2007, 

before there was a focus on improving real results for the 

people of this province. 

 

We can go back to a StarPhoenix article, B7 in 1999. It’s May 

19th, the full text. It says: 

 

You’re ill, you need treatment . . . and you wait. 

 

After seeing your general practitioner, you wait for an 

appointment with a specialist. 

 

You wait for an appointment with a magnetic resonance 

imaging machine and you wait for an appointment with a 

surgeon. 

 

The waiting list is one of the defining characteristics of 

Canada’s system of universal health care. Everybody 

qualifies for hospital service and there are limited 

resources so some people must wait. 

 

In Saskatoon and across the province, it has been subject 

to bitter public and political debate. 

 

Several recent reports have suggested Saskatchewan is one 

of the worst provinces in the country when it comes to 

waiting times for some medical treatments. 

 

That was 1999. Perhaps unfair to go back that far but it allows 

us to say what happened after the 2003 election when, during 

that election campaign, the NDP promised, among other things, 

to provide the best public health care in Canada — a promise 

made. Now why don’t we get a sense of what this is consistent 

with? This is consistent with “the bread and butter issue for the 

NDP since its days with the CCF.” But in the first two years of 

this term, and I quote now from November 8th, 2005, a 

Leader-Post article on A6: 

 

But in the first two years of this term, the NDP 

government has taken extensive fire on the state of the 

Saskatchewan’s health care system despite its election 

promise of the best public health in Canada. 

 

. . . Waiting times [and I quote] for patients has been the 

focus of health care debate in Canada for some time and 

Saskatchewan has some of the longest wait times in the 

country. 

 

But there was a way out. There was a way out; at least the 

members opposite saw it. And it’s a peculiar way out, complex 

way out, but at the time it was their only way out and that was 

for federal money. Someone else was going to help pay the bill 

so that a broader issue of reform wouldn’t have to actually 

come to the fore. And so in September 2004 the country’s first 

ministers came together to come up with a $41 billion 

federal-provincial agreement on health funding. That meant an 

additional $66 million pumped into Saskatchewan’s health 

system for that last year and an average, and I quote again, “90 

million in extra funding over the course of the following six.” 

 

So what would happen? New money. What would the results 

be? Because if you’re going to put more money, good money 

after bad, perhaps some things can be anticipated. The Fraser 

Institute says in this very article from 2005, in fact: 

 

Saskatchewan patients are waiting 25 weeks between 

seeing their doctor and the beginning of treatment, the 

longest period in the country even after surgical wait times 

dropped by eight weeks. 

 

It gives some sense of the crisis that we were in. 

 

Glen Beck, a friend and colleague from the University of 

Saskatchewan, quoted: 

 

The federal government gave them a lot of money that was 

allegedly being directed at solving the problem, but most 

people say that the problem is a shortage of nursing staff 

in the facilities. And what’s happened on that front? I 

don’t see fundamental change. 

 

The federal-provincial deal has been a disappointment, 

according to Ken Fyke, Saskatchewan’s former deputy minister 

“. . . because the extra money was supposed to be linked to a 

new model where provinces would be accountable to ensure 

improvements were made.” Fyke went on to say, “The problem 

is that the NDPs long-held commitment to reforming primary 

health care is moving at a glacial pace.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. It gives you a sense and a 

summary of just how bad things were. The key barrier, buried 

in the assumptions, came out in 2010, among other times, when 

Judy Junor gave an interview and it offered a notion, a 

snapshot: 

 

To tell the people that the public system can’t do it and 

you’re going to have to wait or we go private . . . that’s not 

true. If you properly fund it and put your money in the 

public system, they can do it. 

 

There was an ideological aversion to innovation. Now that is 



7550 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

peculiar, and it’s peculiar because it goes against the very 

foundational elements of the CCF, because the CCF, as Tommy 

Douglas became Premier in the 1940s, had a dream. And I’ll 

quote, Tommy Douglas is quoted by Vincent Lam: 

 

Their dream was a society in which people were as free as 

possible to pursue individual self-realization, while 

working co-operatively in order that all could live a 

“dignified, and a rich and a varied life.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the challenge for the members opposite, the 

numbers demonstrate that real progress is being made for our 

neighbours. The rhetoric coming from the other side simply 

belies and betrays their ideological blind spot that isn’t even 

consistent with the original vision of Tommy Douglas. And 

that’s why I’m delighted to move today: 

 

That this Assembly commends this government’s steps to 

address surgical wait times in the province through the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative, noting a significant 

reduction in the number of patients waiting greater than 

three months since 2007, and furthermore will not support 

approaches that place ideological interests over the 

interests of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Greystone has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly commends this government’s steps to 

address surgical wait times in the province through the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative, noting a significant 

reduction in the number of patients waiting greater than 

three months since 2007, and furthermore will not support 

approaches that place ideological interests over the 

interests of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

weigh into this debate and this motion today. I’d like to talk a 

little bit about the problem this government has right now with 

self-congratulations, particularly when it comes to health care. 

And at the end of my comments, I’ll talk specifically about 

some of the challenges around the surgical . . . as this 

government is going in the wrong direction There’s been some 

really good work done, but the fact is they are now going in the 

wrong direction. 

 

So in terms of self-congratulations, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think a 

government should ever be in the position of patting itself on 

the back. The reality is the work of government is never done 

and there are always people left behind. There is always much 

more to figure out how to do better and to ensure that all 

citizens have an opportunity to have the services that they need 

and the opportunity to live full and inclusive lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s interesting that we have this self-congratulatory motion 

before us. So, arguably, governments should never be so full of 

themselves and full of hubris and full of the desire to pat 

themselves on the back, but particularly now is definitely not 

the time to do that, particularly when we look at the state of 

health care in this province. 

 

So we could look to this government’s record of health care. 

We can talk about the long emergency room waits, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve heard in recent weeks that there are about 

18,000 people who left emergency rooms in Saskatchewan last 

year, Mr. Speaker, 18,000 people who left Saskatchewan 

waiting rooms before seeing the appropriate medical, before 

seeing a doctor, Mr. Speaker. And these aren’t people who were 

not . . . Some of them varied in range, but there were many 

people, Mr. Speaker, who left, who needed emergency care, 

dire emergency care. About 10 per cent of those people, 10 per 

cent of that 18,000 were leaving before they got the care that 

they needed. 

 

I can tell you about a story that I just recently heard from 

someone in Saskatoon who talked about their own experience 

with the emergency room. They were sent to City Hospital in 

Saskatoon or they sent their . . . their mother went to City 

Hospital in Saskatoon by ambulance at 10 a.m. one day. She 

had a series of tests and then an ambulance took her to Royal 

University Hospital. They arrived at about 7:30 at night, and it 

was then many hours later at 11, their mother was still sitting in 

the hallway. This person notes that they saw four stretchers and 

a man in a wheelchair in the hallway, and many paramedics 

sitting with patients being brought in. 

 

And that’s another issue, Mr. Speaker: the lineup of ambulances 

at RUH [Royal University Hospital] because the ERs 

[emergency room] are overcrowded. And so we have many 

cases where we have ambulances not on the road and waiting 

with patients because they have to stay with their patient before 

they can hand them over in the ER. So we’ve got long ER 

waits. 

 

I’ve heard from constituents and from other citizens outside of 

my constituency, who have presented, are at hospitals with 

suicidal ideation, Mr. Speaker, people with thoughts of killing 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, who have been sent home after 

waiting many, many, many hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can talk about, if we want to talk about self-congratulations, 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the government should look to their 

specialist waits. The number has increased here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Right now the average number or 

average time to wait for a specialist in Saskatchewan is about 

11 months. 

 

So when we’re talking about surgeries, we have to factor in the 

whole timeframe, Mr. Speaker. It’s the time to see your GP 

[general practitioner]. Many people in Saskatchewan don’t have 

a general practitioner and then it’s the referral to get to see a 

specialist or a surgeon — a specialist in particular; surgery may 

not be the option. 

 

But there was just a quote on Twitter from someone who said, 

“It’s the wait to get the surgeon appointment. That’s the killer.” 

That was a recent quote on Twitter. So a big part of the waiting 

is around specialists. And the government has been going the 

wrong direction when it comes to seeing specialists as well. Mr. 

Speaker, that is a huge problem. 

 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7551 

So we have ER waits. We have specialist waits, and we can talk 

about the seniors’ care crisis. So the government likes to pat 

itself on the back. We have a seniors’ care crisis here in the 

province. This government’s own reports have validated this 

very well. 

 

The CEO tour, which they were dragged kicking and screaming 

to do just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, initially they were like, 

there’s nothing to see here. And then after much pressure, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister finally relented and said, I’ll send my 

CEOs to tour facilities around the province, and discovered, lo 

and behold, there is a seniors’ care crisis. 

 

[11:15] 

 

There are people, because of chronic understaffing in long-term 

care, Mr. Speaker, there are people who wait for hours and 

hours for the much needed services and care that they need, 

whether they’re left sitting on the toilet for hours on end, or not 

getting to the toilet, and continent people having to wet their 

pants, Mr. Speaker. These were stories that came out of the 

CEO tour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there was validation again a year later. The report was 

done a year later, but it wasn’t issued until quite a bit after, Mr. 

Speaker. But the second CEO tour identified the same issues. 

And in fact this government was so lazy it did a cut-and-paste 

job from the Saskatoon Health Region. So it either didn’t take 

the issues seriously, or nothing had changed despite a small 

injection, a modest injection according . . . relative to the needs, 

Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon Health Region needed 450 care aids; 

that’s what they identified. They got 19, Mr. Speaker. So 

seniors’ care is a huge issue in this province. 

 

So this government is patting itself on the back because of one 

area in which they’ve focused, but they seem to have let 

everything else go, Mr. Speaker. And the one area on which 

they’ve hung their hat is now going the opposite direction. 

 

Let’s talk about the huge infrastructure issues, Mr. Speaker. 

This government, a year and a half ago, about a year and a half 

ago, finally released — again, after some pressure — the VFA 

[Vanderwiel Facility Assessors] report which identified $2.2 

billion in an infrastructure deficit, health care infrastructure 

deficit here in Saskatchewan. That was a year and a half ago 

that that number was released. But that report was done, I think, 

about a year before that. So where is that $2.2 billion number 

now? The reality is it keeps going higher. 

 

And this government invested this year a meagre 28 million, 

less than 30 million, Mr. Speaker, in maintenance of health care 

facilities throughout the province. A couple of years ago 

actually the former CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region 

identified, just to keep things going, Mr. Speaker, to stay on top 

of things, her health region would have needed five times the 

amount of money they were getting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have health care infrastructure where there isn’t hot 

water when a woman has delivered a baby, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a facility in Saskatoon, the largest health region in the 

province, and RUH, Royal University Hospital, has netting up 

on the building to keep the building from crumbling down on 

people below, Mr. Speaker. We have surgery theatres, operating 

theatres that have been shut down because of a lack of 

investment in maintenance of these facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can talk about the mental health and addictions action plan, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government spent about $800,000 on, and 

a lot of fanfare. Many people came forward to share their very 

painful stories, Mr. Speaker. And this government, nary a word 

in the last budget about the mental health and addictions action 

plan. This government . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

minister is saying that’s not true. The one thing that they’re 

doing has been committed to a very long time ago, and that is 

the hospital in North Battleford, which is long overdue, Mr. 

Speaker, long overdue. So if this government thinks that the 

North Battleford hospital is the fix to mental health and 

addictions issues here in Saskatchewan, they have their head 

buried deeply in the sand, Mr. Speaker, deeply in the sand if 

they think that is the only fix in mental health and addiction 

services. 

 

So when we get to surgery . . . This is a government who’s had 

record revenue, $5 billion, approximately $5 billion more than 

any government in the history of this province. They have 

drained the rainy day fund. They haven’t put a single dime 

away for my children, your grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, not a 

person. And in fact the debt has gone up under this province. So 

at a time of record revenue, more money than any government 

has ever had, this is the state of health care in this province: 

high ER waits, Mr. Speaker, surgery times actually going up. 

Some progress was made, but they’re going in the opposite 

direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a seniors’ care crisis. We have huge infrastructure 

issues. We have a broken mental health and addictions service, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government, Mr. Speaker, is going in 

the wrong direction. We know that in the last six months, 

surgeries have been reduced here. And this is a government 

who has had more money and more opportunity to do some 

really positive things, Mr. Speaker, and this is their record in 

health care. So I will not be supporting the motion. I can’t in 

good conscience do that. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week there was a 

lot of hype and discussion on the news about what, if any, 

innovative ideas had come out and come from the movie Back 

to the Future. Well listening to question period in this House 

over the last week and the old, tired ideological rhetoric from 

the opposition, I would have to say it sounded like more back to 

the past, or Groundhog Day for that matter. 

 

The only innovations that I heard about were ones put forth by 

the Saskatchewan Party government, which includes the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative, a novel and an innovative idea 

put forth by this government to help combat the longest surgical 

wait times of any province in Canada created and left behind by 

the former NDP government. 

 

Now I guess I would be remiss in not noting that they once 

thought they had an idea. Some of you might remember this. In 

2001 they created the health action plan where they made a 

commitment that all Saskatchewan residents will have access to 



7552 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

primary care services within a 30-minute drive from their 

homes. Of course this couldn’t be achieved, Mr. Speaker, 

because they were already in the process of closing hospitals 

across this province, including the Regina Plains Health Centre 

— 52 hospitals in total, Mr. Speaker, 52. In a November 14th, 

2006 Leader-Post article, the NDP Health minister of the day, 

Len Taylor, admitted that his government had failed to meet the 

goal they had set up five years ago. 

 

I’d like to say this whole discussion should be more about the 

results and the timely surgeries and significantly reduced 

numbers on wait-lists that have helped many patients and 

families across this province. But if the opposition wants 

numbers, let’s talk numbers. Let’s begin by going back to the 

days where the members opposite didn’t bring any innovative 

ideas or allow any private sector involvement into the health 

care system, and see what it looked like. Let’s go back to the 

days, just for a minute because I hate to lock that in my memory 

for too long, Mr. Speaker, and talk about numbers for surgical 

wait times under the NDP in this province in 2007. 

 

Under the NDP, 2,600 patients were waiting more than 18 

months for surgery compared to 18 patients under the 

Saskatchewan Party government today. That’s down 99 per 

cent. Under the NDP, 5,136 patients were waiting more than 

one year for surgery compared to 97 patients under the 

Saskatchewan Party government today. That’s down 98 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP government, 10,644 patients 

were waiting more than six months for surgery compared to 582 

patients under the Saskatchewan Party government today. 

That’s down 95 per cent. And under the NDP, 15,365 patients 

were waiting more than three months for surgery compared to 

2,587 patients under the Saskatchewan Party government today. 

That’s down 83 per cent, Mr. Speaker. There has been a 

significant decrease all across the board for surgeries since the 

new and innovative Saskatchewan surgical initiative was 

introduced, clearly a drastic comparison to the track record of 

the NDP when they were in power. 

 

In 1999 they even campaigned and were re-elected on a promise 

to cut wait-lists by 30 per cent over four years. And how did 

they perform? They actually increased the wait-lists by 61 per 

cent. So compare that to our record where 89.9 per cent of all 

surgeries being performed within three months, in five years. 

NDP increase in surgical wait times versus Saskatchewan Party 

government decrease in surgical wait times. I wonder which 

one, as a patient waiting for surgery, I should pick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have to remind people that there was also a 

member from the other side in government at one time that 

recently made a statement: 

 

The [Saskatchewan] health department established the 

Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative in 2010 to reduce wait 

times. Comparing the total cost of performing 34 

procedures in the clinic versus the health department . . . 

reveals that it is 26 percent less expensive to use clinics 

than hospitals, and in all cases the clinics were less 

expensive. 

 

That statement was made by Janice MacKinnon, former NDP 

cabinet minister, under Health Care Reform From the Cradle of 

Medicare, January 2013. 

So our results and the methods we are using have shown that 

we are doing great things for the people of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, from just June 1st to August 1st of this year alone, we 

can tell the people of Saskatchewan that 91 per cent of all 

surgeries can be performed or offered within a three-month 

period, and 99 per cent — I repeat, 99 per cent — of all 

surgeries are performed or offered within six months. We’ve 

made progress, significant progress, and given the people of this 

province actual results. 

 

We can now say that surgical wait times in Saskatchewan are 

now amongst the shortest in Canada, a far cry from the 

notoriety we received as having the longest wait times of any 

province in Canada under the NDP. If it’s a choice between 

NDP ideology and a blast from the past or actual results through 

innovative ideas and partnerships, I believe the people of this 

province would definitely choose the latter. 

 

To bring this a little closer to home, Mr. Speaker, I would just 

like to briefly share my own mother’s story of being on a long 

surgical wait-list under the NDP government. My mom is 

currently 91 years old. In the fall of 2003, my mom was told she 

needed to have knee replacements and, after seeing her doctor a 

number of times, she was put on a surgical wait-list. She was 

told that it would be about a year before she would be called 

and scheduled for surgery. After the year went by and she 

suffered through excruciating pain on a daily basis, she was told 

she was moving up the list but it would still be a few more 

months. She was 80 years old at the time. Those few months 

went by and another few months and another few months until 

finally, two years later in the fall of 2005, she had one knee 

replacement. It was another year later before she got the second 

knee replacement. These were the longest surgical wait-times, 

under the NDP, in the history of Canada and this province. I 

know this is not an isolated event and was commonplace under 

the NDP. 

 

As my children would say often from the back seat of the car 

when on a long trip, are we there yet? No, Mr. Speaker, but 

definitely much, much closer than before. We readily admit we 

need and can do better, and we will not apologize for coming up 

with innovative and new ideas like the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative that has worked to improve the health care system in 

this province and give people a better quality of life. We will 

never go back to the past like it was under the NDP, where the 

only response to fixing a broken health care system was closing 

52 hospitals and 420 beds, losing 450 nurses and 173 doctors. 

We can never allow this to happen again. 

 

Thanks to the work and the direction of this government, our 

population is growing and with that will come a bigger and 

greater demand for quality and efficient health care services. 

The Saskatchewan Party government has invested 285.3 million 

in dedicated funding into the Saskatchewan surgical initiative 

and enhanced surgical services, and we are committed to 

ensuring that we continue to move forward on reducing wait 

times. 

 

We are forward thinking, not like the members opposite who 

seem to be stuck in the past with old ideology. They have no 

plans for health care in this province, and this is quite evident 

with the statement made recently by the opposition leader when 

asked by the press, would you cut private surgical clinics? His 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7553 

answer was very telling, Mr. Speaker. I quote: “The same gain 

or better gains could have been made by building capacity 

within the public system. That is certainly my preference.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier was right. The people of 

Saskatchewan, given a choice between tired, old . . . [inaudible] 

. . . will choose timely surgery. I wholeheartedly support the 

motion. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and as always, it’s an honour to be able to rise in this 

Legislative Assembly to enter into debate. 

 

Interesting topic, today’s debate. And I think the hon. member 

who brought it up kind of had bad timing, Mr. Speaker, because 

of some of the things that have been revealed here in the House 

this week about the change in direction in the surgical wait 

times. So I’ll speak to that later. But certainly I think maybe he 

was wishing he had brought this motion forward a couple of 

weeks ago rather than today. So that’s kind of a, I guess, maybe 

they’re . . . We’re seeing the swan song from some of these 

members. We know that as of the end of November, they will 

no longer be rising to speak in the House, so I guess he had to 

take his turn when it came and that was the timing that he got 

stuck with. I’ll be talking about that quite a bit in the few 

minutes that I have here. 

 

But I think the first thing we need to note here is that there have 

been achievements in surgical wait times, and those need to be 

celebrated. And our leader has consistently said, we need to 

celebrate the achievements that have been seen. But the 

problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we’re now moving in the 

wrong direction. And those numbers were clear and in the 

forefront this week as we brought forward the information that 

shows that we are no longer seeing these reductions, but in fact 

surgical wait times are increasing. 

 

We know that in March this government, with its non-ideology, 

decided to cut funding for surgeries. This was a deliberate cut 

that was put forward by the Sask Party government. And what’s 

happened since then, Mr. Speaker? Well I think this is 

something that’s very telling. The number of people waiting 

more than three months for their surgery has ballooned by 50 

per cent. That is something that should set alarm bells ringing 

throughout this government’s surgical initiative. I think what 

they see is a deliberate . . . When you see a deliberate cut like 

that, then all the progress that they have made is going to 

evaporate. And we know that the numbers are going in the 

wrong direction. 

 

With about 3,500 people, more people, in the group that are 

now waiting longer than three months, we know that thousands 

of people are in pain longer. They’re frustrated longer and 

possibly unable to work or unable to play with their kids longer. 

These are people that are now being put out of their daily lives 

because those waits are now increasing. 

 

In addition to waiting for surgery, we have to keep in mind, and 

my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale brought this up, it’s 

not just the surgery itself. It’s everything that has to happen 

before you actually get to the surgery. First of all we know that 

there’s a huge wait time now for specialists, so what advances 

that can be claimed in terms of surgical wait times we know 

that there’s a negative effect in terms of the amount of time that 

people now have to wait for a specialist. Then there is the wait 

for diagnostics and tests. And we know again there are waiting 

lists for MRIs, and certainly I’ll speak to that in a few minutes 

as well. And then after you’ve got your diagnostics, after 

you’ve seen your GP, and after you’ve waited a very long time 

to see a specialist, then you’re put on the waiting list for 

surgery. 

 

So we know that this waiting list is growing; it’s growing fast. 

Fifty per cent more people since March are now waiting more 

than three months for surgeries. So this is really, really 

concerning statistics. And I think, having brought them forward 

in the House this week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know the 

people of Saskatchewan are starting to realize that, without a 

sustained effort, the Sask Party is letting down the numbers that 

we . . . the gains that have been made in the surgical wait times. 

So the real wait time for any individual from the day they go to 

their family doctor, in pain and worried, until their surgery date, 

it’s now up to 14, 15, 16 months or longer which, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m sure you’ll agree is unacceptable. 

 

Now why is this happening? We were seeing progress, and now 

we see a complete reversal in the way this government is 

approaching this. We know there has been an $8 million cut to 

surgeries in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, an $8 

million cut at a time when progress was being made. We know 

that that means there is going to be fewer surgeries. The math is 

pretty simple. No money, no surgeries. So we’re going to lose 

3,500 . . . There’s going to be 3,500 fewer surgeries in Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region alone . . . or sorry, in Saskatchewan. 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is planning 1,664 fewer 

surgeries in Regina alone this year. So those folks who were 

finally getting through the list, they’re finally getting to see 

their specialists, they’ve finally had all the diagnostic tests and 

the surgery has been ordered, they know they’re going to be 

waiting much longer than three months. 

 

We have quotes from Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s 

internal documents: “The goal has changed from one of growth 

to one where contraction of services in order to meet a reduced 

target is the overall goal.” So we see a complete reversal in the 

direction that this government — certainly the speaker and the 

introducer of the motion — has indicated. 

 

He’s said it’s, you know, the number of surgeries is going to 

keep pace with the demand. It’s clearly not what the folks 

within the health regions are saying or doing. And we know 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, they’re definitely 

changing their goals. “The goal has changed [that’s a quote] 

from one of growth to one where contraction of services in 

order to meet a reduced target is the overall goal.” That’s the 

quote. Why is there a reduced target? Because this government 

has cut funding for surgery. Simple math. I know we saw some 

interesting math earlier in question period about somehow 78 

per cent equals 90, but that’s the way we see numbers going 

around. 

 



7554 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

And here’s another quote from a Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region internal document: 

 

The Ministry has modelled the supply and demand, and 

linked with the financial situation, has provided funding 

for around 1000 cases less than last year with the 

expectation that we maintain flow of incoming demand. 

 

I think that the telling part of that quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

where they have linked this to the financial situation. So it 

acknowledges that there is a financial situation with this 

government despite I think some bluster and denial of that from 

the government benches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we know that this government has had record revenues. 

That was one of the reasons why they were able to make 

progress with the surgical demand. But now there is a financial 

situation, and they are starting to have to make cuts to the 

number of surgeries that are going on, which is going to have a 

direct impact on the length of time that people are going to have 

to wait. We have more people in Saskatchewan, ergo we’re 

going to have more people needing surgeries. We have less 

money in Saskatchewan, ergo we’re going to have to cut the 

number of surgeries. It’s a simple mathematical equation. 

Therefore Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has had to make 

$38 million in cuts, and Saskatoon Health Region has to make 

more than $44 million in cuts. 

 

And when you think about the fact that we’re giving Cenovus 

$12 million in penalties for last year, we’re giving them 

probably . . . There is an estimate of 5 to $6 million more this 

year. That’s already, on that one file alone, at least half of the 

cuts that are being required in Regina for surgery wait times. 

And so you’ve got to wonder what’s going on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, over there, when they’re incurring penalties, large 

penalties, on a project that is not proving to be working well, 

and then we see cuts in surgeries in the two main health regions 

for sure. 

 

We’re concerned about the numbers. We’re concerned about 

the numbers the government’s been giving. Both the Premier 

and the Minister of the Health have given us inaccurate 

numbers. We heard that in the House this week. And we know 

that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has raised concerns. 

The officials within the region have raised concerns that these 

cuts might affect progress. We know internal documents have 

indicated that these cuts put the gains made at risk, and it will 

have a negative impact. There’s no way to get around this, Mr. 

Speaker. If you cut funds, surgeries are reduced. So again I 

think the timing of the member’s motion is a bit awkward 

because he probably should have raised it a couple of weeks 

ago before we were able to release these numbers and show that 

the gains are diminishing and that in fact they’re going in the 

wrong direction. 

 

We note from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

department of surgery . . . Here’s a quote right from the 

department of surgery, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “The ministry by 

their own calculations realizes that maintaining a strict 

three-month target is going to be a challenge based on the 

projected availability of surgical resources.” So once again you 

see it right in the quote itself. It’s a matter of math. Less money 

in, less surgeries are performed. If this government cuts the 

money for surgeries, there are going to be fewer surgeries and 

the wait times are going to grow. And we know that this is a 

frustration. 

 

We’ve proposed a lot of solutions to this, Mr. Speaker, and I 

know these guys don’t seem to think we have. But we’ve said, 

first of all get rid of things like the toxic John Black lean 

experiment. Get rid of top-heavy management. Get rid of kaizen 

promotion offices. And reduce their addiction to consultants, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are some of the things that this government 

could do better. 

 

So again you know, my condolences to the member for raising 

this motion at a pretty awkward time for his party. But certainly 

I know he had to get his last words in before he leaves the 

Assembly. So I will not be supporting the motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s an honour to join in this debate today about surgical 

wait times in Saskatchewan and the progress that has been 

made since 2007 to 2015, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think there’s a lot of numbers that are going to be thrown 

about for the next 10 minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But one 

that we have to keep in mind is that 99 per cent of patients 

receive surgery within six months; 91 per cent of patients 

receive surgery within three months. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I think we have to keep that in mind because we’re not talking 

. . . It’s not surgeries we’re talking about. It’s people. This 

means 91 per cent of people get surgery in three months; 99 per 

cent of people get surgery within six months. And I think we 

have to take that in context that these are people. They’re 

suffering with knee injuries. They’re suffering with hips, with 

other afflictions. And it’s a quality-of-life issue that we’re 

talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a quality of life for people 

in Saskatchewan that, since 2007, have seen more timely access 

to surgery. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few numbers I’d like to quote. 

Surgeries performed or offered within three months, and these 

are . . . I’m going to go across the health regions in 

Saskatchewan: Sun Country Health Region, 100 per cent; Five 

Hills Health Region, 100 per cent; Cypress Hills Health Region, 

100 per cent; Sunrise Health Region, 100 per cent; Heartland 

Health Region, 100 per cent; Kelsey Trail Health Region, 100 

per cent; Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 88 per cent; 

Saskatoon Health Region, 88 per cent; Prince Albert Parkland 

Health Region, 94 per cent; Prairie North Health Region, 100 

per cent; province wide, 91 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think that talks about our government’s commitment to 

making sure that people across our province have more access 

to care. And this isn’t like the member from Riversdale’s 

saying. This isn’t patting ourselves on the back. We’ve always 

said that there’s more work to do in the health sector and within 

providing patient-centred care. And for her to rise today and 

say, you’re self-congratulating and you’re patting yourself on 

the back, well no, these are the numbers, member from 

Riversdale. 

 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7555 

These are what we’re trying to do, and we’re trying to have the 

best possible outcomes for patients, for people, for families in 

Saskatchewan. And one of the reasons why we’ve provided 

more timely care is because of our government’s investment of 

$285.3 million in the surgical initiative, an enhanced surgical 

services program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Surgery wait times in 

Saskatchewan are now among the shortest in Canada. That’s 

one thing we have to really remember. 

 

When we talk about what our government has done, it’s not a 

referendum on our government. In five months give me a 

choice on what our government has done and will do and what 

they, the opposition, will put forward and what they are going 

to do. It’s the choice of the longest wait times in Canada or the 

shortest wait times in Canada. It’s a choice of should you 

supplement the public health care system with private clinics or 

just be tied to ideology and not go forward with private health 

care clinics. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s an important question for the people of 

Saskatchewan because private surgical clinics since 2010, over 

47,000 total surgeries have been done in the private clinics, 

47,000. You think you’re going to make up that backlog in the 

public service system? Over 19,000 in Regina, over 27,000 in 

Saskatoon. Private diagnostic clinics, over 14,600 CT scans 

provided in 2014-15, over 3,000 MRIs provided in 2014-15. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the record on this side of the House. 

That’s an innovative approach to making sure people in 

Saskatchewan get more timely access to the health services they 

need. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, on their side they have a record as well. They say, 

oh, don’t bring back up the past. Don’t bring up the history of 

our government because it’s not so good. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think that’s, when people go to the ballot, that’s the 

choice they have to make. Their record versus our record. 

NDP’s, longest wait times of any province of Canada in 2006. 

That’s not a long time ago. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 2006, when 

they were in government, they had the longest wait times in 

Canada according to the Fraser Institute. 

 

So they can argue with the Fraser Institute if they’d like and say 

that that’s not a good report but, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And 

the member from Saskatoon, he was on his feet once during 

question period. I’m sure he might get on his feet again if he 

wants to get asked a question again during the time we have 

questions and answers here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In the 1999 election campaign, the Saskatchewan NDP was 

re-elected on a promise to cut wait-lists by 30 per cent over four 

years. And how did they perform? What did they do, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? They actually increased wait times to 61 per 

cent. It’s sad. But I’ll ask the member from Lakeview . . . The 

all-knowing member from Lakeview asked some questions in 

committee in April 30th, 2013. So the member from Lakeview, 

and I’m quoting Hansard, Mr. Nilson talked about what they 

had . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I quoted, yes, quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They had the Surgical Care Network. The 

Surgical Care Network was their idea of how to shorten 

wait-lists. Like, that’s fair. We have the surgical initiative. They 

had the Surgical Care Network. And this was the answer. This 

was the answer on the NDP’s plan to cut wait-lists from 

someone in committee. It looks like 20,000 to 27,500 people 

were on the wait-list. You know, that’s kind of a bit of a 

movement. They decreased it by 500 people. But it would 

probably put us in really good shape 30 years from now. 

 

So the NDP’s proposed initiative would have taken 30 years to 

cut that backlog. I think that’s a long time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

That’s almost as long as I’ve been alive actually, so you put that 

in context. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about the funding for health 

regions, and some of the members across the way say it’s 

because of funding that some of the surgical numbers have gone 

down. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve increased the budget for 

health, the total health budget by 50 per cent. It’s over $5 

billion now from 2007 to 2015 — 50 per cent budget increase. 

Here’s some of the increases for health regions across the 

province: Cypress Hills, 83 million, 2007-8; 2015-16, 122 

thousand, 600 million, an increase of 46 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a long list of numbers here, but there’s a 

couple more things I’d like to get to before my time’s up. So the 

overall in health regions, the budgets increased, base operating 

funds to health regions increased by 77 million, which is 2.5 per 

cent in 2015. 

 

So this whole conversation is talking about people and about 

how people need more timely access to care to ensure that they 

have a better quality of life. 

 

And our Premier, a couple of days ago, posted an infographic 

on where we were and where our wait times were across 

compared to where they were in 2007; an infographic actually. 

And there’s a lot of comments on this, a lot of interesting 

comments from people all across Saskatchewan. But I looked at 

it. There’s over 200 comments on what people had experienced, 

and these are real people telling their experiences. And I could 

make some of these comments and put them in the record, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

My experience was completely different. I tried to put it 

off [meaning surgery], and I was taken immediately on a 

long weekend in Regina and I don’t even live there. I’m 

not a PC/Sask Party, but I’ve got to give credit where 

credit is due. When the NDP were in, I had friends waiting 

years [for surgery]. 

 

Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

I am 20 days post bilateral knee replacement. It took four 

months from the time I met with my orthopedic surgeon. 

Great timing as he was in summer holidays for three 

weeks, plus it is a little longer surgery so extra time was 

required. I’m very grateful for my full experience so far. 

Thank you very much, Saskatchewan government. 

 

That’s not patting yourself on the back, member from 

Riversdale. These are real people making real comments. 

 

Three years ago this coming November, I had emergency 

surgery to repair tendons in both knees after falling on ice. 

Best care, and I also had the best surgeon to perform the 



7556 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

surgery. Took two months to recover but by New Year’s 

Eve 2012, I was home. I’m so thankful for [and I’m 

quoting] Premier Wall and the Sask Party for the service I 

had there. The challenge was learning to walk all over 

again, but without the Sask Party, who knows how long I 

would have taken to recover? Thank you, Brad Wall, for 

your leadership and for improving the care in hospitals 

like Saskatoon City Hospital. 

 

One more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one more: 

 

Hurt my knee last November; saw a doc early December. 

MRI in early January then bone scan in February then 

consult and then surgery sometime in January. Happy with 

the pace it has progressed at. Good job, Sask Party and 

Mr. Wall. Don’t ever leave us . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot more quotes I could use from 

real people across the province. But one thing is true. We’ve 

had the results. The surgical initiative brought more people into 

surgeries faster, and we’ve created a better quality of life for 

people across the province. 

 

At some point in time, the members opposite are going to have 

to put forward their plan. And it’s going to be interesting if 

they’re going to agree with private clinics, ensuring people get 

more timely care to health, more timely access to health care 

and not . . . I’m hoping that one of them will put forward a plan 

today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into this debate. I read the 

motion with some interest, and again, my colleague from 

Nutana thought it was ill timed. And I’m thinking it’s ill placed 

because really there’s not a lot of argument in it. You know, 

when we take a look at this and I read that “. . . commends this 

government’s steps to address surgical wait times in the 

province through the surgical initiative . . .” And we have said 

that we celebrate the successes, so that first part is done. We 

recognize that. 

 

And you know, sometimes I wonder if this government is a 

little deaf tone . They often say we on this side don’t recognize 

good things. We do; we have. And I can think of several 

opportunities, you know, and I think in Social Services we 

recognized the good work around SAID [Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability], but somehow the minister doesn’t seem 

to recognize this. 

 

The government on the other side . . . You know, we’re not 

going to make a big deal of it. We’re not going to go like the 

member before for 10 minutes or 7 minutes, go on and on and 

on about it, but we have recognized it. It’s a good thing. For 

people of Saskatchewan, that’s a good thing. And we have said 

that, and the leader has said that. So what’s the argument? 

What’s the argument there? We’d all be there. But then we go 

on to say, “. . . and furthermore will not support approaches that 

place ideological interests over the interests of . . .” But we all 

agree with that. We all agree with that. 

 

We’ve seen the boondoggles, and I have to say, one of the 

biggest boondoggles for this government, when they placed 

ideological interests over the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

And I wonder if the member from Walsh Acres will be talking 

about the Supreme Court ruling around essential services, that 

they made a big deal, made a huge deal, cost hundreds of 

thousands of dollars if not more, more. 

 

There was a clear example of a government placing ideological 

interests over common sense. And eight years later, at being 

ordered by the Supreme Court to get down to work and think 

about the interests of people of Saskatchewan, and finally 

they’re doing it. And you know, funny how it only took a few 

months. And if they had done that in 2007, we would have 

saved hundreds of thousands of dollars and, I think, a lot more. 

 

But when we talk about ideological boondoggles, it’s this 

government that really we need to take a look at. We see this, 

and the answers to questions today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 

they refuse, they really refuse, to give straight answers to 

straight questions and they prefer to really fight the ideological 

interests of the right wing. 

 

You know what? What we’re here for is the common sense 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan, and what makes sense 

today in this year, in this month, at this time, and what people 

are facing today. 

 

Now they’re fighting the battles of 2007, you know. And the 

other day I had brought up, well actually both sides brought up 

the 1970s. They love to go back to the 1970s and fight that 

battle over again, like to fight the battle of 2007, 2011. 

 

They don’t want to fight the battle of 2003 again when it was 

really . . . Their leader at the time really did admit to their 

ideological interests, that they would privatize many of the 

Crown corporations. That little slip cost them the government 

of the day. They don’t want to talk about that, but they do want 

to fight 2007 over again, over again, and over again. No, we’re 

going to fight, we’re going to fight the good fight of 2016. And 

we’ll put our case forward; they can put their case forward. 

 

But I’ve got to tell you, what’s happening in health care today is 

a real, real mess. And we can go down the list. You know, I can 

talk about the headline in the paper, and I don’t know how they 

can live with this one. How can you live with this one? “18,000 

Saskatchewan patients leave ERs without seeing a doctor.” 

How does that feel? How do you feel about that? How do you 

really feel about that? When you have 18,000 people leaving 

emergency rooms, giving up, saying, I’m not going to be able to 

see a doctor, that’s a problem. That’s a problem. That’s a 

problem. 

 

And you know, and my colleague for Riversdale so rightly 

pointed out the issues around mental health. Mental health, 

we’ve got a lot of work to do with that. And when you see a 

report that looks like it’s on a shelf somewhere gathering dust, 

the Minister of Finance can talk about the North Battleford 

hospital as a good start, but there’s so much work, so much 

work to be done in that area. Absolutely, absolutely so much 

work that needs to be done in that area. 

 

And then we talked about seniors’ care. Seniors’ care is a real 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7557 

issue as well, and we’ve raised that. And finally we got the 

Minister of Health to recognize that he’s got to fix that. It took a 

lot of work, a lot of work in this Chamber for him to actually 

admit that there’s a problem. 

 

And now we see what’s happening in wait times. Now this 

should be a red light. Buzzers should be going off. Okay, we’ll 

take a couple of minutes, pat ourselves on the back about the 

good work that we’ve done, fair enough. But what about now? 

What about now? We see health regions cutting back their 

budgets, and the impact is that there are fewer people getting 

surgeries. I mean we know that there’s 3,500 people in this 

group that has waited longer than three months, and we know 

that thousands of people are in pain longer. This is a problem. 

This is a real problem. 

 

And these folks over here would prefer to fight the battles of 

2007, 2011. They bring out the old clippings. And you know, it 

was interesting that the member who raised this issue won’t be 

part of that fight. He’s done a lot of good work in the House, 

but some work has not been as good as it might have been. But 

I have to recognize that he’s not going to be here, so maybe he 

is living some past glories. 

 

We would like to see some issues, some concern about what’s 

really happening here and now, here and now. And really if 

we’re talking about . . . This is one that’s most interesting, I 

find, that when we talk about waiting lists and all of that and the 

whole issue around MRIs, and of course we’re fighting at that 

bill. And we haven’t really heard the members talk about this 

because really on this side of the House we get to talk more 

about it than they do in second readings. So we don’t really 

have members, private members on their side raising their 

concerns, their thoughts on MRIs. I thought that would have 

been the thing that we would have been hearing more about. 

But in fact they are reaching . . . and they wanted to spend time, 

they want to spend time congratulating themselves. 

 

But here’s a letter. Here’s a letter about MRIs. And this is from 

Sally Mahood, a well-respected doctor in Saskatchewan. Private 

MRIs are a bad . . . Are private MRIs bad medicine? She says, 

“I see this as a cynical political move that caters to public fears 

about long lists for imaging, but . . . [one that will actually 

worsen things] for patients who truly need an MRI.” 

 

So talk about cynical moves. Talk about ideological moves — 

that’s the habit of that government over there. And we have 

some real concerns about what’s happening here and now in 

Saskatchewan: 18,000 people leaving emergency rooms without 

seeing doctors; thousands of fewer surgeries being happening, 

forcing longer waiting lists; mental health report not being paid 

to in attention at all; and senior care that should be, should be a 

priority for this government. What we see is not, is not because 

this government would prefer to pat themselves on the back. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this motion is deeply flawed 

and doesn’t really help the people of Saskatchewan. It should be 

focused on helping the people of Saskatchewan, as I said, in just 

those four areas. And I know we’ll . . . [inaudible] . . . so what 

about we’ll get people talking about other areas that are 

important as well. So, Mr. Speaker, there is no way, no way at 

all that I can support this motion, and I look forward to 

questions. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the member 

from Walsh Acres explain why it would make any sense to put 

health regions in a position where they have to cut 3,420 

surgeries while the demand is going up? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m proud to say that the health regions have received more 

money under this government than ever before under the 

previous government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got to take this into 

account. Look at the whole history of our government. Since 

2007 and 2015, health regions have received 50 per cent more 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would love to know from that 

member specifically, because she’s bound to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ideological. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Ideologically bound. Thank you, member 

from Rosemont. Would her party cancel the 47,000 surgeries 

done in private clinics over the past four years? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

government strongly supports the use of private clinics to 

reduce surgical wait times. Since 2010, private clinics have 

helped reduce wait times by providing 47,000 surgeries in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Regina alone they 

provided 19,000 surgeries. 

 

On October 26th, 2015, the Leader of the Opposition was asked 

if he would cut private surgical clinics. He responded that he 

would prefer to eliminate private surgical clinics. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, doing this would result in longer wait times and reduce 

surgeries. Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question for the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale: do you stand by your leader’s word 

and would your party eliminate private clinics? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

answer that question. We believe in a single-payer system 

where we encourage innovative ideas and time-tested methods 

for ensuring . . . that are put forward by front-line workers, Mr. 

Speaker, that strive to improve quality for everybody. This is 

about common sense solutions, Mr. Speaker. We believe in 

good ideas, Mr. Speaker, good ideas, not ideology. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that patients in 



7558 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

the Saskatoon Health Region now have to wait over 300 days 

on average to see a specialist. We’re just wondering; we know 

the member for Walsh Acres likes to speak and raise his voice 

as much as he can in this legislature. Unfortunately he doesn’t 

get very many opportunities to answer questions, so I’m going 

to put that question to him. Does he think it’s appropriate that 

patients in the Saskatoon Health Region should have to wait 

over 300 days — and I hope we get an answer to this — 300 

days on average to see a specialist? What’s your answer? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I do enjoy getting on my feet and speaking on behalf of 

members of Regina Walsh Acres. I enjoy talking about how the 

wait times in the province have gone down since 2007, not up. I 

enjoy talking about how 99 per cent of patients in 

Saskatchewan get surgery within six months. I enjoy talking 

about health: 91 of patients in Saskatchewan get surgery within 

three months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And my question to the member from Saskatoon Nutana would 

be, are you sure that you don’t support your leader in cancelling 

the private clinic surgeries in Saskatchewan? Because on this 

side we’ll put patients’ health, patients’ quality of life ahead of 

ideology every time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Once again we have no answer from that member. He did not 

even touch on the question at all. So it’s really disappointing 

that we hear as much volume as we do from that member, but 

we don’t hear any positive answers to questions that are 

actually placed to him. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I should 

try this again. Can the member from Walsh Acres explain why 

it makes any sense to fill your budgetary holes with cuts to 

health care? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you so much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it breaks my heart that I disappointed the member from 

Nutana. It really does. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will try and 

support the people of Saskatchewan whenever I can and make 

sure that we support a surgical initiative where we put $285.3 

million into making sure people get more timely access to 

surgeries, make sure that no . . . 99 per cent of surgeries are 

done within six months, 91 per cent of surgeries are done within 

three months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So on this side of the 

House, we’re going to put the people of Saskatchewan first. 

We’re going to put the patients of Saskatchewan first to ensure 

that they have a higher quality of life and that they get their 

access to timely surgery faster, safer, and better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I did 

miss my opportunity because I was carefully listening to the 

member from Walsh Acres who very carefully but correctly 

answered the questions, as opposed to the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale who when asked a question did not 

respond. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his scrum on Monday, the Leader of the 

Opposition made it very clear that he is against private clinics. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess this means he’s against the 14,600 

CT scans provided in private clinics, 2014-2015, the projected 

40,000 CT scans to be delivered over the next three years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this question is for the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. I’ve given her plenty of opportunity to 

craft her answer. Would you be in favour of closing the 

diagnostic clinics along with your proposed closure of private 

surgical clinics? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the issue at hand here is 

whether or not wait times for surgery are going in the right 

direction. This government is going in the exact opposite 

direction. Yes, there’s been progress made, which our leader 

has commended this government and said that needs to be 

celebrated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in the last six months alone, this government has gone in 

the exact opposite direction very quickly. Surgery numbers or 

the wait for surgery has gone up by 50 per cent in the last six 

months, Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s $8 million 

budget cut to the RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region]. 

That is the issue at hand. The government is going in the exact 

opposite direction than it should be. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And we 

see on the other side all sorts of contortions to pat themselves 

on the back and refuse to take responsibility about what’s 

happening here and now. And alarm bells should be going off, 

should be going off. Now we hear and we see that the Health 

minister says he’s monitoring the situation, but the waiting lists 

are actually growing. And I want to know from the member 

from Walsh Acres, how can he go out and knock on doors when 

he knows that’s the fact? What’s he telling people about the 

growing waiting lists? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, and thank you to the 

member from Saskatoon Centre for the question. What I’m 

telling people is that in Saskatoon this year, 6,500 surgeries are 

going to be done in a private clinic; in Regina, 5,000 surgeries 

are going to be done in a private clinic. And that would not be 

done under the NDP in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What I’m telling people when I knock on doors is that we’re 

doing more surgeries, 85,000 surgeries this year. The NDP in 

their last year did 70,000. That’s 15,000 more surgeries, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. What I’m telling people about health care in 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7559 

this province is we’re working as hard as we can. There’s more 

work to do, but there’s more surgeries being done now in this 

province. There’s more doctors, there’s more nurses, and 

there’s more front-line workers than ever before in this 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I knock on doors, I’m proud of this 

government’s record, and I tell them about the plan. We’re 

going to continue to work hard to make sure you get more 

timely service. I’m wondering what he tells people when he 

knocks on doors and about their history of having the longest 

wait times in Canada. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — The NDP often refuses to set goals. Perhaps 

this is because in the past they have set goals and they failed to 

deliver any progress towards meeting their targets. One of the 

few targets they did set was in 1999 when the NDP was 

re-elected on a platform which promised to reduce surgical wait 

times by 30 per cent over four years. Unfortunately it actually 

increased by 61 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: what is 

your party’s plan to ensure that Saskatchewan never returns to 

the longest surgical wait times in the country, as we did when 

the member from Lakeview was Health minister? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riverdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to take that question. I need to point out that the issue at 

hand is the government made some progress and now when 

they are having some financial troubles, they are cutting health 

care, Mr. Speaker. They are going in exactly the wrong 

direction. The member from Walsh Acres, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

was waxing on about numbers of surgeries are taking place in 

our health regions but the reality is he failed to mention that 

those numbers are going up actually. Those surgery numbers, 

Mr. Speaker, the wait-list for surgeries is going up, not down, 

Mr. Speaker. The member from Walsh Acres can cite numbers, 

but the fact is the progress is being eroded. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Once again, no answer from the member from Walsh Acres. 

We’ve asked him a few and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 609 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 609 — The 

Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon as it relates to 

Bill No. 609, a private member’s bill that was brought forward 

by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

I do want to, just before we move on, I want to recognize the 

good work of that member, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, on this file. And this is a member that’s gone out 

and met with seniors across Saskatchewan, that’s met with 

those providing care across Saskatchewan, that has met with 

facilities, and that has built a piece of legislation that’s common 

sense and compassionate and simply the right thing to do for 

seniors today and certainly important for us to be ensuring that 

security and dignity that seniors deserve for tomorrow. 

 

So when I look at Bill No. 609, An Act respecting the Rights of 

Residents in Special Care Facilities and Personal Care Homes, 

I also want to recognize the hundreds and hundreds and 

hundreds of conversations and pieces of input that have put 

together this piece of legislation, that certainly have directed the 

bill that was brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, but have informed all of us to enter in and to form 

this piece of legislation and bring it to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that on a daily basis, I’d have numerous conversations 

and phone calls and emails and messages with people helping 

contribute to ensuring that seniors have the security and dignity 

that they deserve. So many of those conversations, so many of 

the stories have directly shaped this piece of legislation, have 

directly shaped the actions of this opposition to ensure that 

seniors are a priority, to ensure that the care they receive is a 

priority. I’m thankful to everyone on that front. 

 

And I think of so many of those conversations, whether it’s the 

direct exchange with somebody while door knocking, who 

might be a daughter or a son of somebody who’s receiving care 

or might be someone who’s receiving care right now, or it 

might be somebody who’s working and working hard, and 

working hard with resources that are insufficient because of 

choices of this government, to try to deliver the care that seniors 

deserve. Quite frankly this is an issue that touches us all. We 

can relate to it by looking at our own families, certainly at our 

own constituencies. And it’s a pressing matter that quite frankly 

needs to not be part of the partisan fray in here and be delayed 

or dismissed any further. Action needs to be required. 

 

When you look at Bill 609 and establishing standards for 

seniors in care, this legislation is something that provides a 

promise of some very basic security and dignity that the seniors 

of this province deserve. We know that it’s critical to do the 

right thing now for those that are receiving care today. But we 

know as well when we look at the demographics, if we look at 

the growing need for care and for support, that it’s absolutely 

critical that we respond to the crisis and insufficient support and 

attention from the current government right now, but that we 



7560 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

plan for the future. So it’s about responding to the crisis today, 

one that’s been dismissed by the government opposite, one 

that’s a creation of their own budgetary choices, Mr. Speaker, 

and a choice of theirs to eliminate standards and that 

commitment to seniors. 

 

If you think of the vulnerable position that anyone entering care 

is in, Mr. Speaker, they deserve some certainty. If you think of 

the role as a son, as a grandson, or a person that’s entering in, 

we all deserve to know what a loved one can expect. And I 

guess the reality is we hear day in and day out way too many 

stories of strain and strife, way too many stories of the impacts 

of the inadequate funding of this government by the scrapping 

of the minimum care standards of this government. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And all too often we hear heartbreaking stories, Mr. Speaker. 

And when we’re thinking of those heartbreaking stories, we 

need to recognize that these are stories about families and 

people. These are real people, Mr. Speaker, in communities all 

across Saskatchewan who deserve better, Mr. Speaker. We have 

thousands and thousands of seniors who deserve better as they 

enter into care, Mr. Speaker, as they’re in care. And we know 

that the system has failed far too many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also heard in a very tragic way of premature deaths in 

care facilities, at least seven of them that we’ve discussed on 

this floor of this Assembly. I think we owe it to those families, 

those families and those people who were lost in a premature 

way while in care, to do better for the seniors of today and 

certainly the seniors of tomorrow. If we put into perspective the 

tragic loss of those individuals within their families, I think it 

should cause every last one of us in this Assembly to take this 

issue with the serious attention that it deserves and to provide 

the basic common sense measures, the basic compassionate 

measures that seniors deserve. So when we think of Margaret 

Warholm, when we think of Jessie Sellwood, when we think of 

Lorne Rowell, when we think of Fern Chingos, Irene Hohne, 

Lois Rein, and the man in Moose Jaw who died after eating 

detergent pods, we need to think of those people, those families 

who lost those loved ones in a premature way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At a time where government has presided over record revenue, 

Mr. Speaker, and has found all sorts of money for certain sets of 

priorities that on too many fronts quite frankly have turned into 

debacles and waste, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad that a priority wasn’t 

given to bolstering the seniors’ care system in this province and 

to providing the basic guarantee and assurance that seniors 

across this province deserve to address the chronic 

short-staffing that’s providing strain and causing inadequate 

quality of care across this province. 

 

You know, we have incredible workers in the seniors’ care 

system across Saskatchewan, working in homes, providing 

support. They’re dedicated to their work. They do it to make a 

difference. They do it because they care, Mr. Speaker. They 

need to have the supports that they deserve to be able to carry 

out their work and provide the quality care that they know that 

every one of those seniors they work with deserves. 

 

We should also recognize the work of the Ombudsman on this 

front, who weighed in and took on a study and provided a report 

and looked at complaints that came forward to the Ombudsman. 

I believe there were 89 complaints that the Ombudsman 

reviewed. And in those complaints and in the report in reporting 

back out to the public at large, the Ombudsman reinforced what 

the public’s known for a long time and what the opposition has 

been asserting, is that there’s not the sufficient support in our 

seniors’ care system, that the standards of care are far too broad, 

far too vague, that they’re not measurable, that it’s very difficult 

to ensure accountability on this front, that they’re not able to 

make sure that quality of care is in place where it needs to be. 

 

So that report was an important piece as well in identifying the 

inadequate crisis-type conditions in seniors’ care across 

Saskatchewan, and again a government that has made choices, 

Mr. Speaker, and sadly hasn’t made seniors’ care a sufficient 

priority when making budgetary decisions and focusing their 

time and attention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we certainly need to have legislated minimum care standards 

to make sure that everybody gets the care they deserve. And 

certainly as I’ve said, that’s important for anyone who’s in care 

today or may enter into care fairly soon. And it’s important to 

all those families and loved ones, Mr. Speaker. The current 

guidelines are incredibly vague, and they don’t provide the 

protection and security that seniors deserve. I know that internal 

documents show that an official of this government actually 

cites that these are extremely general, with the following quote: 

“Is there any further policy development or requirements under 

each of the items under section 1.4 for care standards? These 

are good but extremely general.” 

 

So we owe it, Mr. Speaker, to make this the priority that 

Saskatchewan people deserve. We know that this government 

has officials, their own officials, Mr. Speaker, letting them 

know that the current standards are extremely general. And we 

know from the conversations and the people that we serve, and 

our own loved ones and our families, that the current conditions 

for seniors’ care across Saskatchewan are, you know, are 

inadequate. 

 

We recently had three other seniors speak out, proud seniors, at 

the Ross Payant home in Assiniboia. They came forward. I 

want to quote one of them. And again like I said, they’re very 

proud seniors. That’s the story of Saskatchewan seniors, seniors 

that have worked hard their entire life, that have given so much 

to their family, to their community, to our province, have asked 

for very little but have given lots, Mr. Speaker. And they 

deserve more than insecurity and inadequate supports when 

they get to the stage of life where they need supports. Jim 

Lawrence, who lives in the home says, “I didn’t come here to 

be abused and pushed around. We’ve been fighting to try and 

get the staff increased.” Well that’s our push too. 

 

But if you put yourself and think of your own family and your 

own loved ones or you picture Mr. Jim Lawrence sharing that 

quote: “I didn’t come here to be abused and pushed around.” 

That’s absolutely troubling if you think about the stress and 

strain that that individual, that senior has upon his shoulders, 

and certainly the family as well. 

 

Now seniors shouldn’t have to fight for the basics, Mr. Speaker. 

That should be a promise and a guarantee to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The government should focus on providing 



October 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7561 

quality care instead of on its pet projects. 

 

You know, I’m not going to get into the long, long and growing 

list, Mr. Speaker, of pet projects of this government that haven’t 

related to quality of life, that haven’t related to seniors’ care, 

that haven’t related to improving things for the people of 

Saskatchewan, but that have wasted money hand over fist, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m not going to get into that list right now because I 

want to stay focused on the importance of this bill that was 

brought forward. 

 

But it hasn’t for this government been a shortage of money, Mr. 

Speaker. They were handed record revenues year after year 

after year. And they made choices, Mr. Speaker — choices, Mr. 

Speaker, that haven’t lined up with improving lives for far too 

many across this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I again want to I guess commend the Leader 

of the Opposition. I want to commend the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale for their focus and attention to the 

seniors’ care crisis in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s been frustrating to observe as those members in this 

opposition have brought this issue and the voice of thousands 

and thousands of seniors and thousands and thousands of 

families to this Assembly and to this Premier, that it was met 

with arrogant dismissal, Mr. Speaker, and that it’s been met 

with inadequate and delayed action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At a time where we have an Ombudsman, an independent 

officer of this Assembly, weighing in and stating the inadequate 

conditions in care, Mr. Speaker. At a time where we know 

thousands across Saskatchewan are far too vulnerable, families 

who don’t have the security that they deserve to know that their 

loved ones have care. And at a time, Mr. Speaker, where we 

know the stress and the pressures upon this system are growing. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, if given the current conditions and 

the record revenues that this government has had, if they 

couldn’t make it a priority then, Mr. Speaker, and fix it for the 

seniors of today, it offers little hope, which is very sad for the 

future of this province, which is why this issue — the security 

and dignity and the promise of safety that seniors deserve 

across this province — is something that the official opposition 

takes very seriously. 

 

I’d like to recognize as well the voice of many across this 

province, the hundreds upon hundreds of my own constituents 

who have engaged on this issue. Unsolicited, contacting me to 

engage with their own personal stories, stories that often they 

don’t want directly on the floor in a public way, Mr. Speaker, 

very personal stories. Stories that are conveyed often when 

you’re engaging individuals directly on their doorsteps, Mr. 

Speaker. The stories of workers all across Saskatchewan who 

are committed to seniors and committed to those that they 

provide care for, but are beat up from a morale perspective and 

are beat up from being able to do what they know they need to 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they recognize the inadequate staffing, the inadequate 

resources provided by this government. And they recognize 

what it means when a government goes and eliminates 

standards and scraps certain commitments, Mr. Speaker, and 

how that allows the government to get off without providing the 

commitments to seniors, yes, or the funding to these homes all 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the seniors of this province have given far too 

much to their families, to the people of this province, to their 

communities, to be treated like this. Now this issue is 

something that we can resolve. It’s an issue that, with focus and 

attention and with some dedicated resources, with scrapping 

wasteful spending on priorities that aren’t getting the job done 

in improving lives, Mr. Speaker, but improving our seniors’ 

care system, we know we can do a better job for the seniors of 

today. We know we can deliver that tomorrow. That’s the 

commitment that the official opposition New Democrats give to 

all families and all communities across Saskatchewan. That’s a 

priority for us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But here today we have an opportunity to do something as well. 

We have the opportunity to vote and support a piece of 

legislation that would provide a basic guarantee — a basic 

guarantee of security and dignity and certain standards to 

families across Saskatchewan and seniors across Saskatchewan. 

And it’s increasingly frustrating to see this government not do 

its part on this front. We have a chance to support a good piece 

of legislation. We have a chance to make this a priority. 

Certainly this opposition, the New Democrats, will continue to 

do that. And we’ll continue to push, you know, a government 

that has dismissed the issues in seniors’ care across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have too much more to say as it relates to 

this bill here today. But I will say this: there has been way too 

many tragic losses, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t right. There are way 

too many seniors across this province that don’t have the 

security and dignity they deserve. We have the opportunity and 

we have the resources in this province to fix this, to provide 

security today, dignity today and tomorrow as well, Mr. 

Speaker. We owe it to Saskatchewan people to do just that, 

which is why I strongly support Bill 609 and I urge government 

members to support it as well. 

 

But at this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate as it relates to Bill 

No. 609, An Act respecting the Rights of Residents in Special 

Care Facilities and Personal Care Homes. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 609, The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



7562 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2015 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:28.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7539 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7539, 7540 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7539 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7539 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7539 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7539 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7540 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7540 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7540 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7540 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7540 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 University of Regina Alumni Awards  

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

 Funding for Regina Police Service and Internet Child Exploitation Unit 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

 Writer Wins Governor General’s Award 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

 Youth for Christ Hope Dinner  

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7542 

 Rescue Squad Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7542 

 Donation to A.E. Peacock Collegiate 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7542 

 Pharmacists Provide Free Flu Shots 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7543 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7543 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7543 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7547 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 Consideration of Carbon Capture Project 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7547 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7548 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7548 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7550, 7557 

  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7551 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7553, 7557 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7554, 7557 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7556, 7558 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7557 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7558 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7559 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7559 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


