




















































Hansard: October 20, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 70A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7375 

 October 20, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Unparliamentary Language 

 

The Speaker: — Before the commencement today, I would 

like to make a statement. On Monday, October 19, 2015, the 

Opposition House Leader raised a point of order about 

comments made by the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General during question period. The Opposition House Leader 

indicated that the minister used the expression “continues to try 

to mislead” and that the language used by the minister be ruled 

unparliamentary. In response, the Government House Leader 

made reference that the Speaker had dealt with the issue earlier 

in the debate. 

 

Upon further review of the verbatim and previous Speakers’ 

rulings, I would like to clarify how our Assembly has dealt with 

similar circumstances. I was precipitous in my ruling yesterday 

and upon further review of the Hansard record I will now rule 

on this matter. 

 

I would like to draw to the attention of the members that on 

March 7, 2011, the comment, and I quote, “would like to 

mislead the public into believing” led to the member 

apologizing and withdrawing the statement. Further, on April 

22nd, 2010, a member indicated that a comment was taken out 

of context in order to mislead the public. In this instance the 

Speaker ruled that the comments were out of order and asked 

the member to apologize and withdraw. 

 

With regards to yesterday’s comments at page 7356 of 

Hansard, the Minister of Justice and Attorney General stated, 

and I quote, “the opposition continues to put, continues to try to 

mislead the public with respect to this project.” Speakers have 

ruled this type of language out of order. Therefore based on 

previous rulings, I find that the minister’s comments are out of 

order and ask that the minister apologize and withdraw the 

unparliamentary language. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I retract and apologize for those 

comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I have the honour of introducing two very special 

guests who have dedicated their lives to making life better for 

Saskatchewan’s children and youth. Mr. Speaker, this week is 

Foster Families Week here in Saskatchewan, a week that 

celebrates our dedicated and caring foster parents. 

 

Joining us today from the Saskatchewan Foster Families 

Association is the executive director, Deb Davies, and the board 

Chair, Kevin Harris. Kevin Harris has been a foster parent for 

over 15 years, Mr. Speaker, and has been chairman of the SFFA 

[Saskatchewan Foster Families Association] board since 2012 

and has recently been appointed director with the Canadian 

Foster Family Association. 

 

Deb Davies was a foster parent for 28 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Deb’s experience as a foster parent has helped her excel in her 

role as the executive director for SFFA. Deb has been putting in 

great work as the executive director for over 11 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these outstanding citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join the minister opposite in welcoming Deb Davies and 

Kevin Harris to their legislature. This is a very important week 

as we celebrate the contributions of foster families to 

Saskatchewan. They do such outstanding work. And I’ve 

always appreciated the insight from Deb in particular when we 

have our conversations about how we can do things better here 

in Saskatchewan. They’re very, very committed to making sure 

our children, all children in Saskatchewan, are safe every night. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to 

welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Campeau: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to also welcome Deb to her legislature. She’s been a 

long-time advocate for children in Saskatchewan and she’s also 

been a long-term resident of Saskatoon Fairview. So I’d like all 

members to please welcome Deb to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I’d like to introduce five leaders in the 

agricultural industry seated in our west gallery: from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, president 

Ray Orb; from the Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan, president Norm Hall; Mr. Dwayne Anderson, 

Chair of the Farm Land Security Board; Mr. Noel Skelton, 

board member, Farm Land Security Board; and Mr. Mark Folk, 

general manager, Farm Land Security Board. 

 

I would like to ask my colleagues to join me in thanking them 

for their leadership and contributions to our agricultural 

industry and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 

you and through you on behalf of the official opposition, I too 

would like to rise and welcome these fine gentlemen to their 

Legislative Assembly. I know that they are all deeply 

committed to the agricultural community and the people that are 

involved in agriculture. I know Norm has been doing a good job 



7376 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

for APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan] for a number of years now and Mr. Orb for 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. 

And certainly for the folks from the Farm Land Security Board, 

we’re looking forward to hearing what the minister has to say in 

regards to that today. So again, on behalf of the official 

opposition we would like to welcome these individuals to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery is 

a group of grade 12 students I’d like to introduce to the House. 

They’re from Campus Regina Public. They’re learning about 

social studies. Their teacher is Mr. Blaine Duffield. I look 

forward to having a chat with them after question period. All 

members please help me welcome them. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition in support of GSAs [gender and 

sexuality alliance] in our schools. And we know that this 

province lags behind others in securing the rights of gender- 

and sexually diverse students. This government is not doing 

enough to create safe spaces in our schools for sexually diverse 

students or students bullied because of their sexual identity or 

sexual orientation. 

 

And we know that gender- and sexually diverse students are 

four times more likely than their heterosexual peers to attempt 

suicide. And we know that this government must act so that 

under no circumstances are gender- and sexually diverse 

students denied the right to form GSAs or gender and sexuality 

alliances within their schools. The prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 

action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 

Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right of 

Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 

in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 

and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 

their full potential. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present this petition. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to rise in the Assembly today to present a petition on 

cellphone coverage. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To ensure that the provincial government improve cell 

service coverage for northern communities like St. 

George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 

Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 

coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. This 

would provide support to our northern industries as well as 

mitigate safety concerns associated with living in the 

remote North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from Saskatoon and Big River. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today 

to present a petition again for a residents-in-care bill of rights. 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, point out that residents in care 

should have the right to dignity, respect, and safety, and there 

should be basic guarantees of the quality of care that they 

receive in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. And the petitioners also 

point out that this is the responsibility of the provincial 

government to ensure consistent standards in care facilities 

throughout Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

adopt Bill 609, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 

which would provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right 

to quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care 

homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Prince 

Albert. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition from individuals concerned about the high 

cost of post-secondary education here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And in their petition they point out that a report 

released by Statistics Canada labelled Saskatchewan as the 

province with the highest increase in tuition for the 2014-15 

year, having increased by 4 per cent in the province for 

undergraduate students and over 5 per cent for graduate 

students, and that the average Canadian student in 2014 

graduated with debt of over $27,000, not including credit card 

and other private debt. In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to immediately increase the 

funding for post-secondary education in this province, 

with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 

used to lower tuition fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by young citizens from the 

city of Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

India Supper Night 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, September 

26th, Stephanie and I had the pleasure of attending the India 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7377 

Canada Association of Saskatchewan’s 33rd India Supper 

Night, along with the Leader of the Opposition; his wife, Ruth; 

the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre; his wife, Theresa; 

the members from Coronation Park and Regina South. 

 

This annual dinner was another huge success. It raised money 

for Mother Teresa Middle School in Regina and, Mr. Speaker, 

over $50,000 was raised. Since 1999 this event has raised over 

$600,000 for various charities and organizations. 

 

The evening was filled with incredible food, great speakers, and 

fantastic entertainment, including an impressive performance 

from students who attend Mother Teresa Middle School. 

 

My wife, Stephanie, and I enjoyed helping out with the dinner 

once again this year and I know Stephanie and others enjoyed 

putting their best Bollywood moves on display. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the people who dedicated their 

time and efforts to making this event a huge success. I 

especially want to acknowledge the organizing committee: 

Renu Kapoor, Anjana Kaushal, Rani Bilkhu, Indra Datta, 

Kavita Ram, Poonam Sood, Madhu Kumar, and Kanwal 

Pandher. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the India Canada Association of Saskatchewan 

on another successful dinner and to thank ICA [India Canada 

Association] and Saskatchewan’s Indo-Canadian community 

for their ongoing contributions to our community and our 

province as a whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Foster Families Week 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House today to ask my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing Foster Families Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

We proclaim this special week to celebrate the contributions of 

foster families to at-risk children, their families, and our 

communities. Foster families open their homes and their hearts 

to children and youth to provide a safe and caring place for 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, like all other jurisdictions across 

North America, has had a decrease in the number of foster 

homes over the past five years. Foster families remain an 

extremely important resource for families in crisis, and work is 

being done to better recruit and retain them. The Saskatchewan 

Foster Families Association has been very instrumental in this 

work. The SFFA provides prospective and established foster 

families the education, guidance, and support they need so they 

can give the best care for our most at-risk children and youth. 

 

There is not a more selfless way to give back to other families 

and communities than become a foster parent. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to ask all members present to join me in thanking all 

foster families and the Saskatchewan Foster Families 

Association for this vital service to our province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Celebrating the Legacy of Gordon Tootoosis 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this time to 

speak about the Gordon Tootoosis gala which I attended, along 

with the member from Saskatoon Centre, on Friday, October 

2nd. The Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company hosted the 

gala and celebrated the legacy of Gordon Tootoosis. 

Throughout the night, eight new bursaries and scholarships 

were announced, and the theatre company unveiled their new 

name. 

 

Over the past year and a half, the theatre company consulted 

with members of the community regarding future directions of 

their organization. In consultation with the Tootoosis family 

and through ceremony, the Saskatchewan Native Theatre 

Company changed their name to the Gordon Tootoosis 

Nīkānīwin Theatre. The name honours Gordon Tootoosis, a 

Cree icon and one of the founding members of the theatre 

company. 

 

Nīkānīwin is a Plains Cree expression for leadership, which 

appropriately describes Tootoosis’s lifetime of work. When 

Gordon Tootoosis from Poundmaker First Nation began 

working in theatre, there was an incredible void of indigenous 

actors. He set out to fill that void and create supports for the 

development of young, aspiring indigenous actors. In doing so, 

he has had a profound impact on both the indigenous and wider 

theatre community in Saskatoon and across the province and 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting time for the Gordon Tootoosis 

Nīkānīwin Theatre as they move forward into the future as a 

company grounded in culture, language, and history. I ask all 

members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating the 

Gordon Tootoosis Nīkānīwin Theatre and wish them all the best 

for a bright future of indigenous theatre. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Police Officer Recognized for Act of Bravery 

 

Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

speak about an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

officer in my home constituency of The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on July 17th, 2014, Constable Jan Indenbosch 

responded with another officer to a call about an intoxicated 

man on a roof. Constable Indenbosch pursued the suspect, 

eventually following him up on to the roof to arrest him. Once 

on top of the building, Constable Indenbosch pursued him by 

foot. However the suspect made an almost fatal mistake by 

jumping over the edge of the building. With the suspect barely 

holding on to the side of the building, Constable Indenbosch 

risked his own life by grabbing the suspect’s hands, saving him 

from a nearly 45-foot fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for his act of bravery, last night the Lieutenant 

Governor presented Constable Indenbosch with a bronze medal 



7378 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

from the Royal Canadian Humane Association. I ask all 

members to join me in thanking Constable Jan Indenbosch for 

his bravery and for going above and beyond to ensure that 

North Battleford is a safe and healthy community. 

 

I’d also like to thank all RCMP and municipal police force 

members across this province who risk their lives every day to 

make this province a safe place for all of us. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Dedication 

Ceremonies in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 

in the House to talk about two Habitat for Humanity dedication 

ceremonies that recently took place in Prince Albert. 

 

First we celebrated a key ceremony with Delores Pocha, whose 

dream of one day owning a home is now a reality. Now Delores 

has her own home where she, her three kids, and her grandchild 

can begin making memories. We then celebrated a sod-turning 

ceremony where Lu Paw, Mar Taw, and their two children 

broke the ground where their new home will be built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Habitat for Humanity is a great example of what 

happens when we work together to make good things happen in 

our community. Now two more Saskatchewan families are 

embarking on a brighter future for themselves, beginning with a 

home to call their own. 

 

Since March 2009, our Saskatchewan Party government has 

provided an overall commitment of $7.85 million to Habitat for 

Humanity. We support builds in 13 communities across the 

province, and we now provide $65,000 in funding for each 

home starting construction. Mr. Speaker, each home is special 

because it represents a new beginning for a hard-working 

family seeking a safe, quality, affordable home. 

 

I would like to offer my congratulations for both Prince Albert 

families on achieving their goals of home ownership. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

University of Regina Honours Red Cross 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I had the honour 

of attending the University of Regina’s President’s Community 

Award. The President’s Community Award recognizes those 

who have a strong history of working hard to better the lives of 

people across Saskatchewan. 

 

During the award presentation, University of Regina president 

and vice-chancellor, Dr. Vianne Timmons, said, and I quote, “I 

cannot think of a more deserving organization to receive this 

award.” The Red Cross has such a long history of giving back 

to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Cindy Fuchs, provincial director of the Canadian Red Cross, 

accepted the award on behalf of all the hard-working staff and 

tireless volunteers, quoting, “This award is a tremendous 

honour for our staff and nearly 400 volunteers across the 

province.” 

 

While the Red Cross works in our community every day, this 

year the organization went above and beyond with their 

tremendous response to the wildfires in northern Saskatchewan. 

The Red Cross provided assistance and relief on behalf of the 

government during the province’s largest evacuation which saw 

more that 13,000 people forced from their homes by the fires. 

Red Cross staff and volunteers worked 24-7 to manage the 

seven shelters during the four-week evacuation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 

the Saskatchewan Red Cross on their well-deserved award and 

thank them for their commitment to the people of Saskatchewan 

during times of need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Wholesale Trade Record Set in August  

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud to rise in the House and say the numbers have come out, 

and Saskatchewan wholesale trade set a record in August. 

During August, Saskatchewan saw the highest percentage rise 

among the provinces with a gain of 12.9 per cent, 

year-over-year basis. Mr. Speaker, this totalled 2.3 billion in 

August, the highest ever for the month. This is also well above 

the 3.8 per cent of wholesale trade recorded nationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in August we saw gains in Saskatchewan 

wholesale trade because of the strength of our agriculture 

sector, which had the largest increase. And the Minister 

Responsible for the Economy said, “Increases in wholesale 

trade are a good sign that Saskatchewan’s economy is making 

gains.” Further, “While there is no doubt these are challenging 

times for the resource-based economies, we are still confident 

that the diversity of our economy will help us create jobs and 

provide opportunities for businesses to prosper as we move 

forward.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward, strong as ever with a 

strong economy and a strong agriculture sector. It is because of 

our emphasis on moving forward with a strong economy that 

the province continues to show gains. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Room Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Does the Premier know how many people leave 

emergency rooms without ever seeing a doctor because the 

waits are simply far too long? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

for his question. We’ve been having some debate about 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7379 

emergency room response and emergency room wait times in 

the province of Saskatchewan since the session returned. Mr. 

Speaker, I will again point out for members of the House that 

on the first day that my honourable friend raised the matter of 

emergency room waits, we’ll all recall that his comparisons 

were inaccurate. He was comparing the Melfort hospital with 

Saskatoon, Regina, and Melfort combined in subsequent years. 

And so we know that the statistics he presented were not 

correct. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, emergency room waits remains a 

priority of the government. That’s why we have increased 

resources with respect to emergency room delivery service, 

delivery right across the province — more nurses, more doctors 

— with the recognition that more needs to be done. The goal 

that we’ve set remains. We may not get there on the timeline 

that we first set out, but we remain committed to the goal we’ve 

set to eliminate waits for emergency care in Saskatchewan 

facilities, Mr. Speaker. And again, we’re going to continue to 

properly resource the system so we can achieve that goal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier doesn’t like the 

stats, he should speak to CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health 

Information] and take that up with them, Mr. Speaker. But more 

importantly, he should speak with Saskatchewan patients, Mr. 

Speaker, who will indicate that the current waits for emergency 

rooms are nowhere near acceptable. And for the Premier to try 

to pretend that he’s taking this seriously is absolutely laughable. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier was whether or not he 

knows how many people leave emergency rooms because the 

waits are simply far too long, Mr. Speaker. The Premier clearly 

doesn’t know the answer, but he should know the answer 

because it is disturbing, and it ought to be a wake-up call to this 

government. Thousands of people who go to emergency rooms 

in Saskatchewan end up leaving before they’re ever assessed by 

a doctor because the waits are far too long. 

 

In Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, in P.A. almost one in ten patients 

leave the ER [emergency room] without seeing a doctor. That 

means about 2,700 people left the ER over the last year because 

the waits were too long in Prince Albert alone. What does the 

Premier have to say about this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member gets very agitated 

when he’s confronted with the fact that he hasn’t necessarily 

been presenting all of the facts with respect to this very 

important debate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh please, Brad. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Oh he just said, oh please, Brad. I’ll present 

him with the facts. 

 

The claim that he made that emergency room wait times have 

doubled since 2010-11 is simply incorrect. Melfort was the only 

reporting hospital with respect to the stats he was citing in 

2010-11. And the CIHI data, so we are using the same data, 

compared it to Regina and Saskatoon hospitals in subsequent 

years. Mr. Speaker, that’s apples and oranges. 

 

Moreover, the CIHI data would also show members on both 

sides of the House that emergency room wait times for teaching 

in Saskatchewan, in Regina and Saskatoon, are consistent with 

teaching hospitals across the country, consistent with wait times 

across the country. Still unacceptable, more work needed to be 

done, and that’s why we’re putting more resources into the 

system. 

 

But I invite the member, I invite the member to deal in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, so that we can in fact have the debate that the issue 

deserves. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the facts show that this 

government has made no real progress when it comes to 

reducing waits for emergency room care. We have a case, Mr. 

Speaker, of 2,700 people leaving the Prince Albert emergency 

room because the waits are too long and it’s not being taken 

seriously by this government. 

 

It’s not just people whose situations are deemed non-urgent that 

are leaving the emergency rooms due to these lengthy waits. In 

Prince Albert, there have been several months over the last year 

in which over 15 per cent of the people needing urgent care 

ended up leaving, and 10 per cent of those needing emergency 

care ended up leaving the ER. 

 

Patients needing emergency care are supposed to see a 

physician within 15 minutes, but many of them ended up 

leaving the ER because they were left sitting in the waiting 

room for far too long. My question to the Premier: what is his 

explanation for this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that 

wait times in Saskatoon and Regina, in emergency rooms, is 

consistent with teaching hospitals across Canada. That’s not to 

say that anybody on either side of the House is satisfied with 

any wait time at all in emergencies. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

why our government has committed, in this current budget, $4.7 

million additional in ’15-16 for emergency wait time initiatives. 

That’s up $3 million over last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We note there have been, because of population growth, 

significantly more emergency room visits in recent years, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we’ve been piloting the hot-spotting 

concept, that’s why there have been more home pilots in the 

province, all funded by the province of Saskatchewan. Funding 

for emergency room initiatives up across the board, funding for 

more health care professionals significantly up: 3,000 more 

nurses practising of every designation now in the province over 

what members were able to deliver when they had the chance, 

500 more doctors, more specialists in every discipline. 

 

We recognize there’s more work that needs to be done. We’ve 

laid out the foundations for a plan with recognition that more 

needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. It would be interesting to hear 

from the member opposite now, four months away from an 

election. More than just pointing out the problem, what would 



7380 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

he do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier who 

gave a pledge that there’d be zero wait times for emergency 

rooms. And what did this Premier do, Mr. Speaker? He turned 

around and drove millions and millions into a failed lean 

experiment, Mr. Speaker, that’s not working throughout health 

care, and it’s not working, Mr. Speaker, for the many patients 

who need urgent medical attention. 

 

This is a widespread problem in our province. At the 

Battlefords Union Hospital almost 2,500 patients left the ER 

over the last year. Twenty-five hundred people went to the 

hospital in North Battleford needing help, but the waits were so 

long that they left without even being assessed by a doctor. That 

is unacceptable. When Saskatchewan people are sick or injured 

and go to an emergency room, they should be able to expect 

timely assessment and treatment. They shouldn’t be left 

waiting, Mr. Speaker, for so long that they give up, go home, 

and perhaps dangerously self-medicate. 

 

To the Premier: after nearly a decade of record prosperity, 

unprecedented prosperity in Saskatchewan, how on earth is this 

state of emergency rooms remotely acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, and I have indicated in 

the past, we are certainly moving on a number of initiatives to 

improve the wait times in the emergency departments, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have set a very bold, ambitious goal for wait 

times in the emergency department. We know we need to make 

progress, and we are seeing some new initiatives being rolled 

out. For example, in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, using 

some of the tools that the members opposite are very much 

against, a new process for patient treatment and assessment in 

Regina Qu’Appelle has led to a 27 per cent average reduction in 

the time for an assessment from the initial time they walk in to a 

physician assessment for non-emergent visits. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s real progress. 

 

What also is real progress is ensuring that people have access to 

primary health care. Where does that happen? Ensuring that you 

have the right number of nurses, the right number of nurse 

practitioners, the right number of physicians — over 500 

physicians in this province, compared to the members opposite 

where they actually lost 173 family physicians across this 

province and closed 52 emergency rooms across this province. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the Premier 

hands off the responses to the Health minister, because this is 

the Premier, this is the Premier, Mr. Speaker, that with lots of 

fanfare, with tons of hype, Mr. Speaker, he made a promise that 

there’d be zero wait times for emergency rooms. That was his 

promise. And then, Mr. Speaker, they bury this in an annual 

report, sweep it under the rug, when they’re clearly breaking 

that pledge to Saskatchewan people. That is the record, Mr. 

Speaker, of this Premier: made a commitment over and over. 

The government records and documents show that they’ve 

made no real progress on reducing wait times. 

 

And now we learn that ER wait times are so bad that thousands 

of people leave emergency rooms without seeing a physician. In 

Saskatoon, almost 6,600 people who went to the ER needing 

help last year ended up leaving because the waits were far too 

long. In Regina the number is 5,700 people. In just four health 

regions, Mr. Speaker, four regions, over 18,000 patients 

registered with the triage nurse were put on a list to see a 

doctor, but were left waiting so long in the waiting room that 

they left the emergency room. My question to the Premier: is 

that enough to finally get the Premier’s attention? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I look forward to the Leader of the Opposition handing 

off some questions perhaps to the Health critic on the opposite 

side of the benches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members opposite that there are 

10,000 more visits in the last year to emergency departments to 

the previous year. That’s why we need to look at improving not 

only the flow within the emergency departments through our 

triage assessment program that’s seen real reductions here in 

Regina, but as well through some additional programs. 

 

For example, in Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, an 

event using lean methodology at RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] has seen a reduction by 58 per cent in ER wait times 

for cardiac patients presenting to RUH — the most emergent, 

urgent issues for cardiac patients, and we’re seeing a real 

reduction, 58 per cent reduction, in their wait times. 

 

We have more work to do. That’s why we’ve invested $4.7 

million. That’s why we’re setting targets, unlike the members 

opposite and their record where there was no investment. There 

were no targets. There was just closures. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Suicide Prevention Measures in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Northern Saskatchewan has one of the worst suicide rates in all 

of Canada. Our loved ones are dying at a time and at a rate that 

far exceeds the rest of the province. Keewatin Yatthé Health 

Region has a suicide rate that is three and a half times higher 

than the provincial rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I attend far too many funerals of family members 

and constituents who have lost hope and chose to end their 

lives. And this is heartbreaking, and it needs to stop. Does the 

Premier recognize that much more needs to be done to prevent 

suicides in northern Saskatchewan? And when can we finally 

expect this government to act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7381 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly this is a very serious issue for I think all members of 

the House. Certainly I know a number of members including, I 

can consider myself in this, have been touched by the impact of 

completed suicides or even suicide attempts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is I think nothing more heartbreaking to 

think of an individual in our province who can no longer think 

of a future that includes themselves in it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have embarked on a lot of 

work in terms of our mental health and addictions review. The 

work that we do have in place, that does put a high focus on 

suicide prevention. I can say that one of our health regions had 

been contracted to provide some suicide prevention material 

that’s going to be rolled out into all of our health regions. That 

work is taking place. In fact suicide risk identification measures 

are being made a part of standardized screenings and 

assessment tools that are being used by all of our mental health 

and addiction services. That work is being rolled out, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a very serious topic, and that’s certainly why 

the health care system has put such a high priority on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the number of youth that are 

hospitalized for suicide attempts in northern Saskatchewan is 

almost 300 per cent worse than the rest of the province. In the 

Far North it’s 635 per cent worse, Mr. Speaker. And I say 

again, this needs to stop. 

 

And there are many things that need to happen. We need 

accessible mental health services in the North. We need 

addiction programs, Mr. Speaker. We need to give northern 

residents the hope that comes with good housing, strong 

communities, a vibrant economy, and lots of opportunities for 

education and employment. We need to give them hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree? And what’s he going to 

do about this problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly we do take this very seriously on this side of the 

House. I can inform the House that the Ministry of Health, 

working with five of our health regions, are working on 

spreading mental health and addictions services, prevention, 

policies, and protocols in fact into other areas of the health care 

system, whether that be into the emergency department in our 

hospitals, as well as long-term care, ensuring that there are 

proper protocols and procedures in those areas of the health care 

system where perhaps in the past we have perhaps overlooked 

those avenues. 

 

I would certainly encourage anybody in this province that is 

experiencing depression, suicidal thoughts, suicide ideation to 

contact a health care provider, certainly to call HealthLine 811. 

We’re ensuring that there is a mental health worker that is 

staffing 811 at all times. In the past we had that for part of the 

time; we want to ensure that that’s happening at all times so that 

individuals can have that immediate access. And I would 

certainly encourage anybody to avail themselves of those 

resources. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

province has had a decade of unprecedented prosperity, but 

people in northern Saskatchewan haven’t felt the benefits of the 

boom and thereby feel disregarded. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not acceptable. 

 

The last report on mental health in northern Saskatchewan 

found that northerners in our province reported a worse state of 

mental health than anywhere else in all of Canada, including the 

territories. We are losing far too many people in northern 

Saskatchewan and far too many of our youth to suicide, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want, and I say it very clear, I want this 

government to act now. Mr. Speaker, what will it take for the 

Premier to do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there is a significant focus that’s being put in place, particularly 

in northern Saskatchewan. I’ll go into a little bit more depth in 

that. Keewatin Yatthé Regional Health Authority plans to 

continue to provide suicide prevention and intervention training 

six times a year across that health region. Mamawetan Churchill 

River is continuing to provide the same training to staff in 

various organizations throughout its health region. 

 

Sandy Bay and Pinehouse developed critical incident trauma 

response teams. Sandy Bay opened a family resource centre 

which is focusing on early childhood development for parents. 

And I know certainly the education system has significant 

resources as well. Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse each have a 

community-based, multi-agency committee that is focused on 

suicide prevention activities. 

 

Certainly we recognize, Mr. Speaker, through our mental health 

and addictions action plan that this is not just a health issue. 

This involves health. It involves education, social services. It 

involves the community. It involves other agencies of both 

government and non-governmental organizations, and we are 

dedicated and committed to working with all of those to find 

solutions to these problems. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Child Care Spaces 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to a new 

report by the Childcare Resource and Research unit, 

Saskatchewan is last among Canadian provinces in terms of 

regulated child care spaces. Just 12 per cent of kids age five and 

under have access to a regulated space. The Canadian average is 

24 per cent, more than double the rate here in Saskatchewan. 

This government has had almost a decade of record revenues, 

yet it has failed to significantly improve child care, and that is 

not acceptable.  

 

To the minister: is it acceptable to the Sask Party that just 12 

per cent of young kids in this province have access to a child 



7382 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

care space when the national average is double that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can advise 

the member opposite that we are committed to families. We are 

committed to early learning. We are committed to child care. 

 

Our budget this year provides over $70 million for early 

learning opportunities. That includes $3.9 million for early 

childhood intervention programs, four and a half million dollars 

for KidsFirst, $19 million for pre-kindergarten programs, and 

$51 million for child care spaces. Since forming government, 

we’ve increased child care spaces by 53 per cent, pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] programs by 104 per cent. Early childhood 

intervention programming funding has increased by 40 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve made a major commitment to the children 

in our province. There’s more work to do but, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re moving in the right direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, last might be the right 

direction for this government. They remain in last place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are 18,000 more children in Saskatchewan now than there 

were in 2007. The number of children with moms who work 

outside the home has jumped by 15,000 during that time. But 

despite nearly a decade of record revenues, the Sask Party 

government has managed to add about 4,400 child care spaces. 

So the Sask Party hasn’t even come close to meeting the 

growing need. 

 

To the minister: when will the Sask Party shelve the tired 

excuses and get serious about expanding the number of child 

care spaces here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the 

members opposite, we made a commitment last election to add 

2,000 new spaces in the second term. Mr. Speaker, we’re well 

under way to meeting that target, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve committed to 90 spaces in each of the nine joint-use 

schools. Mr. Speaker, that will add an additional 810 spaces. 

That will exceed our target by some 310 when those are 

completed, and those are on track, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are committed to having sufficient and adequate child care 

for our province. Our plan is to continue to expand pre-K 

programs, with an emphasis on improved support for children at 

risk, in addition to increasing early learning and child care 

spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do, but we’re continuing to 

do that, and we’re continuing to make significant progress in 

that area. It is wrong for the members opposite to say we are not 

making progress when in fact, Mr. Speaker, we made a 

commitment for 2,000 spaces. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

exceeding that commitment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I guess all those parents looking for child 

care should just disregard the few spaces that there are in 

national rankings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With this kind of record revenue that the government has raked 

in over the last eight years, they should have made huge 

improvements to child care in this province, but they have not. 

Eighteen thousand more children, 15,000 more children with 

moms who work outside of the home, but just 4,400 more child 

care spaces — they have not even come close to keeping up 

with the growth and need for child care spaces. And parents in 

Saskatchewan are sick and tired of the Sask Party’s pathetic 

excuses. 

 

Will the minister just admit that the Sask Party government 

dropped the ball and let Saskatchewan people down on child 

care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I think we better have 

some comparison about what took place under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under 16 years of the NDP, the total licensed child 

care space in the province only increased by 2,856. Mr. 

Speaker, under this government it’s increased by more than 

5,000. That’s a big difference between eight years here and 16 

years over there. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you some more 

specifics on that. Mr. Speaker, the NDP did not add any new 

pre-K programs in ’96-97 and, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t do any 

more in ’98-99, ’04-05, or in the ’05-06 budget. And that’s the 

reason why those members are sitting opposite because they 

made no commitment to that whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can quote from some of their members opposite, 

Pat Atkinson, Hansard, May 9th, 2011: “Because I agree that 

this has been a significant ramping up of child daycare.” That 

was after the Sask Party formed government. That’s their 

member recognizing that this is what’s taking place here and 

the members there now ought to continue to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Maintenance Agreement for Regina Bypass 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is the Sask Party’s 

maintenance plan for the Regina bypass. Government-owned 

snowplows will reach the edge of the bypass, they’ll lift up their 

plows, and they’ll drive through this. Maybe they’ll wave at a 

Paris snowplow driver as they go and then they’ll hit the end of 

that bypass. Then they’ll put their plows back down and start 

moving snow again. How does this make an ounce of sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as per usual with the NDP 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7383 

when they come into this House, the information they bring in 

is not always correct. The member opposite makes it sound like 

there’s going to be absolutely no maintenance, no snow 

removal, no mowing around the bypass, which is absolutely 

incorrect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He sat through a technical briefing about two weeks ago. I find 

it incredibly unfortunate that he came out afterwards and said 

that he didn’t get any answers, which is a huge insult to the 

public service members that were there answering his questions, 

and they answered every single question he asked. He should be 

apologizing to them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as he was told, part of the agreement for the 

$1.88 billion project is maintenance for the next 30 years, Mr. 

Speaker, which includes snow removal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Right, Mr. Speaker, as the minister 

states, it’s not just Paris snowplows, it’s also sanding and 

mowing. And they’re going to have a conglomerate from 

France, from Paris, France that’s going to deliver this for 30 

years for the people of the province for this very short portion 

of highways. It doesn’t make any sense at all. You know, 

meanwhile the conglomerate from France will be making a 

profit off of that maintenance contract for 30 years. 

 

You know, it’s remarkable, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party never 

fails to find the most expensive and most convoluted way to do 

something, Mr. Speaker. And time and time again they’re 

sending piles and piles of taxpayers’ money out of country to 

corporations as a result. 

 

So again to the Highways minister: how on earth can the Sask 

Party pretend that it’s cheaper for the French conglomerate to 

plow our roads, to mow our ditches while government-owned 

plows and mowers drive by the bypass just to get to the other 

side? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as was explained to the 

member opposite, part of the contract with the project company 

is for maintenance for 30 years. Mr. Speaker, it’s all been 

worked into the costs. 

 

But if he’s concerned about money, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

keeps sending out press releases asking us to delay this project. 

The proposal that was put forward by the member opposite 

would cost us $1 billion more, take four years longer to take. 

Mr. Speaker, we’d lose $200 million from PPP Canada 

[Public-Private Partnership Canada]. We would lose all the 

design work that’s been done. 

 

If he’s worried about this project going ahead, if he’s worried 

about safety on Highway 1 and interchanges that are needed 

along Highway 1 East, Mr. Speaker, he should get behind this 

project because his proposal will take longer, will cost more 

money, and will keep endangering people while they wait for 

the NDP to come up with a solution. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 

Amendment Act, 2015 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 187, 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I gather everybody must have gone home and 

gone to bed early, didn’t watch the game or the election because 

they’re full of vim and vinegar today. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture has moved first reading of Bill No. 

187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to approve the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 

(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to speak on Bill 184, The Automobile Accident 

Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year in May I had the pleasure to 

announce that for the 2016 riding season, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] will be introducing a third choice for 

injury coverage for motorcycle owners in addition to the current 

choices of tort coverage or no-fault coverage. The additional 

option is to reduce . . . is a reduced package of no-fault benefits 

which will provide the same level of benefit as the tort product, 

but with a limited ability to sue. 

 

This new choice is for motorcycle owners who feel they require 

fewer benefits in the event of a collision, and because there are 

fewer benefits, it allows for a lower cost or a lower premium. 

On average, opting to the reduced no-fault coverage will result 



7384 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

in savings of 20 to 30 per cent for most motorcycle owners. We 

feel this provides a good balance between cost and coverage, 

because it ensures that all motorcycle riders continue to receive 

some level of insurance coverage if they are injured. 

 

As members of the Assembly may know, these changes are a 

result of motorcycle coverage and injury coverage reviews 

undertaken by SGI. Both reviews involved the stakeholders 

from the motorcycle community as well as a consultation with 

the public at large. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I make it very clear when I announced this 

additional option last May that motorcyclists need to think long 

and hard about their injury coverage options and which is best 

for them and their family should they be injured in a motorcycle 

collision. No one ever thinks that will happen to them, but it 

does. One of our injury review committee members had himself 

been seriously injured in a motorcycle collision, and he had 

made the point very strongly that people shouldn’t make the 

choice with their wallets. He makes it a very valid argument, 

Mr. Speaker, and I just want to convey that to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that the changes we 

announced were received favourably by the motorcycle 

community. They are looking forward to having this additional 

option in place by April 1st, 2016. As a result of the new 

options, Mr. Speaker, there is a significant number of wording 

and update amendments required in the Act which are reflected 

in the bill before us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to conclude, I am pleased to move second reading 

of Bill 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) 

Amendment Act, 2015. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) 

Amendment Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

once again pleased to stand up this afternoon to give our initial 

comments on Bill 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This really has a lot of history to it as we look overall in the last 

number of years, in particular the last decade, and some of the 

changes made around no-fault insurance and of course the 

option of tort and the option of the personal injury protection 

program that SGI sometimes offers, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 

number of options that many vehicle owners have as it relates to 

the ability to not only go through the trauma of an accident but 

to remain sure that their family’s protected from further 

challenges that may result from that accident. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that over the last decade there’s 

been a lot of discussion around the option of PIPP, the personal 

injury protection plan, versus the legal option of course called 

tort, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that really takes a lot of time 

to begin to try and understand because of the complex nature of 

the insurance industry, Mr. Speaker. What happens here is 

you’ve got to have a lot of consultation with a lot of groups, and 

of course SGI themselves certainly have to be able to run an 

automobile insurance business because obviously it’s 

government-owned and something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to protect. 

 

So there’s really a lot of challenge to try and mix and match the 

demands of both parties. By both parties, I’m talking about SGI 

as the insurer and, Mr. Speaker, the people that drive our 

automobiles, including the motorcycles in this case. Certainly 

also have the issue of affordability and of course protection in 

the event that there is some incident or some accident that 

they’re involved with, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that is really, 

really, as I said at the outset, a complex relationship. It’s an 

affordability issue. It’s also an issue of trying to sustain the 

service for years to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know from some of the discussions we’ve 

had in the past that there was a lot of debate, there’s a lot of 

argument around the option of tort, of actually suing the other 

party or other people that may be involved in your accident 

versus just taking the no-fault insurance, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

all kinds of twists and turns to the insurance industry and we’ve 

got to be very, very careful that when we make changes to it 

that consultation must occur and that you certainly have to be 

able to consult with some of the groups. And I’m pleased to say 

that there has been some discussion with the automobile 

owners, and certainly I think there was an opportunity for 

motorcycle owners to provide feedback, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we see as a result of this particular bill, Bill 184, is that 

you have the tort option as one option; you have the no-fault 

option as a second option, and of course, as the minister 

explained, the third choice of no-fault with some limited 

benefits. And of course also the trade-off here is a limited 

ability to sue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know that there was an outcry 

from the motorcycle industry. I believe the association or the 

group that was born out of the anger by a lot of motorcycle 

owners that looked at the rates that SGI was looking at charging 

them for keeping their motorcycles on the road, I believe that 

organization was called R.A.G.E. [Riders Against Government 

Exploitation]. They were quite angry about the rate that was 

being proposed and obviously they wanted to make sure that 

they were consulted, Mr. Speaker. And we want to, as an 

opposition, also ensure that there is that discussion with groups 

like R.A.G.E., with groups that are involved with the use of 

motorcycles as a hobby or as a means of transportation. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly think that consultation and 

co-operation and discussion is something that ought to be 

afforded to this process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand from the minister’s comments 

that there was general acceptance overall from the motorcycle 

owners as we make reference to them today. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to know a number of regions, I guess, the number of 

uses of the motorcycle owners themselves. Like as I mentioned 

at the outset, there was recreational users. There was people that 

actually use it to transport themselves back and forth to work. 

Others do it on the occasional weekend. Others do it as a 

summer trip, Mr. Speaker. So there’s a wide variety of uses and 

users of the motorcycle in the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

think we need to have some very good serious discussions with 

some of those groups to ask them their opinion on their advice 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7385 

on the issue of the third option, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s a lot of different scenarios here that we have to be 

careful of. As I said at the outset, you have SGI wanting to do 

the affordability issue. You have the motorcycle drivers that 

need the protection of insurance in case there is an accident. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, you’ve also got to be able to look 

at how SGI operates their Crown corporation to ensure that 

there is a profit when it comes to the insurance process, Mr. 

Speaker. Because you can’t have a vibrant Crown sector in the 

province of Saskatchewan without the bottom line called profit, 

and I think that’s something that SGI takes into account when 

they do these consultations. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that I 

want to make sure that all these factors are included in these 

discussions. 

 

And that’s why it’s important, the Legislative Assembly 

process, as I indicated from time to time, is the minister’s going 

to introduce the bill and what the intended changes are, and as 

an opposition member we have the opportunity to have a first 

crack at this particular bill just to make sure that everything’s 

aligned and properly thought out, Mr. Speaker — something 

that we’ve from time to time not expected from that particular 

minister. And once again he’s in a different portfolio, Mr. 

Speaker, so we’re trying to find out and make sure that he 

knows exactly what he’s doing in this particular bill. 

 

And there are times that I said at the outset that we really want 

to take our time to study the bill, talk to the impacted groups 

and organizations that are out there, and really read in between 

the lines here and read what could possibly happen, look at all 

the different scenarios that could occur, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as I said, I’m quite pleased that there is discussion with the 

motorcycle owner themselves, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

something that we’re going to pay very, very close attention to. 

So as we proceed in this fall sitting, I would say that there’s 

going to be a lot more feedback from my colleagues. We have a 

number of issues that we want to talk about in this particular 

bill. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 184, An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act. I so move. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance 

(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 

Amendment Act, 2015 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 

to speak to Bill 185, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2015. 

Mr. Speaker, the most significant amendment to this Act 

protects data gathered through facial recognition technology 

used with driver’s licences in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is 

the only province not using this technology. Having it in place 

will bring our province in alignment with every other 

jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

We announced late last year, Mr. Speaker, that we were seeking 

a vendor for driver licence production. Facial recognition 

technology was part of the request for proposal or RFP. This is 

very interesting technology, Mr. Speaker. Your photo is taken. 

Your features are measured electronically by the facial 

recognition software and then compared to other images in the 

database. It’s pretty sophisticated. Mr. Speaker, facial 

recognition software provides better security. It helps prevent 

fraud. It will protect Saskatchewan residents from identity theft. 

It will prevent people from obtaining multiple driver’s licences 

or IDs [identification]. It will also improve road safety by 

preventing suspended drivers from using a false identity to get a 

licence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will take privacy of our citizens very seriously. 

People trust us with their information. They want to be 

comfortable that we are using advances in technology for the 

right reasons. I want to assure the Assembly that facial 

recognition technology will improve the security of 

Saskatchewan driver’s licences and ID cards. We will also 

ensure that privacy of individual residents is maintained. This 

technology will be used only for the specific purpose of 

detecting fraud with the goal to maintain the integrity of the 

Saskatchewan driver licences and ID system. I will add, Mr. 

Speaker, that the office of the information and privacy officer 

was consulted on the draft of this legislation and agrees with 

how SGI is proceeding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also puts forward a number of 

housekeeping amendments and, with the indulgence of the 

Assembly, I would like to highlight those briefly. You may 

recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the spring of 2014, The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2014 received Royal Assent. The Act 

introduced significant changes to improve safety on our 

roadways and highways and helped bring down the number of 

people being killed and injured in vehicle collisions. It’s a 

serious issue, Mr. Speaker, and we are very proud to implement 

those law changes last June. 

 

This next amendment, Mr. Speaker, imposes stronger 

consequences for drivers under the influence of drugs and 

alcohol. Changes to the Act allow for immediate roadside 

licence suspension and vehicle impoundments for drinking, 

drugs, and driving. As a result of a drinking and driving 

offence, The Traffic Safety Act requires a driver to complete an 

approved educational course. If this course is not completed 

within 90 days, the driver’s licence will either remain 

suspended or another suspension will be added until the course 

is completed. This bill before us today proposes to increase the 

length of time to complete the course from 90 days to 100 days, 

Mr. Speaker. This will make the time frame consistent with 

other SGI programs. 

 

In some cases, prior to the reinstatement of the driver licence 

after a drinking and driving offence, a driver must attend an 

addiction screening or drug or alcohol abuse course, Mr. 

Speaker. Drivers will not get their licence back until an 

addiction counsellor indicates to SGI the driver is deemed low 



7386 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

risk of reoffending. Industry changes have resulted in addiction 

counselling no longer providing SGI with a low-risk offence 

rating; therefore the legislation needs to be updated so 

customers may be properly reinstated as drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a further amendment proposes changes to the Act 

to allow for the impounded vehicle’s licence plate to be 

cancelled. Over 50 per cent of the vehicle owners make 

monthly insurance payments. When the vehicle is impounded, 

SGI continues to take monthly . . . money from their bank 

accounts. Customers are unhappy with the process and this 

amendment seeks to improve that. 

 

Moving on, Mr. Speaker, chances are we all know someone 

who has been injured or even killed in a vehicle collision. 

Sometimes it’s their fault, sometimes the other driver’s. 

Sometimes it’s caused in the commission of an offence. An 

innocent party is killed or injured, for example by a stolen 

vehicle or an impaired driver. The next amendment addresses 

those circumstances by allowing additional Criminal Code 

offences to be reported to SGI. Those offences are: causing 

death by criminal negligence, causing bodily harm by criminal 

negligence, and dangerous operation of a motor vehicle while 

street racing. This amendment aligns with proposed changes to 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. The intent, Mr. 

Speaker, is that convictions for those offences would trigger the 

ability to sue the responsible driver for pain and suffering or 

bereavement damages. This brings more fairness to the type of 

scenario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also making an amendment to the Act 

around vehicle ownership. In the Act, “owner” is identified as a 

person with a vehicle registered in Saskatchewan. The proposed 

changes indicate that an owner is a person registered with a 

vehicle in any jurisdiction. This change adds clarity for issuing 

of tickets to out-of-province vehicle owners for automatic 

enforcement or red light or speed offences, speeding offences. 

This amendment is retroactive to July 1st, 2006, the date that 

the original Act came into force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an additional change moving into regulation 

requires some motorists to wear helmets and eye protection. 

This allows quicker licensing and registration changes as new 

vehicles become available on the market without compromising 

safety for operators and passengers. Vehicle manufacturers are 

getting more creative all the time and we want to be able to 

ensure people are travelling safely. This change will allow us to 

respond more nimbly when a new vehicle type is introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a variety of housekeeping 

amendments. The main purpose is really to ensure consistency, 

assist customers, and improve road safety. Mr. Speaker, to 

conclude, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 185, The 

Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 

Amendment Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand in my place today to give initial 

comments in relation to this particular bill, Bill 185. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a number of amendments and there’s a number 

of Acts that are being impacted by this particular bill. And 

obviously there are some that are housekeeping bills and other 

certainly more serious parts of the bill that we have to take the 

time to understand what the bill is trying to achieve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I look down some of the lists and some of the comments that 

the minister basically made as to what the proposed changes 

are, Mr. Speaker, we look at the whole notion of the facial 

recognition technology. I understand from the minister’s 

comment that this is a very interesting technology and that there 

is certainly other jurisdictions that obviously may have 

experimented with this technology. It would be very interesting 

to know what the other jurisdictions are, what their results were, 

and of course how is that going to impact SGI and how’s that 

going to impact the people of Saskatchewan. Because obviously 

at the outset, you would assume that facial recognition 

technology is something that is basically a very valuable tool 

when you look at the whole notion of trying to ensure that 

people aren’t using your licence and that there isn’t that threat 

out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about driver licence integrity as part 

of the process. We talk about safety on our highways. We talk 

about some of the challenge as it relates to amendments around 

the immediate suspension on the highway if somebody is 

suspected of being intoxicated either through drugs or alcohol, 

Mr. Speaker. We look at the notion or the comment as it relates 

to the 90 days to 100 days for training, Mr. Speaker, some of 

the arguments around the addiction screening that was made, 

the minister made, and the added component where an 

addiction counsellor will determine whether you get your 

licence back. These are some of the issues I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that really will take a lot of time for us to discuss and certainly 

take the time to determine how this is going to impact the 

motorists of Saskatchewan overall. 

 

There’s no question from the opposition perspective that we are 

after safe highways, that we are after reasonable insurance rates, 

and that we are trying to ensure that the people that may have 

been involved with an accident, that they’re properly covered 

and they’re properly cared for, Mr. Speaker. That all goes, you 

know, without saying. And of course obviously we have to 

make sure that SGI’s able to respond to these challenges, these 

ever-growing challenges as it relates to motor traffic, motor 

vehicle traffic in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the other amendments that the 

minister briefly alluded to was basically that vehicle ownership 

. . . in terms of providing clarity as to vehicle ownership in the 

province of Saskatchewan, as well the materials for eye 

protection and helmets. 

 

So as you look at all these issues, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

really, really take the time to understand what Bill 85 is all 

about. We obviously encourage people that are out there that 

have some information, some people that have been following 

some of the parts of the bill, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to make 

sure that they have an opportunity to explain to them what the 

strengths are of some of the changes, Mr. Speaker. Even though 

they’re housekeeping, I think it’s really, really important that 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7387 

we take the time to get their opinion and get their input as to 

how these changes are going to affect the automobile insurance 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly the safe flow of 

traffic throughout all parts of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is a bit confusing to us over here, and 

we kind of were wondering about the timing, about the timing 

about this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. We had this issue dealt 

with last year and here we are six months before the next 

provincial election and all of a sudden this particular bill, Bill 

185, comes before the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So we’re kind of 

wondering why wasn’t this implemented a year ago. Why is it 

being done in the fall sitting, the last six months before a 

provincial election is called? 

 

So the timing is suspect here, Mr. Speaker, because these issues 

and a lot of the discussion around automobile safety . . . I 

understand that a couple of my colleagues, the member from 

Cumberland and the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, were 

on this committee and they done a tour throughout the province 

of Saskatchewan studying and talking and consulting about 

traffic safety, Mr. Speaker. And this was done a year ago, just 

over a year ago. 

 

And none of the changes that they were implementing, or they 

were suggesting as the opposition members, to strengthen our 

laws and to really protect the people of Saskatchewan and to 

make the highways a lot safer, well a lot of the discussions that 

were brought up by my two colleagues were disregarded, Mr. 

Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party government disregarded 

some of their very compelling arguments and some of the 

arguments that were supported by documentation from some of 

the various industries or people or groups or organizations out 

there that participated in that public process. 

 

So one of the things I think Bill 185, the most compelling thing 

that we see, Mr. Speaker, is the timing of presenting this bill in 

the Assembly. The timing is suspect. There is something 

obviously very wrong here, Mr. Speaker, when some of the 

work and some of the most compelling ideas and concepts were 

fresh on the minds of the people of Saskatchewan a year ago 

and it wasn’t dealt with at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So really, as you look at the bill itself . . . Again as I mentioned, 

facial recognition technology, ensuring that the integrity of the 

driver’s licence system is in place, like these, safety on our 

highways, these are all motherhood statements. But some of the 

tough decisions and the tough choices that were to be made as a 

result of those hearings on safety on our highways, the 

committee that went throughout the province . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of those issues weren’t dealt with. 

 

So again we go back to, we fast-forward to the fall sitting of 

2015 and the minister is now bringing these issues forward. 

And, Mr. Speaker, again as we said at the outset, we’ve got to 

make sure we know what the agenda is of the Saskatchewan 

Party. That’s our role as an opposition. So therefore again we 

would point out to the people of Saskatchewan a simple point, 

that the timing as a result of some of the amendments on Bill 

185 is suspect, Mr. Speaker. They could have done some of 

these changes last year. 

 

And the question you have to ask yourself: why didn’t they 

present these amendments and these changes a year ago when 

the committee was fresh off their hearings, Mr. Speaker? They 

try and move it over a year. And what I would point out, Mr. 

Speaker, is some of the changes and some of the 

recommendations and some of the harder penalties that are 

being proposed for people that drink and drive, as a good 

example, Mr. Speaker, none of the issues were accepted by the 

general committee that undertook these public hearings except 

for the two members, from Cumberland and of course the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. They had some very good 

ideas, Mr. Speaker, again supported by the organizations and 

the groups out there that are committed to traffic safety in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, all kinds of groups and organizations. A 

good example would be the MADD [Mothers Against Drunk 

Driving] chapters in the province, mothers against drunk 

drivers. Mr. Speaker, these are some of the organizations and 

the groups and the people that came forward, again, a year and a 

half ago. 

 

[14:45] 

 

It took a lot of time and energy and a lot of time away from 

their families and their work and their other pressures to 

participate in this very important public hearing process. And 

what did the Sask Party do, Mr. Speaker? They enacted very 

few recommendations as a result of that study, Mr. Speaker. 

They delayed some of the issues that were pressing as a result 

of some of that committee work. And now, Mr. Speaker, a year 

later, they’re introducing a few more changes at the fall sitting 

six months before the next provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So really people begin to ask the question is, why are they 

doing that? What is the logic behind there, Mr. Speaker? Why 

are they delaying and bringing pieces and bits and parts of the 

bill, or the changes that were recommended to come forward to 

bills such as 185, Mr. Speaker? We don’t know the answer to 

that. We have our suspicions, Mr. Speaker, but the big thing on 

Bill 185 really is the timing is so suspect that we are starting to 

think that there was a political agenda on that side of the 

Assembly that trumps common sense. There’s a political 

agenda on that side that really trumps what we think is a solid 

plan to ensure safety on our highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see bits and dribs and drabs of what the 

hearings, public hearings had to say about how you strengthen 

our Acts and how you position Saskatchewan people to benefit 

of the number one concern, safety on our highways, eliminating 

some of these threats on our highways, Mr. Speaker. And none 

of that work and none of those issues certainly have come 

forward. 

 

And this is the reason why it’s important that the opposition is 

. . . that we do our job here to hold this government to account 

and to ask the questions of why the delays, why the timing here. 

You had all this information a year ago. Why didn’t you 

implement it then? Why is it six months before the next election 

that they’re proposing it now? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suspect that they didn’t have the 

courage to bring forward some of the recommendations that the 

members of the opposition had that would really strengthen the 

hand of SGI and strengthen the hand of the law enforcement 

people for really doing the number one thing that the committee 



7388 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

was set up to do, and that is to ensure and to increase the level 

of safety on our highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is a job that the member from Cumberland and the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale took very seriously. They spent a lot 

of time away from their own constituents and from their 

families and from their time at home to go on the public hearing 

trail to hear what people are saying out there about some of the 

dangers, Mr. Speaker. And they committed a lot of time. 

 

So these are some of the things that’s really, really important as 

we look at the notion around how we make our highways a lot 

safer, Mr. Speaker. And as I said at the outset, the minister 

basically explained some of the points and some of the Acts that 

were impacted as a result of this Bill 185. 

 

We want to make sure that all the issues that they’re talking 

about or he’s talking about is certainly vetted and that we’re 

able to go through a number of organizations and/or legal 

advice from a number of lawyers that might be paying very 

close attention to what SGI does around Bill 185, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is something that is keenly interesting, and it’s something that 

is keenly watched by a number of groups and organizations. 

And we in the opposition would invite those groups and those 

organizations to do what they can to share some of the 

information with us. Because rest assured we will certainly use 

the information to the advantage to make sure that Bill 185 

really does what it’s supposed to do, and that is to maximize 

safety on our highways through appropriate measures of dealing 

with those that are driving under the influence of drugs or 

alcohol, or those that want to use a false licence. These are 

some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that’s really important to the 

opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope, given the current practice of the 

Saskatchewan Party, that what’s not next on the agenda as the 

result of what’s in front of us, Bill 185, is they don’t try and use 

the facial recognition technology during the election process, 

Mr. Speaker. Because they have done a lot of things to deter a 

number of people from voting, Mr. Speaker. It’s that old voting 

suppression trick and tactic. 

 

So I hope and I would warn people that as a result of Bill 185, 

when you do the facial recognition technology, please don’t 

transfer that over to your fair elections Act, whatever you 

decide to do, Mr. Speaker. I think a picture on a licence plate 

would be sufficient, Mr. Speaker, because according to them 

there’s a huge problem of voter fraud. So they put in all these 

measures and, Mr. Speaker, those measures were, quite frankly, 

to try and stop a lot of the Aboriginal community from voting, 

to try and stop a lot of the immigrant community from voting, 

and a lot of people, the elderly people from voting, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a common tactic of the conservative, right wing 

Saskatchewan Party ilk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I hope that if we use these to do the facial recognition 

technology for vehicle purposes, Mr. Speaker, to Bill 185, we 

think that it’s probably appropriate to use it there. But please 

don’t expand it to your fair elections Act so to speak, Mr. 

Speaker. Keep it under the vehicle security and keep it under 

the driver’s licence integrity. Keep it under the safety on our 

highways argument. Please don’t bring in another measure to 

deter another huge amount of voters, Mr. Speaker. Because 

people of Saskatchewan don’t like that kind of action, and they 

certainly don’t like that kind of manipulation overall. 

 

And it was really, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on this facial 

recognition technology aspect, it was really nice just to be able 

to see the turnout in the federal election overall through all our 

province, Mr. Speaker. So what happened here was, as you can 

see, Mr. Speaker, that there was a lot of people that came out 

and voted, and despite the best efforts to try and use what I 

think is activity that would deal with voter suppression. My 

only argument is, please don’t use the aspect of facial 

recognition technology as another means to try and suppress 

votes, Mr. Speaker, because these are some of the things that 

we worry about. When they have an idea on Bill 185, it 

becomes more relevant to us because every bit of technology 

and every bit of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to talk about the 

relevance of the bill, not some other discussion that he may 

want to have in another venue. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So getting back to 

Bill 185, the facial recognition technology, it’s appropriate in 

determining the licensing and the operator of the vehicle, Mr. 

Speaker. Perhaps the technology is interesting. My only point 

being, Mr. Speaker, is that they don’t use it in some other venue 

and don’t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve asked the member to maintain his 

remarks relevant to the bill, not to some other topic, and I won’t 

correct him again on this issue. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, on that note, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 185. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 

Measures) Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 179 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 

Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to take my place in this Assembly and join debate today on Bill 

No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. 

 

I guess off the top, I’d like to say a few things about just some 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7389 

observations around the timing of this particular piece of 

legislation that I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, a little bit about 

some of the context that we see this bill coming forward in. I’d 

like to say a few things about the bill itself and certainly, you 

know, how this does or does not address the problem that it sets 

out in front of it, and then of course, Mr. Speaker, just some 

getting into the bill itself, and the reaction from different 

commentators throughout Saskatchewan and indeed 

commentators that have some national standing and experience 

when it comes to issues like this. 

 

But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I join this debate in a spirit of . . . 

Certainly I’m very cautious and very sober in terms of how I 

approach a question like this, because when it comes to the 

question of getting timely access to MRIs — you know, the 

gold standard of what is required in terms of trying to identify 

what a problem is in a person’s health — I know that it’s not 

just a debate that we’re having in this Assembly, but this is an 

issue that has a very real impact in a lot of people’s lives. 

 

And certainly as we approach this session, an old friend of mine 

who’s has different health concerns reached out and was 

looking to bring forward the topic to make sure that we’re 

considering the topic of MRIs being done correctly in the first 

place, and making sure that the information being gathered was 

being assessed correctly, read correctly, and that in terms that 

that would appropriately inform the diagnosis and prognosis for 

an individual with a health emergency. 

 

And certainly there are a lot of different ways that this topic 

impacts people’s lives in Saskatchewan, and I know that in our 

own family the whole question of MRIs, as the McCall family 

have had a chance to contemplate this very question under some 

very trying circumstances. And so I understand first-hand 

something of the desperation and the anxiety and the worry that 

comes with people that need an MRI to find out what is wrong 

with them, to get a better picture, a better analysis of what is 

their health situation and then in turn being able to move on to 

some course of treatment and to try and take on the health 

problem as it’s presenting. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people that are in that lurch of not being able 

to get access to that diagnosis, it’s a wrenching place to be, Mr. 

Speaker, and I know that for a fact. And I guess the question 

that I’d have as regards to this bill, Mr. Speaker, is this about 

honestly trying to set out and provide a cure for those that are 

confronted with long wait times or lack of capacity around 

MRIs in the province of Saskatchewan, in the public health care 

system in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

You know, I assume that it is, but the politics or the kind of 

timing that enters into this equation, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

this being something that has been bandied about in a few 

different ways by this government over the years and then over 

the last year in particular, Mr. Speaker, is more than a little 

passing strange in terms of how they’re trying to set up the 

timing for this. It’s pretty plain that, you know, they wanted to 

set it up as a debate last fall to try and again, I think, placate the 

right wing base of the Saskatchewan Party that’s always 

looking for, you know, what are they doing to privatize 

different of the public systems that we have in Saskatchewan 

and in terms of trying to set themselves up with some kind of 

point of differentiation heading into the next election. 

So why else would that be the case in terms of the timeline that 

this bill has been put forward on, Mr. Speaker? Certainly 

introducing it in the closing days of the spring session, after 

having raised the topic last fall as something worthy of 

consideration, is more than a little suspect, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

pretty clear that the intent of the timing on this legislation, and 

then of course this fall serving as a continuation on the spring 

sitting, the way that they’re trying to usher this legislation into 

being on the eve of an election slated for April 4th, that’s pretty 

plain to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So I guess it raises a number of questions about, if this is a good 

idea that’s going to make a meaningful improvement to health 

care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, then what’s with the 

timeline? Why are they trying to use it as some kind of 

trumped-up hobby horse to ride into the election? Why would 

they play those kind of games with people’s concerns about, 

when they are out there — and I notice again for too painful a 

fact, Mr. Speaker — when they’re out there desperate, 

confronted with long wait times, and what that means for not 

being able to get to a proper diagnosis? 

 

So is it about a genuine fix to a problem that presents in the 

health care system, Mr. Speaker, or is it about some very crass 

politics? I think it’s pretty plain when you look at the timeline 

how this issue’s being used by the Sask Party government. 

 

And when you look back over the record, Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that’s been considered by that government and 

dismissed, and I’ll get into that further in my remarks. But that 

they’ve revived it on the eve of an election again, I think speaks 

to the need to placate their right wing base, their conservative 

base, and to make sure that they’ve always got something they 

can point to in terms of furthering the privatization agenda 

instead of doing what they should be doing, which is putting 

forward a basic, fundamental fix to the system. 

 

So is this about providing better capacity in the system? Is this 

about providing better access to MRIs [magnetic resonance 

imaging] for all Saskatchewan citizens? Or is it about setting in 

some kind of convoluted pay-as-you-go approach where again 

you can’t help but be queue-jumping with the wallet in your 

back pocket, Mr. Speaker, where it depends on the ability to 

pay as opposed to the need for care? 

 

And again, these are things that have been ruled out by those 

members opposite. So that they’re bringing it forward now, I 

think, relies on two things: (a) that this is going to be very 

interesting for their right wing base heading into the election, 

but moreover, Mr. Speaker, it’s relying on short memories on 

the part of Saskatchewan people in terms of pledges that they’d 

previously gotten on the record with in terms of what they 

would and would not do as regards private MRI access, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there’s a few different ways to look at the timing of this 

legislation, but certainly from the opposition’s perspective, 

from the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party’s perspective, 

Mr. Speaker, we’d like to see work towards increasing capacity 

so we can fix MRI wait times for everyone. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I have no end of sympathy for folks that are already 



7390 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

looking to get that information and are doing so by going out of 

province or going out of country to get that information. 

Because again, it’s this very critical pass in our health care 

system where, if you don’t have that information and, you 

know, you’re desperately trying to find out what’s wrong, it’s a 

horrible situation to be in. 

 

So I have a lot of sympathy for the motivations around folks 

that would be looking to avail themselves of the existing 

options. But I think the answer that this government’s come 

forward with is, you know, where they’re playing political 

games, where they’re bringing forward a solution that will 

arguably make the systemic challenges worse for everyone. The 

answer is to have, you know, better access to good quality 

MRIs for all Saskatchewan citizens, to increase the capacity and 

fix this situation for everyone. Again, not to engage into some 

kind of convoluted formula that, you know, has people putting 

out the money to get access to the care. 

 

And again the argument is made that, well it’s just to the MRI. 

It’s not about buying access to the surgery. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

again if you gain access to the information, then it’s going to 

impact what happens with the availability and the access to the 

surgery. It’s just the way it works. Another thing that this 

government has said that they, you know, it wouldn’t have any 

impact on the existing capacity of the public system, which of 

course on the face of it is ridiculous. In terms of the highly 

talented health care professionals that are there to do these jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, it can’t help but increase the competitive aspect of 

what is already a hugely competitive situation around making 

sure that you’ve got that appropriate complement of health care 

professionals to get the job done on this very important file, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I guess we see this as a situation where, with the Sask 

Party’s plan, most patients will wait longer so that a few can 

jump the queue. We see it where parents have been told that 

their child needs an MRI. They will face a difficult decision 

under the Sask Party’s plan: come up with the money, rack up 

credit cards to pay for that MRI, or wait even longer while 

people who have the money get to go first. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is not sort of speculation. You 

know, the greater private component you have in your system 

and the more it relies on people’s ability to pay as opposed to 

the need for care, it’s not for nothing that up to very recently the 

leading cause of personal bankruptcy in the United States is 

personal health costs, Mr. Speaker, or that historically we’ve 

seen that very same thing take place in . . . see that very same 

thing be a fact of life in places like our Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, that they bring it forward at this time is 

more than a bit strange. 

 

Now there might be two lineups for the MRI scans, but there’s 

only one line for surgeries. So it’s not just the MRI line that 

queue jumping will be allowed in. Those who don’t pay will be 

at the back of the line for surgeries too. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is something where they’re 

pointing to Alberta, and we’ll see how long this carries on in 

Alberta in terms of the situation there. But again if this has been 

such a great solution for Alberta, what happened there? Well 

patient-pay MRIs didn’t shorten wait times; it made them much 

longer. In Saskatchewan 90 per cent of people get their scan 

within 88 days. In Alberta 90 per cent of people wait up to 247 

days. Mr. Speaker, why would we want to go down that path if 

that’s what it’s going to lead to for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Instead of making the public-paid system much worse, as 

privatization does, obviously we should be looking at making 

the public system much better for everyone. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not like there’s an inexhaustible supply of health 

care professionals. If the highly skilled, highly valued 

technologists and health care professionals that are working in 

the one system are being poached off to do the high-grade work 

in the private system, guess what? That’s going to decrease 

capacity and worsen the situation on the public side. So again to 

settle for a system where someone simply pulls out a wallet, 

figuring out what they can afford, is I think a bad way to go 

when obviously what we should be doing is making sure that 

we’ve got again better access to good-quality medical resonance 

imagining for everyone. 

 

You know, we’ve had discussion in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of other issues that are presenting where this 

government has said one thing and then something very 

different is playing out on the ground. We’ve seen that with ER 

wait times. We’ve seen that with access to specialists. And 

you’d think that that would provide enough of a challenge for 

them in terms of things that they should really be putting the 

shoulder to the wheel on. But instead, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

obsession with John Black and Associates and lean and 

converting the Health Quality Council into the kaizen 

promotion office and stacking the managers up when they 

should be worried about the care being given on the front lines. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess we see this as one more example of 

misplaced priorities in a way that, instead of addressing the real 

challenges, the real problems that present in the health care 

system, we see this government doing something totally 

different, doing something that’s more, it would seem, about 

ideology, about pretty questionable political gains instead of 

actually providing real solutions to the problems that exist, like 

improving the capacity in the system as a whole. So that’s 

something we find to be more than a little strange, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

In terms of what this government’s bringing forward with the 

licensing bill that we have in front of us, again it’s part of a 

longer historic debate that we’ve had in this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and certainly a debate that has been informed 

by those that fought against medicare, that stood out in front of 

the legislature kicking the door to register their disapproval of 

the medicare coming in to begin with, and the way that the right 

wingers never sleep when it comes to medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

They always see it as an opportunity for privatization instead of 

a success to be built upon, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not about 

common sense so much as it is about ideology. And again I 

appreciate there’s an election coming up and that members 

opposite have got their own right wing base to get excited 

about, you know, what’s going to be privatized next. 

 

But again to get into this convoluted path on MRIs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, instead of working to increase capacity across the 

board for Saskatchewan citizens, is again quite questionable. 

And it’s also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, interesting coming forward 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7391 

at a time where we’d had certainly, you know, in 2008, not very 

long after the 2007 election, where members opposite took the 

pledge on support for all kinds of public endeavours and, you 

know, saying no way would there be privatization of different 

public services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the time, and it wasn’t so much of their own choosing, but 

there was a proposal came in in early 2008 around a private 

MRI. And the approach was considered at the time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’m sure you remember it well. But it was 

interesting that at the time, and this is to quote from an article 

entitled, “Proposed MRI project renews privatization debate,” 

dated February 15th, 2008, where the Premier himself said, 

“offering medical services such as an MRI for a fee ‘seems to 

be a bit outside the Canada Health Act’ and is an area where the 

government doesn’t want to tread.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess the interesting thing about that is 

that, you know, that was 2008. Time has marched on. It’s seven 

years past. So this, you know, considered by the government, 

but not engaged in. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think it has more 

to do with trying to beat the drum for their right wing base 

heading into an election, to play on an issue where frankly 

there’s a lot of concern and fear on the part of the individuals 

that are confronted with MRI wait times, that is being used in a 

fairly unseemly way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So considered 2008 

and then ruled out. 

 

But I guess something I’d like to provide a greater quotation for 

the House too, Mr. Speaker, is from an individual from here in 

Regina, Mr. Simon Enoch who is a director of research with the 

Saskatchewan chapter of the Canadian Centre for Policy 

Alternatives. And I’d like to quote at length from the article that 

he had written just over a year ago, dated October 17th, 2014. 

It’s entitled, “Get back in line, Mr. Premier,” and it’s from a 

regular sort of series that the Saskatchewan CCPA [Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives] puts out called Behind the 

Numbers, where they provide the analysis on what’s being put 

forward. 

 

And again please bear in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

quoting from this article so please keep that in mind that 

October 17th, 2014, “Get back in line, Mr. Premier”: 

 

Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall once again stirred the 

privatization pot yesterday when he took to social media to 

ask: “Is it time to allow people to pay for their own private 

MRIs in Saskatchewan like they can do in Alberta?” The 

Premier’s twitter trial balloon suggests the government 

will argue that allowing private, for-profit MRIs will help 

reduce wait times in the public system. The Premier 

himself added: “It does make sense that the wait list is 

going to shrink because those who want to pay will come 

off that public wait list and they’ll get their MRIs and 

thereby shortening the wait list for all, whether they want 

to pay or not.” 

 

[15:15] 

 

Carrying on with the article, Mr. Speaker: 

 

This certainly is a rather radical re-direction for the 

Saskatchewan government on the healthcare front. While 

always a champion of private, for-profit clinics, the 

government has always been at pains to reassure the public 

that these experiments with private healthcare would . . . 

[also] remain within the ambit of the public system — 

paid for by public dollars and used to relieve stresses on 

the public system. Indeed, faced with the question of a 

proposed private MRI centre in 2008, the Premier “said 

offering medical services such as an MRI for a fee ‘seems 

to be outside the Canada Health Act,’ and is area where 

the government doesn’t want to tread.” 

 

Where I’d referenced that earlier, Mr. Speaker. Carrying on 

with the article: 

 

Moreover, government officials “said patients would not 

be able to jump to the front of the queue by paying 

out-of-pocket, but rather that the proposed centre would 

work with the existing system.” Indeed, Mr. Wall . . . 

 

And again carrying on with quoting the article, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

Indeed, Mr. Wall has made the queue-jumping promise 

himself, telling reporters in 2009 [following after the 

debate] that his government’s health reforms would not 

allow anyone to “use a bulging wallet to jump the queue.” 

In light of this history, Mr. Wall’s about-face is surprising, 

particularly given this government’s historical 

vulnerability on the privatization question. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, if I could add parenthetically, 

commenting now on this article by Mr. Simon Enoch, again 

you’ve seen the Premier be very definitive in terms of saying 

that private, for-profit MRIs were not on previously. And I 

guess, you know, folks can make up their own mind, but that’s 

not something I’m making up, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record. 

That’s what the Premier has had to say on this. And now of 

course what they’re doing is something very different indeed. 

 

Returning to the article, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Notwithstanding Mr. Wall’s rather abrupt reversal on this 

issue, the threat of private MRI clinics to our public 

system is very real but maybe not readily apparent. So 

let’s take a look at why one might oppose the 

establishment of private pay-for-access MRI clinics in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, as the Premier rightly observed in 2008, 

private pay-for MRIs undermine the accessibility criterion 

of the Canada Health Act which states that “access to 

medically necessary services should be based on need — 

not on means — and on uniform terms and conditions.” 

 

Persons who have the ability to purchase private MRIs end 

up getting faster access to health services in two ways. 

First of all, they gain access to the test itself. Secondly, 

they can then return to the publicly funded system for 

treatment, should such care be required, one step ahead of 

patients still waiting to obtain publicly funded diagnostic 

tests. 

 

But it’s not just that those people who can afford it gain 



7392 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

access to quicker care. Those of us who cannot afford to 

purchase private MRIs may see our access undermined. 

For example, there is a very real problem that if for-profit 

clinics are opened they will have to steal staff from the 

public system, making it harder for the public system to 

operate efficiently. There is considerable anecdotal 

evidence to support this position. As the Ontario Health 

Coalition reports: 

 

One Calgary hospital lost three of five diagnostic 

technologists to a new MRI clinic that offered signing 

bonuses of up to $10,000. Similar pressures are being 

reported in Nova Scotia and technologists and radiologists 

working in Ontario’s hospitals are already being 

approached by companies hoping to open up private 

clinics. The question of how these clinics are to be staffed 

has already been raised by the Ontario Association of 

Radiologists which says the system could currently use an 

extra 150 professionals. 

 

Even the Saskatchewan Ministry of Health is concerned 

about losing staff to Ontario if the 20 for-profit clinics 

open. Dr. Normand Laberge, president of the Canadian 

Association of Radiologists, suggested that private clinics 

may exacerbate the problem of waiting lines. In his view, 

governments may assume that the private clinics will 

“solve the problem” rather than governments being 

proactive and taking the steps necessary to provide timely 

access to needed diagnostic services. 

 

Moreover, if the Saskatchewan government believes that 

emulating Alberta’s private model will “solve” our 

wait-list problems, it may be in for a surprise. According 

to the Canadian Institute for Health Information [CIHI, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker] Saskatchewan posted typical waiting 

times for MRIs at 28 days. Whereas in Alberta, even with 

pay-for-service private clinics, typical wait times for an 

MRI scan was 80 days. Moreover, the Alberta experience 

with pay-for-private clinics has devolved into a litany of 

queue-jumping and preferential access to such an extent 

that it is undermining public confidence in the health 

system. Indeed the College of Physicians and Surgeons in 

Alberta has proposed to ban private imaging diagnostic 

clinics altogether because of the damage it is doing to the 

public system in that province. This would not seem to be 

an experience that any province should be eager to match. 

So rather than follow Alberta’s lead, how about we invest 

in greater capacity and more efficient utilization of MRIs 

in our current public system? 

 

Again thanks to Simon Enoch in the Saskatchewan chapter of 

the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives for providing that 

rather timely commentary 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that came onto the public records back 

last fall when this was first being mooted around by the 

government, only to be introduced as actual legislation in the 

closing days of the spring session, again leaving us with certain 

questions about the timeline of how this government has gone 

about approaching this legislation. 

 

Now I’m not on Twitter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t know 

if you are either. But given that the Premier wanted to, you 

know, restart this debate via his Twitter account — which is of 

course, you know, the hallmark of a great debate coming from 

the Sask Party is when they tweet out about a great new idea, 

and again, Mr. Speaker, an idea that that Premier had said 

wouldn’t be proceeding, that they weren’t going to do it — and 

lo and behold, here we are with this particular piece of 

legislation in front of us. Given that that was brought forward in 

Twitter, I’d like to provide some thoughts from an individual 

named Tom McIntosh that he provided via Twitter for the 

debate.  

 

And of course Tom McIntosh is a very well-informed, very 

interested observer in terms of the political scene and, you 

know, head of the political science department at the University 

of Regina, associate director of the Saskatchewan Population 

Health and Evaluation Research Unit, SPHERU, and also, Mr. 

Speaker, a past director of research into the future of health care 

in Canada, more commonly known as the Romanow 

Commission, Dr. McIntosh served as the director of research 

for that commission. 

 

So what does Dr. McIntosh say via Twitter about private pay 

MRIs? “Thoughts on Private-pay MRIs: A Twitter Essay” 

#skpoli So: 

 

(2) #skpoli has approximately 5,000 people waiting for 

MRIs currently delivered in two sites (soon to be three) in 

the province. 

 

(3) We know that simply opening up private pay MRIs 

doesn’t reduce wait times in the public system (Alta has 

both private MRIs and longer waits). 

 

(4) Gov’t proposes that if an individual buys MRIs 

privately and one for a person on a public list then the 

waits will shrink. 

 

(5) But they offer no evidence that this will work. There is 

no jurisdiction that has tried this, so it is at best an 

assumption. 

 

(6) And, I think, it is an assumption that is based on a 

number of faulty premises which I will discuss in turn. 

 

(7) It assumes that the reason for wait times must be that 

we’re not “buying” enough MRIs in the public system. 

 

(8) Their proposal, in effect, is to have wealthy individuals 

buy more MRIs for the public system rather than have the 

gov’t do it. 

 

(9) Yet all wait time evidence . . . [that Mr. McIntosh has 

seen and he’s done research on it himself] shows that 

‘throwing money’ at wait times doesn’t work. 

 

(10) This indicates that “we’re not spending enough” is 

rarely the cause of waits for diagnostics, surgeries or other 

services. 

 

(11) Thus, solution to wait times lie in other areas — 

capacity (both technological and human) and 

organizational issues in system. 

 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7393 

(12) Nothing the government proposes would solve those 

issues and might actually make them worse. 

 

(13) It isn’t evident that there is a surplus of qualified 

personnel to operate these machines just waiting to move 

into system. 

 

(14) Which means they would likely, in the first instance, 

come from the public system and thus reduce capacity 

there. 

 

(15) Could we train more? Yes. In time. We’re training 

pretty much at capacity now and health care training is not 

a tap. 

 

(16) You can’t just turn it on and off at will. Building 

increased training capacity takes time and (mostly public) 

resources. 

 

(17) Could we import more people? Yes we can. 

Assuming they’re out there and qualified. 

 

(18) But there are also ethical issues raised by such a 

move. We’re asking other jurisdictions . . . to solve our 

problem. 

 

(19) Western gov’ts have repeatedly been asked to quit the 

active recruitment of scarce human resources from 

developing . . . [countries]. 

 

(20) So at least we have to confront the issue of where the 

human resources will come from in both the short and 

longer term. 

 

(21) There are other issues raised by this proposal as well. 

At the forefront of course is the idea of queue jumping. 

 

(22) While queue jumping already exists in parts of the 

system (e.g. WCB claimants) this would certainly increase 

it. 

 

(23) That the system already has a queue jumping problem 

is not a rationale in my view to make it worse. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if I could add parenthetically, the proposed 

solution on the part of this government making the problem 

worse. 

 

(24) The principle of “need not ability to pay” remains key 

to our commitment to medicare and is a cornerstone of 

public support for it. 

 

(25) This proposal is now saying that ability to pay (and 

pay twice) will get you better preferential access to the 

system. 

 

(26) The claim is that the rich have to take a poor person 

along with them so it’s all for the good — indeed it’s 

altruistic. 

 

(27) But it comes back to the assertion that underlies the 

proposal, that this is a “not enough money” problem. 

 

(28) But, again, there’s no evidence to suggest that lack of 

spending on MRIs is what is causing the public . . . [wait 

times]. 

 

(29) And lots of evidence to suggest that the problem lies 

elsewhere in how we organize the delivery of services. 

 

(30) Ironically, if lean is supposed to teach us anything it 

is that how one organizes the system matters. 

 

(31) But for some reason gov’t is now . . . looking at 

organizational solutions and instead just throwing (private) 

money at the problem. 

 

(32) It’s ill-thought out, lacks an evidence base and, like 

past money throwing instances, likely to make things 

worse. 

 

To close off the citation of the Twitter essay on just how 

ill-informed this government’s approach is on MRI wait times, 

again I thank Tom McIntosh for that contribution to the public 

discourse on this legislation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if they’re seeking to solve a problem, this 

would . . . Again, you’ve got a very well-informed individual 

looking at what they’re about and saying that this, their 

proposed solution that’s represented here by this legislation, 

could well indeed make the situation worse. So, Mr. Speaker, 

why would they . . . Again it’s, you know, we like to think 

we’re all reasonable people. We’re rational people. Why would 

it make sense that they’re bringing it forward at this time if it’s 

actually going to make things worse? Well it’s because of 

ideology and it’s because of ramping up and jacking up the 

right wing base of that party in advance of an election, is what I 

would submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again it’s not just people like Dr. McIntosh that are 

questioning the proposal put forward by this party at this time, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve also got, and this is an article from The 

StarPhoenix dated May 8, 2015, byline Jason Warick, 

StarPhoenix, “SMA president questions private MRI plan.” 

And to quote from the article: 

 

The president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association is 

skeptical of a government plan to allow private MRIs, 

saying the proposed cost structure may not be viable . . .  

 

Dr. Dalibor Slavik, whose term as SMA president ends 

today, said the two-for-one plan would make it difficult 

for radiologists to cover their costs. As for passing the 

added cost to the patient, he said most people would rather 

get a cheaper scan in Alberta. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of a bad joke in that, you 

know, seeking to emulate the bad path that Alberta’s gone 

down, that they wouldn’t make improvements on the Alberta 

model. They’d in fact make it worse. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So it’s interesting that again we see somebody that is a doctor, 

that is, you know, past head of the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, questioning what this government’s, whether or 



7394 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

not their approach will work, and saying a lot of doubts about 

what’s going on. 

 

You’ve also got health care expert Steven Lewis saying that the 

Saskatchewan MRI plan could create a two-tiered system. And 

again Steven Lewis, a well-known, well-regarded health 

consultant raising questions about what this does to the capacity 

in the public system and what it does in terms of greater private 

influence in the public system as a whole. 

 

And again, you know, they like to pick and choose what the guy 

has to say in the public debate, but I’d recommend for members 

opposite if they could look into the opinion of one Dr. Ryan 

Meili who’s written in op-eds, again dated 2014 from October 

28th last year where his op-ed, they ran it across the country. 

But this one is from the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

op-ed entitled, “Private MRI clinics do not shorten wait times.” 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s, you know, they have this 

occasional relationship with Dr. Meili in terms of things they 

like to cite. They were very happy to have the good work of Dr. 

Meili on offer in the anti-poverty strategy committee that was 

struck. But since that committee reported out in the end of 

summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the silence in terms of the 

response of that government on the important work, the 

valuable work that was done by that group of people that are 

very well rooted in the community and know what they’re 

talking about when it comes to poverty reduction, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the response from this government has been 

deafening. 

 

So as regards whether or not they’ll, you know, do themselves a 

favour and see what Dr. Meili has to say about MRIs not 

shortening wait times, private MRIs not shortening wait times, I 

don’t have a lot of hope for, Mr. Speaker, if indeed . . . You 

know, I don’t know if they’re on an off-cycle where they can’t, 

you know, first they can’t get enough of what Dr. Meili has to 

say and now, you know, when the anti-poverty committee has 

made its report, they somehow want to stop listening to what an 

individual has to say. It’s a bit strange, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But what Dr. Meili has to say, again citing the situation in 

Alberta and what has in fact made the situation worse there in 

terms of the question of equity, quoting from the article, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

If an MRI scan is the limiting factor for getting a surgery, 

and I can pay for my scan, I get to have my publicly 

funded surgery before someone in as much need but less 

able to pay out of pocket. This is the principal reason the 

existence of patient-pay MRI clinics, as Wall has pointed 

out [again quoting from the article, Mr. Deputy Speaker], 

is against the Canada Health Act. 

 

This is also the reason that Alberta has, in recent years, 

moved away from the patient-pay model. Many of the 

private clinics charge the public system for the scan and 

charge the patient a premium on top. Alberta was also 

forced to repay some patients who had paid for medically 

necessary scans out-of-pocket. 

 

With no financial savings, and no increase in accessibility, 

there is actually little real impetus for provinces to 

promote patient-pay imaging centres. In fact, Alberta has 

moved in the opposite direction, increasing public capacity 

and ending the practice of contracting out services to 

private facilities. 

 

And again I think this government and indeed the people of 

Saskatchewan would do well to pay heed to the wise advice 

offered there by Dr. Ryan Meili, someone who knows a lot of 

which he speaks and brings a very thoughtful perspective to 

matters of public policy generally, but certainly health care in 

particular. 

 

But I guess ain’t it just like the Sask Party, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to show up and proclaim the virtues of an approach just when 

Alberta is moving in a different direction, having learned the 

lessons. And I guess it’s, you know, one of the points in public 

policy, Mr. Speaker, is to look at precedent, look at the situation 

in other jurisdictions, and try to learn from the experience of 

those jurisdictions. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we thought that the Premier and the 

Sask Party government had been doing that when this was 

raised for public consideration in 2008, 2009, and then 

dismissed. But of course, Mr. Speaker, I guess they’ve got a 

right wing base to placate and they’ve got to bang the drum 

heading into the election. So here we are again with a big 

debate about private MRI access in this province instead of how 

we could improve the situation both in terms of access and 

quality for all the people in Saskatchewan, not just those, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, not just those, to use the Premier’s phrase, 

those with the bulging wallets, to close that quote. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what we see as the merits 

of this legislation, both the timing is sort of suspect. We’ve 

heard back in terms of some questions that are out there around 

the consultation process that’s gone forward on the regulations 

and who’s got special access when it comes to that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Again, you know, sort of a case in point of what I 

think we can expect from this approach, this privatization of 

health care approach for the whole province in terms of, you 

know, pretty good access for some, Mr. Speaker, but not for all 

the citizens, which again is the point of public health care, is to 

get it to people when they need it and in the way that they need 

it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So to, I guess, wrap up my intervention in this debate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in terms of what we see this government 

doing, we think it has more to do with a pretty doubtful kind of 

politics. We see it more about electioneering and what’s 

important for their right wing base as opposed to what makes 

sense for Saskatchewan people. We see them, even worse, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, seizing upon a policy approach that would 

make a problem worse. If we can, you know, please, dear Lord, 

learn from the experience in other jurisdictions. And in that 

regard, Mr. Speaker, I think that when people get to know more 

about what this government is doing with this piece of 

legislation, they’ll have a very similar opinion of it as well. 

 

So privatizing MRIs, Mr. Speaker, and privatizing ever greater 

swaths of the health care system all in the name of ideology as 

opposed to, you know, squarely at odds with common sense and 

what works for people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not something 

that we’ll support. And certainly we’ll have more questions to 

ask in the days and weeks ahead. But that being said, Mr. 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7395 

Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 179, The 

MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 183 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 

Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand up today and respond to Bill No. 183 in 

relation to the, as we indicated, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act and The Saskatchewan 

Employment Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the challenge we have in 

Saskatchewan is one of the issues that we talked about as it 

relates to the relationship between this particular government, 

Mr. Speaker, and all the working men and women and young 

people throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that there’s been this 

relationship that hasn’t been positive at all in many ways, 

shapes, and forms. 

 

Now I understand, Mr. Speaker, that some of the provisions in 

this particular bill relates to the really tragic event where the 

Saskatchewan Party brought forward what they thought was an 

essential services Act, Mr. Speaker, and they come along and 

they try to bully their way to working . . . to determine what 

were some of the essential services in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to give a bit of perspective, Mr. Speaker. The fact of 

the matter is that in the province of Saskatchewan there is a 

number of issues that people in Saskatchewan ought to be 

aware of. Now one of the things that we take great pride in, in 

any part of the province, is that we do have a respected civil 

service, Mr. Speaker, and that we really count on men and 

women from all walks of life, from all stripes, and from all 

corners of the province, to provide public service to the people 

of Saskatchewan overall. We’ve always maintained that they 

are the livelihood of any government, that they are the people 

that make government work. 

 

And yes, as politicians we sit in the Assembly, and we certainly 

do what we have to do to go through bills and certainly go 

through the finances of our province, deal with the issues of 

people that are coming to the Assembly to look for ways and 

means in which we could assist them, Mr. Speaker. That’s our 

role. But we know largely, as soon as we stand in this 

Assembly, that there are a number of organizations, groups of 

people that really ought to be recognized on a continual basis, 

and that’s our civil service, Mr. Speaker, our servants that are 

out there doing the many, many types of work that they do. 

 

Now one of the things that we found amazing, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of The Public Service Essential Services Act, is the 

Saskatchewan Party, as soon as they became government, they 

went to war with our working men and women of the province, 

and they tried to force their way, to bully their way in doing 

what they want with the civil servants. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

tell you today, that was a complete waste of time. It was a 

complete waste of energy, Mr. Speaker. It was also a complete 

waste of finances because obviously, in order for us to be able 

to do some of these Acts, you have to make sure that you have 

all the bills in place. You have to make sure that you dedicate 

the amount of time necessary to do up the consultation of the 

particular bill. You’ve got to sit down, and you’ve got to talk 

with some of the unions that are impacted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all the history behind this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, really 

results from one fatal flaw as it relates to the attitude of the 

Saskatchewan Party government towards our working families, 

Mr. Speaker, and that effect is that they didn’t do this properly. 

And now here we are, Mr. Speaker, talking about Bill 183, to 

really, really start talking about the relevant legislation when 

you talk about the whole notion around the union sector, the 

working men and women of our province, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s quite important that people in the province really begin to 

be informed as to what this bill is all about and the history of 

this particular bill and the list goes on as to what we think are 

some challenges. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the bill itself, Bill 183, the Saskatchewan 

employment amendment Act, 2015, amends the essential 

services portion of The Saskatchewan Employment Act. In 

January of this year, the Supreme Court of Canada brought 

down a precedent-setting decision on essential services, and it 

goes to my earlier point that it’ll likely have an impact on all 

jurisdictions of Canada, including Saskatchewan. And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is the ideology of the Saskatchewan 

Party government trumped common sense. It trumped the 

complete waste of taxpayers’ money in trying to put in an 

essential services Act that really didn’t have any backbone to it, 

Mr. Speaker. It was primarily just a reaction to, quite frankly, 

the political climate that the Saskatchewan Party wanted to 

create with our working men and women. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Supreme Court of Canada brought 

down this decision and said basically that the action of the 

Saskatchewan Party government was not proper: 

 

. . . we took the time we needed to analyze the decision 

and consider how it may affect our current essential 

services legislation and the amendments made in Bill 128 

which was passed last year, but not proclaimed. [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

We committed to working with the public sector 

employers and the unions that represent their workers to 

find common ground . . .  

 

is according to what the Saskatchewan Party tried to do, Mr. 



7396 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

Speaker. It is quite frankly a lot of discussion that they brought 

forward. And some of the comments that they made as a result 

of what they’re doing here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They went on to thank a number of members of the working 

group, Mr. Speaker. And I’m quoting here, they required the 

parties to include a notice of impasse whether there are essential 

services to be maintained. And this was excerpts of some of the 

discussion in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So I think it’s really, 

really important that when we hear the Saskatchewan Party 

government using words in their documentation, “We 

committed to working with the public sector employers and the 

unions,” Mr. Speaker, we find that this is not exactly what was 

done. And these are documentations that was used by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 

speeches and some of the arguments that they made. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on . . . And I should have noted 

at the start that these were the minister’s notes, and I didn’t do 

that. But he stands in the Assembly, as I said in the outset, and 

he said he was pleased to rise in the Assembly, talk about Bill 

183, talk about the Supreme Court of Canada, talk about all the 

decisions that they ended up trying to make, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can share with the Assembly the . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Exactly. I can share with the Assembly some of 

the other wording, Mr. Speaker, that the minister used. And he 

used the words, “These amendments are largely based on the 

effort of a working group.” And he talked about, Mr. Speaker, 

“These consultations concluded on September 30th, 2015.” And 

then he talked about, “These amendments will enable 

Saskatchewan essential services legislation to address the 

concerns of the Supreme Court” of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all the language in this particular speech, as 

I said at the outset, spoke about the Government of 

Saskatchewan response to the essential services bill, Mr. 

Speaker. Here is the entire text of what the minister said. And 

what I’m wanting to point out to the people of Saskatchewan is 

all of this work, all of the comment that was made in the 

minister’s opening statements as a result of this bill were quite 

frankly made, Mr. Speaker, out of desperation and certainly 

because they weren’t prepared to actually respect what a lot of 

the union sector had to say when it comes to essential services. 

 

And they didn’t do what the Manitoba government had done, 

Mr. Speaker, when they sat down, because often you’ll hear the 

Saskatchewan Party . . . And I’m not certain if the minister 

mentioned that in his particular speech here. And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, was they said, well you have essential 

services in Manitoba, which has an NDP government, is one of 

the comments made by one of the Saskatchewan Party 

members. And I’m not certain if the minister actually alluded to 

that. 

 

But the fact of the matter, in his entire speech, Mr. Speaker, he 

didn’t mention the fact that in Manitoba the essential services 

legislation was basically under the principle of consultation 

with the public sector union, Mr. Speaker. It was agreed upon in 

terms of which were defined as essential services. They actually 

negotiated their way, Mr. Speaker, not unlike the minister’s 

statement here when he wanted to respond to the challenges that 

were identified, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of the 

ill-advised excursions into the realm of trying to bully a lot of 

the civil servants in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So quite frankly, in Manitoba the reaction and the action of the 

Manitoba government was radically different in the sense that, 

yes, they do have essential services but it was negotiated in 

good faith between the public sector unions and the province of 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, unlike what happened here in 

Saskatchewan where the Saskatchewan Party arbitrarily tried, 

Mr. Speaker, arbitrarily tried to force this . . . the whole notion 

around the essential services, to determine which are essential 

services and who cannot go on strike, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now again I don’t want to share at length what was said by the, 

you know, by the minister but, Mr. Speaker, I can point out that 

it was a lot of fancy wording. And some of the wording here, 

Mr. Speaker, he mentioned requiring the parties to include in a 

notice of impasse. 

 

And again, “The new essential services legislation meets the 

constitutional requirements set out by the Supreme Court.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, had they consulted with the Supreme Court, 

had they done some of these works, some of the work that was 

necessary to identify some of the challenges, legal challenges of 

the essential services bill that they tried to put forward, I think, 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly that they would have saved a lot of 

money and they would have saved a lot of time and they would 

have saved a lot of heartache when you sit down and deal with 

the working men and women of this particular province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think there’s a lot of work that is necessary as it relates to 

rebuilding, rebuilding a relationship with a lot of working men 

and women as I’ve pointed out time and time again. And 

another part of the minister’s statement, Mr. Speaker, is that he 

says, “I’d also like to thank SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour] president, Larry Hubich. He was instrumental in 

putting this group together and providing valuable feedback.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he also pointed out, the minister did, “I 

know that we don’t always see eye to eye, but I’d like to thank 

him for helping accomplish something that I believe will work 

for . . . [everyone].” Well, Mr. Speaker, had the minister at the 

time sat down with President Hubich and really began to work 

with the whole Federation of Labour and the working men and 

women of this province, then he wouldn’t be here making some 

of these thank-you notes in his speech. He would actually, quite 

frankly, be sitting down and working his way through this 

essential services as they did in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So overall, right from the start when the minister identified 

what he thought were important in this particular legislation, 

Mr. Speaker — and we have a copy of his speech here — we 

just see that the speech is just covered with apology, Mr. 

Speaker. The speech is just dressing up their critical problem 

and the number one issue that we’re talking about today, and 

that was a lack of respect for the public service bargaining 

teams right across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again it took the Supreme Court of Canada 

to turn this down and say, you guys have done it terribly wrong. 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7397 

We need to go back to the drawing board. We need to make 

sure that some of these issues that we’re speaking about are 

issues that we are on the same page on, and certainly there has 

to be a level of respect afforded to both parties. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that the Saskatchewan Party government 

did not respect any kind of role that the public sector union was 

playing as it relates to their issues, their needs, and their desires. 

 

Now this bill, Bill 183, has a lot of information in it. There’s a 

ton of information on this essential services bill, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to point out some of the issues that we’re talking 

about has a number of processes involved. And I’m just looking 

at some of the notes here, Mr. Speaker — appeal board, 

commissions, concentration. These are some of the language 

that’s being used in this particular bill. And if I get the number 

right, there’s 40 pages of explanatory notes attached to this 

particular bill — 40 pages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to have to go through this bill on a regular basis 

to see what some of the changes are. And I’m pleased, I am 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we do have people involved like Mr. 

Hubich to be able to tell the government, (a) okay, you didn’t 

deal with us the first time; let’s go to the Supreme Court of 

Canada. You went to the Supreme Court of Canada. The ruling 

came down in favour of the public service union, and now 

we’re back to the drawing board. And now we’re sitting down 

finally with Mr. Hubich, where we should have been three or 

four years ago, Mr. Speaker, at the very least. Three or four 

years ago we should have been sitting down with Mr. Hubich 

and working our way through this — and others, not just Mr. 

Hubich, but he’s certainly one of the key figures — and 

working our way through this in a responsible, respectful 

manner. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker? We wasted a lot of time. I’m 

not sure the first year this bill was introduced. Eight years it’s 

been introduced. And, Mr. Speaker, there was discussion and 

there was opportunity for us to save a lot of taxpayers’ money. 

That’s right, the taxpayers’ money. The matter of fact is you 

fast-forward, Mr. Speaker, and despite the great speech 

presented by the minister on how he tried to cover all this up, 

we know. We see it for what it is. It is quite frankly a complete 

waste of time. Ideology trumped common sense on this front, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now we are going to have to fix this, and this is why we are 

here talking about this particular bill. Once again we’re talking 

about this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 183, The 

Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 

Act, 2015. So the big question I would have, Mr. Speaker, as 

we’re talking about this and what the minister has to say is, 

number one, Mr. Speaker, is, why are we here today? Why are 

we back on this particular bill a full eight years after they 

introduced it, a full eight years of wasted time, of wasted 

taxpayers’ money, and really, really straining the relationship 

between our public sector unions and the provincial 

government, Mr. Speaker? Because all it was at the beginning 

was simply a bully tactic that the Saskatchewan Party was 

compelled to undertake because their ideology dictated that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you, in the province of Saskatchewan ideology 

does not trump common sense, and the people of Saskatchewan 

know that full well. And this is why eight years later we’re 

dealing with 40 notes of explanatory notes because we have to 

adjust our essential services legislation because the Supreme 

Court of Canada ruled it out of order, Mr. Speaker. And now 

here we are again. 

 

Now I would ask the question, as you look at some of the 

challenges that we have had over the last number of years, 

everything from the lean program to health, Mr. Speaker, that 

cost $100 million in terms of wasted money, asking advice from 

an American-based consultant, Mr. Speaker . . . As the 

Saskatchewan Party tried to Americanize our health care 

system, Mr. Speaker, they hired a consultant that cost us a lot of 

money. The smart meter fiasco. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

The Regina bypass over cost. You know the overruns, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re talking about $1 billion more. 

 

As you look at all these costs that the Saskatchewan Party has 

mismanaged over the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, you can 

throw this particular bill on top of those other bills because they 

wasted a lot of time and a lot of taxpayers’ money going 

through this essential services when they were told right from 

the start: sit down, negotiate your way through this with the 

public sector bargaining units, and they will come up with some 

great ideas, great advice, and they will establish a relationship 

with you. But the Saskatchewan Party chose not to and this is 

why in Bill 183 today we are actually talking about 40 different 

pages of amendments and 40 different pages of mistakes that 

they had made, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes on. 

 

Now I’m not going to get into detail as to where this particular 

bill is going but what I take offence to, Mr. Speaker, what I take 

offence to, Mr. Speaker, is the presentation by the minister. 

When the minister certainly got up and spoke about this 

particular bill and I looked at the parts of his speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, again I’m quoting his speech but I 

want to say again I go back to his earlier statement and he says, 

I’m pleased to rise in the House today to talk about Bill 183, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, which amends 

the essential services portion of The Saskatchewan Employment 

Act. “In January of this year, the Supreme Court of Canada 

brought down a precedent-setting decision on essential services 

that will likely have an impact on all jurisdictions in Canada.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what his opening line was, Mr. 

Speaker. So my point being is that he did not want to admit that 

there was a mistake made. So what does he do? He just skips 

over that particular argument. And what the minister should 

have said as opposed to what we heard in the Assembly, he 

should have . . . Actually the speech should have read, well I’m 

sorry to stand in the House today . . . This is what his speech 

should have read: I’m sorry to stand in the House today because 

we allowed our Saskatchewan Party ideology to trump common 

sense so we tried to put this essential services bill in place to 

prove to Saskatchewan people that we can take on the unions 

that serve our many needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And we made a big mistake. 

 

We cost you guys a lot of money, is what the minister should be 

saying. We wasted eight years and obviously the Saskatchewan 

Party is not using common sense and we don’t know where 

we’ll begin to say we’re sorry, but eight years later the Supreme 

Court of Canada has said we didn’t know what we were doing 



7398 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

at the time — this is the Minister of Labour — and . . . 

[inaudible] . . . people like SFL President Larry Hubich, we 

would have maybe had figured this out sooner. 

 

That should have been the minister’s quote, Mr. Speaker, and 

obviously it wasn’t. And what we have here in front of us, Mr. 

Speaker, is the minister’s response, the minister’s response to 

this particular bill. And obviously he glosses over some serious 

mistakes that they made, some very serious, costly mistakes not 

only from the financial perspective but the waste of time 

perspective and really straining the relationship we have with 

our public sector unions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it really kind of irks me when I see him use the language 

like, I’d like to thank this particular group; I’d like to thank that 

group; when all of these groups that he was dealing with are 

quite angry with him and quite angry with the Saskatchewan 

Party government. Because what they’ve fundamentally done 

was show them a lot of disrespect. They showed them a lot of 

disregard for their role in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, where does that build a relationship with our 

public sector unions and how does that build a strong 

community? Because obviously as we speak about building a 

brave new economy in the province, we’ve got to make sure, 

Mr. Speaker, we have got to make sure that there’s three or four 

essential things that are really an important part of our 

economic building, so to speak. 

 

We on this side of the Assembly think that Crown corporations 

are pretty darn important. And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan want to own SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI. They 

want to own them because they generate profit for the people 

and generate profit for our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the second thing they also need to do, Mr. Speaker, they 

need to have a good environment. We need to have a good 

environment for investment to occur and to attract industry, 

large corporate industry, and certainly the small- and 

medium-sized businesses. We think that’s really important. 

 

The other component, Mr. Speaker, is dealing with the labour 

issues and a labour force that is necessary to drive that economy 

forward. We think that it’s very, very important in the overall 

scheme of things, Mr. Speaker. And these are some of the 

components and the pillars that we talk about on this side of the 

Assembly when we talk about economic strategies or building 

an important base for the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And one of those pillars, as I mentioned, is Crown corporations 

allowing for investment to happen, utilizing our resource base 

as much as they can. But one important pillar, Mr. Speaker, is 

to make sure we have a good, positive relationship with the 

labour force in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if that labour force consists of people that are organized 

together to work under a public sector bargaining unit, so be it. 

We should respect their right to organize, Mr. Speaker, but we 

should also respect their right to also sit down and negotiate 

with us in good faith, which is not offered in this regard, and I 

think that’s a crying shame. 

So I think overall as you look at some of these challenges, Mr. 

Speaker, this essential services bill that was introduced eight 

years by the Saskatchewan Party government, that here we are 

again, covering up another one of their messes. 

 

And we’ve always maintained, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve always 

maintained as well, that the Saskatchewan Party government 

came along when the province’s finances were really healthy, 

Mr. Speaker, when people were moving to Saskatchewan in 

droves, when the oil and gas sector came into Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP, along with the people of Saskatchewan, rebuilt their 

credibility as a province. They rebuilt our finances, and we took 

this province from the depths of despair and financial ruin 

handed to us by the cousins of the Saskatchewan Party, the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we helped rebuild through a lot of painful 

measures, a lot of painful measures. We rebuilt the credibility 

of Saskatchewan. And just when things were going better, Mr. 

Speaker, things were getting a lot better, along came the 

opportunistic Saskatchewan Party and promised everything 

under the sun, Mr. Speaker, and bang — all of a sudden they 

did become the government. 

 

And the first thing they done under this bright, shining, new 

government, Mr. Speaker, is introduce an ill-advised, an 

ill-thought-out essential services legislation. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, here we are trying to fix this problem, trying to fix this 

issue around how this minister, through his speech, through his 

speech tried to make it really, really a glossy speech and really 

not talking about how much time was wasted, how much legal 

advice was sought, how much money, how much taxpayers’ 

dollars was squandered on this particular exercise. 

 

And again I go back to some of the comments made in the 

minister’s . . . some of the minister’s comments. And the one 

that I find really funny is on page 4, Mr. Speaker, when he says, 

and I quote, “These amendments will enable Saskatchewan 

essential services legislation to address the concerns of the 

Supreme Court decision which recognized that essential 

services must be maintained while respecting workers’ right to 

take job action.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s speech, why didn’t he say 

that from day one? He didn’t want to have to say that, and he 

was actually forced by the Supreme Court of Canada to do this. 

And it took him eight years to realize that he had made a 

mistake, Mr. Speaker. So you chalk this up along with their 

smart meter debacle, Mr. Speaker. You chalk this up with their 

waste of money in the lean program, Mr. Speaker. You can 

chalk this up on the amount of consultants they’re using 

through the Highway ministry, up 250 per cent. And people 

aren’t sure what they do. And you look at the waste of money at 

that. 

 

So this bill, Mr. Speaker . . . Everywhere you go, the 

Saskatchewan Party has made a mess of our financing. And 

that’s why the people of Saskatchewan and we are asking, 

where has all the money gone, Mr. Speaker? That’s one of the 

things we’re asking: where has all the money gone? 

 



October 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7399 

And I identified some of the issues. They had twice the budget 

we had when we were in government, Mr. Speaker, and this 

government performed . . . they underperformed miserably, Mr. 

Speaker. And now as we look at where we’re at now as a 

province, they’ve got twice the amount of money. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what really amazes us is that, as I go back to 

this particular bill, it really epitomizes the failures of the 

Saskatchewan Party to think things through. We knew this was 

going to happen as an NDP caucus, Mr. Speaker. We knew that 

eventually their ineptness would come forward, and now that 

this whole honeymoon phase is over, Mr. Speaker, what we see 

is debt upon debt upon debt, and some of that debt is created by 

mistakes such as the essential services legislation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister’s speech as a result of this bill isn’t worth 

the paper it’s written on, Mr. Speaker, because it’s an admission 

of ineptness, Mr. Speaker. He basically has had to go right back 

and basically apologize, apologize for the fact that he didn’t 

perform very well on this particular file. 

 

Now we sit down and say, okay, the essential services bill 

exercise cost us a lot of money. We want to know: how much is 

that money? How much time and money was wasted on this 

particular exercise, Mr. Speaker? Because I can tell you when 

we sit on this side of the House and my colleague, the member 

from Regina, the Finance critic, he basically indicated that as 

you look at the wasted money, the wasted money, the Bill 183 

is another waste of money. 

 

If you look at the fact that last year the Minister of Finance 

stood in the Assembly and he said, we need to borrow $700 

million, $700 million to balance the books. So they borrowed 

$700 million to balance the books, is what the Minister of 

Finance said. So we all said, how can you call it a balanced 

budget if you had to borrow $700 million? And the minister got 

up and said, it’s okay because it’s for operational debt. That was 

what it was. That was what the discussion was. It’s for 

operational debt, so it’s okay if we borrow for operational. 

We’re not borrowing it for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I believe — I could be mistaken — that we’re 

on Bill 183, The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential 

Services) Amendment Act. I wonder if you could refer to the bill 

occasionally, at least. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the 

connection I’m trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is Bill 183 is a 

huge waste of money. Bill 183 was a huge waste of time. It was 

a huge waste of a lot of quality people’s time, especially in the 

public service union, Mr. Speaker. And it gradually lends itself 

to our argument that the Saskatchewan Party couldn’t manage 

their way out of a wet paper bag when it comes to operating the 

finances of the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Now that I have asked the member to refer to 

the bill, it would be nice to be able to hear his comments. But 

the chatter from both sides prevents that. I recognize the 

member. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s really 

important that you look at the total waste of money that this bill 

. . . Bill 183 is another prime example of how we have wasted 

and squandered opportunity, how a Saskatchewan Party 

government has done so, Mr. Speaker. And I wouldn’t mind if 

the minister would have the courage to say what those eight 

long years actually cost us, from the first time they concocted 

the bill called essential services. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you from history that 

one of the biggest arguments that we had before the election in 

2007 was the issue around this bill, Bill 183, when they talked 

about essential services. And I think the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, who is the Deputy Premier now, he indicated, 

oh, essential services, I don’t think we’ll need that, is what . . . 

somewhere along those lines. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what he 

said. And, Mr. Speaker, at the time he was afraid. He was afraid 

to take a principled stand at the time. 

 

And now he’s sitting there and he’s chatting away, Mr. Speaker, 

because he didn’t have the courage to come out and tell the 

people of Saskatchewan exactly what he thought of essential 

services. Because the moment they were elected, what did they 

do? They bring along essential services, ill thought out, ill 

advised, very expensive, and, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you it 

consumed a lot of time. It destroyed a relationship between 

government and the working class, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And quite frankly, we’ve seen that kind of activity happen 

within the Saskatchewan Party government on a continual basis, 

Mr. Speaker. So whether it’s borrowing $700 million, whether 

it’s depleting the rainy day fund or going through costly 

exercises like Bill 183 or the lean project or the smart meter 

debacle or the travel scouts, Mr. Speaker, we see evidence time 

after time, especially in Bill 183, of how this government and 

this particular minister tried to hide from the facts. But the net 

effect is they have cost us a lot of money, a lot of progress, and 

a lot of good will, because Bill 183 does not do anything to 

build a positive relationship between the public service, public 

sector unions, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan at 

this time represented by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We within the NDP caucus would never waste money and time 

to work with . . . [inaudible] . . . the public service unions, a 

valued part of our equation, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn’t waste 

money on a silly lean exercise, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn’t put 

explosive devices called smart meters on people’s homes, Mr. 

Speaker. We wouldn’t waste over $1 billion on a bypass that 

doesn’t bypass Regina, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn’t squander the 

opportunity attached to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. We wouldn’t overestimate what China bought off in 

potash by over $1 billion dollars as the minister of Industry’s 

done, Mr. Speaker. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t 

saddle future generations with costly schemes like the P3 

[public-private partnership] model, Mr. Speaker . 

 

This is exactly what the Saskatchewan party is doing, Mr. 

Speaker. We asked them very simply, don’t mess it up. And on 

every front, Mr. Speaker, including 183, they have messed 

things up, Mr. Speaker. They have messed things up terribly, 

and we see that trend continue. And it’s important that the 

people of Saskatchewan know, and we’re going to continue 

hammering home the fact that I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have seen this act before. It was called the 1980s. 

And I can tell the people right across the province of 

Saskatchewan, they’re back. They’re back to finish off the job 

and put Saskatchewan in a situation where we cannot continue 



7400 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2015 

to thrive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they have done that by selling off the Crowns, handcuffing 

our public sector unions, Mr. Speaker, and squandering every 

opportunity afforded to them, every opportunity that they have 

inherited, and they will continue squandering them until we 

stop them, Mr. Speaker, which is our prime objective as an 

opposition. And we’ll continue working hard to do what we 

can, to do what we can to stop the Saskatchewan Party from 

their silliness, their ideology. Because, Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Saskatchewan want common sense. They want good use of 

their taxpayers’ dollars, and they don’t want their time wasted. 

And eight years on this bill, Mr. Speaker, is long enough and 

finally . . . The highest injury rates, another prime example. 

And finally six months, six months, Mr. Speaker, before the 

next election they bring this bill forward, and they expect us to 

come along and they want us to automatically, again to 

automatically endorse it. 

 

So the minister’s speech here, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s an 

eight-page speech, Mr. Speaker. We think that this speech 

should be filed, Mr. Speaker, should be filed in a place where 

it’s never seen again, it’s never seen again, Mr. Speaker. 

Because it’s not built on respect. It’s not built on a good history, 

and it’s certainly not built with Saskatchewan people’s interests 

in mind. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to do on Bill 183. I think 

it’s important. And I’m not certain if I’m willing to adjourn 

debate on this particular bill or some of my colleagues want to 

join in. But, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that 

there’s a lot of issues that we want to talk about on this 

particular bill. And I can tell you at the outset, when it comes to 

dealing with our public service employees, that they’re good 

employees. They’re solid employees. And we’re not just going 

to talk the talk like the Saskatchewan Party does, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to bills of this sort. We’re going to make sure we 

afford as much respect and as much confidence as we can into 

the public service. 

 

Unlike the Saskatchewan Party, it’s time that the public service 

sector recognize and realize that the Saskatchewan Party are 

simply there to harm you. And this is a good example of how 

they have flaunted an opportunity to show off their new 

conservative movement, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And in the end, they were wrong. They were 

dead wrong. It cost a lot of money. It cost a lot of patience and 

it cost a lot of heartache right across the public service sector 

union, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think that that’s done 

Saskatchewan people any justice. So on that notion, I move that 

we adjourn debate on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 

(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:15.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Unparliamentary Language 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7375 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7375 

ROUTING PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7375 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7375 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7375 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7375 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7375 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7376 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7376 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7376 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7376 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7376 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 India Supper Night 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7376 

 Foster Families Week 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7377 

 Celebrating the Legacy of Gordon Tootoosis 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7377 

 Police Officer Recognized for Act of Bravery 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7377 

 Habitat for Humanity Dedication Ceremonies in Prince Albert 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7378 

 University of Regina Honours Red Cross 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7378 

 Wholesale Trade Record Set in August  

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7378 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Room Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7378 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7378 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7380 

 Suicide Prevention Measures in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7380 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7381 

 Provision of Child Care Spaces 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7381 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7382 

 Maintenance Agreement for Regina Bypass 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7382 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7382 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7383 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7383 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7384 

 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7385 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7386 

ADJOURNED DEBATES — SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7388 

 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7395 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


