




















































Hansard: March 10, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 10, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6501 

 March 10, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce some fine guests in your gallery this afternoon. They 

are Saskatchewan medical students here on their lobby day. 

They met with a variety of ministers, our government policy 

committee as well as, I believe, with members of the 

opposition. 

 

We had some great conversation, listened to a lot of their ideas 

which were really great to hear. I applaud their career choice 

and their commitment. I was really encouraged by their interest 

in seniors and seniors’ care, which again is a priority of our 

government, and I found a lot of their ideas and preferences and 

where they’d like to see us go is in fact where this government 

has been heading down the last number of years. I’d also like to 

remind them that once they graduate, Saskatchewan offers a 

whole bunch of opportunity here for medical grads from our 

province. I welcome them here today. 

 

With us is Jessica Harris, Larissa Padayachee, Cheyanne Vetter, 

Jillian Kerry, Jaylynn Arcand, Jessica Bruce, Paul Robinson, 

Cheyenne Lawton, Brittany Albrecht, Lindsey Anderson, Ryan 

Cormier, and a special shout-out — the Premier asked me to do 

this — to Dylan Ginter. I’m not sure, there’s an inside joke 

going on there, but a special welcome to Dylan from the 

Premier. So I’d ask all members to welcome these members, 

these medical students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the Student Medical Society of 

Saskatchewan students who are here today. As always, it’s 

always a pleasure to hear from young and inspiring people, their 

ideas about how our health care system could be improved here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

It was heartening to hear that the issues of their, I believe, 400 

or so members, they highlighted that seniors’ care was the top 

issue that came up with these students studying to become 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. We know that it is an issue that is of 

utmost importance to people across Saskatchewan. And we 

enjoyed hearing some of their ideas and look forward to the 

future work that they will continue to do in serving their 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and in serving the people of 

Saskatchewan and ensuring the governments of the day are 

aware of the issues that are important to them and to other 

people. 

 

So with that, I would ask my colleagues to join in welcoming 

these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to give a special introduction to one of the 

guests in the gallery today, Cheyenne Lawton. You know, last 

week we had an alumni of Caswell School, and yet we have 

another alumni of Caswell School, a former student of mine in 

grade 7, 8. Last week we were talking about Mrs. Klopoushak, 

and she would remember Mrs. Klopoushak. So I want to ask all 

members to give her, Cheyenne and all the students a warm 

welcome to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to join in welcoming all the medical students here 

today, but a special introduction to Larissa Padayachee. 

Larissa’s dad, Dr. Veno Padayachee, and her mom, Dr. Diane 

Naidu, doctored in Estevan for many, many years. And I would 

just like to welcome her again to her legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of education. We know that 

education is one of the most vital services this government 

provides to its citizens and that this government has failed to 

deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary resources 

to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence; and that this 

government has failed to deliver a real plan to close the 

Aboriginal education gap, support English as an additional 

language, and support community schools and their 

communities and students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we must build the best education 

system for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 

reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, that builds on strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



6502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 

Avenue when they failed to adequately plan a safe flow of 

traffic and they inundated Dewdney Avenue, an important 

residential artery, with heavy-haul truck traffic that’s dangerous 

and damaging property, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and in 

other parts of the North and it is getting worse. Shelter is a basic 

need for everyone. But under this government, it’s getting 

harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 

especially families, seniors, women and children who face 

abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 

rising level of poverty and the skyrocketing home ownership 

costs. This petition is signed by many, many, and supported by 

hundreds and hundreds of people. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 

government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac La 

Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 

in La Ronge, in the Lac La Ronge area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of La 

Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present a petition today in support of better seniors’ care. Those 

who have signed the petition point out that many seniors are 

having to wait in hospital beds due to the lack of spaces in care 

facilities. They talk about how the Provincial Auditor found that 

many seniors’ care facilities do not have high enough standards 

of care, that many families have spoken out about staff 

shortages resulting in a lack of staff to help their loved ones 

with basic needs while in care facilities. The petitioners point 

out that this government has removed the regulations requiring 

a minimum standard of care for seniors, and they point to 

chronic understaffing in seniors’ care facilities that results in 

unanswered calls for help, seniors being left unattended on 

toilets, and infrequent bathing for residents as well. I’d like to 

read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: to cause the provincial government 

to immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care, including creating more spaces 

and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher standards of 

care in public facilities, private facilities, and home care; 

ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care 

facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 

standards of care; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Saskatoon, 

Regina, Cupar, Strasbourg among other places. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of infrastructure accountability. 

The petitioners point out that the residents and taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have a right to know how their money is spent. 

They point out that it’s in the best interest of the residents and 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to receive the best value for their tax 

dollars in the government procurement of Crown infrastructure, 

goods or services on their behalf, and they also point out that 

cost savings or value for taxpayers’ money has not been 

realized or has been the subject of audit and dispute in other 

jurisdictions in public-private partnership projects. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately pass The Public-Private Partnership 

Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from Air 

Ronge and La Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

present a petition from residents of Saskatchewan who are upset 

about the privatization in the correctional service. There’s a 

number of jobs that are going to be changed. Basically the 

government wants to privatize the food services, and they 

haven’t been listening to the workers in this process. They 

haven’t been dealing with the people who are involved. We 

know the costs will escalate. I don’t think that the government 

understands how important it is for all of these people to be part 

of the correctional system and part of the staffing. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the government to 

cancel its privatization in corrections and young offender 

facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6503 

This is signed by people from Prince Albert and area. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise to present a 

petition for real action on climate change. The individuals who 

have signed this petition want to bring to the Assembly’s 

attention a number of things. I’ll highlight a couple of them. 

First of all Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow to 

74 million megatonnes as reported by Environment Canada and 

show no signs of decreasing; and further, that the Saskatchewan 

government has failed to tackle climate change, reduce 

emissions to the province’s own targets, or put in a real plan to 

protect the natural environment. And so in the prayer that reads 

as follows, the individuals are respectfully requesting: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a 

real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 

budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 

gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Regina, 

Moose Jaw, Cupar, and La Ronge. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Talented Saskatchewan Curlers 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

recognize a number of remarkable Saskatchewan curlers. On 

Sunday, Steve Laycock’s rink from the Nutana Curling Club 

represented Team Saskatchewan in the bronze medal game at 

the 2015 Tim Hortons Brier in Calgary. They stole 2 in the 

extra end to win the bronze against Brad Gushue’s 

Newfoundland squad. 

 

Laycock and his team — made up of third, Kirk Muyres; 

second, Colton Flasch; lead, Dallan Muyres; alternate, Gerry 

Adam; and coach, Lyle Muyres — played great curling all week 

in one of the toughest fields in recent memory. Three different 

teams at this year’s Brier had previously won an Olympic gold 

medal, and this bronze medal came after a long week and an 

impressive 7 and 4 record against some of the best teams on the 

planet. 

 

But the gold medal team had a Saskatchewan connection too, 

Mr. Speaker. Team Canada was led to its gold medal finish by 

Moose Jaw native, Pat Simmons, and that team certainly 

deserves our recognition as well. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 

Saskatchewan players on their strong finish at this year’s Brier 

and wish them all the best as they prepare for the remainder of 

this year’s curling season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Business Women of Moose Jaw Host 

Sparkle & Shine Event 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 

the member from Moose Jaw North and myself had the 

opportunity to attend the second annual Business Women of 

Moose Jaw Sparkle & Shine event. 

 

The Sparkle & Shine highlighted the amazing contribution of 

Moose Jaw business women through the PRISM [perseverance, 

role model, influential, successful, mentor] Awards ceremony. 

These awards represent the five outstanding qualities that are 

displayed by each award recipient. These qualities are 

perseverance, role model, influence, successful, and mentor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s award winners were Elsye Reader for 

the Community Volunteer Award; Dayne Smith-Short for the 

Leadership and Management Award; Viola Reaman for the 

Humanities, Technology and Environment Award; Barb 

Jackman for the Sport, Culture and Recreation Award; Tammy 

Franks for the Rural Community Contribution Award; 

MacKenzie Johnson for the Young Woman of Promise Award; 

and Sharon Watson for the Lifetime Achievement Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event was also a fundraiser for the Moose Jaw 

transition housing, with the goal of raising $50,000. Even 

before the event began this year, they had raised more than last 

year’s $26,000 and are well on their way to reaching their goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the PRISM Awards recipients and the Business Women of 

Moose Jaw for a very successful event. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Regina Sexual Assault Centre 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize an important milestone for an organization in 

our city. I’m speaking of the Regina Sexual Assault Centre. 

 

For 40 years the Regina Sexual Assault Centre has provided 

supports and services for the survivors of sexual assault. 

Through their counselling services, 24-hour sexual assault line, 

and interactive education programs for children, the Regina 

Sexual Assault Centre’s work is making a significant difference 

in the lives of men, women, and children from all parts of our 

city and indeed throughout the region. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, these services are needed now 

more than ever. Too many people in our province live with the 

damage caused by sexual assault and childhood sexual abuse. 

Saskatchewan itself has the highest rate of police-reported 

sexual assaults in the country, nearly double the national 

average, and the number of assaults reported by Aboriginal 

women are even more troubling. 

 

I know all members will join me in recognizing the 40th 

anniversary of the Regina Sexual Assault Centre and in deeply 



6504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

thanking the staff for all the great work that they do. I also ask 

that members join me in calling for an end to sexual violence 

everywhere. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Monday I 

was honoured to attend an event at Campbell Collegiate here in 

Regina which kicked off provincial Impaired Driving 

Awareness Week and the SADD [Students Against Drinking 

and Driving] speakers tour. 

 

Organized by students against drunk driving, or SADD, the 

message that guest speaker Greg Drew shared with the crowd of 

high school students wasn’t about drinking or drugs. Dangerous 

and reckless driving can take a life just as easily. Greg spoke 

from the heart about his experience with the death of his 

17-year-old son, Jay. Jay missed a turn while speeding, causing 

him to hit a tree, ending his life. Mr. Speaker, no parent or 

family should ever have to go through this. 

 

I am proud that there are students in our schools who realize 

that this is a problem that is preventable. The speakers tour will 

take Greg’s message to nine other schools in our province, 

including Estevan, Oxbow, Whitewood, Kamsack, Norquay, 

Naicam, Humboldt, Colonsay, and Rosthern. 

 

Working across chapters and partnering with SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], SADD is creating the 

day where we will not need speakers like Greg to share his 

story. Mr. Speaker, we are all committed to that goal. Mr. 

Speaker, SGI provides roughly $102,000 annually in support of 

SADD activities across our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, safe and sober driving should be second nature 

but, until that day, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 

join me in thanking Greg as well as the SADD chapter at 

Campbell Collegiate and all other Saskatchewan SADD 

chapters for their hard work on impaired and distracted driving. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

The Athletics Commission of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 

government officially proclaimed The Athletics Commission Act 

establishing the Athletics Commission of Saskatchewan. This 

commission will sanction professional combative sporting 

events in this province, including mixed martial arts and 

boxing. The responsibilities of the commission include 

approving event permits, ensuring the promoters and 

competitors have the proper licences, and that qualified event 

rules are adhered to. 

 

The commission will also ensure that qualified medical staff, 

referees, judges, and timekeepers are hired for events, and that 

athletes receive appropriate medical exams before and after 

competitions. In early April, the commission will be ready to 

accept applications for promoter and contestant licences and 

event permits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the creation of the commission will enable 

combative sporting events to be held across the province with 

consistent rules, regulations, and processes to ensure lower 

levels of risks for athletes. Saskatchewan will now also be able 

to attract and host amateur and professional boxing and MMA 

[mixed martial arts] events. Such events will help to further 

cement Saskatchewan’s reputation as a great place to host major 

national and international events. People and businesses in our 

province will benefit from economic spinoffs associated with 

the hosting of these events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the proclamation of The Athletics 

Commission Act, combative sports athletes can look forward to 

increased safety while taking part in regulated competitions in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Doctors in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased to rise in the House today to announce that there are 20 

new doctors practising in Saskatchewan, thanks to the 

Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving the 

lives of rural Saskatchewan residents. That is why we have 

added more doctors in Leader, Kamsack, Davidson, Arcola, 

Porcupine Plain, and Fort Qu’Appelle. We’ve also added 

additional doctors in Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, 

Lloydminster, Estevan, and Prince Albert to service our 

growing cities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician 

practice assessment] is a Saskatchewan program that assesses 

international medical graduates on their medical education and 

clinical ability to ensure they are appropriate for our province. 

Since this program began in 2011, more than 160 new family 

physicians have completed the assessment and have fulfilled or 

are fulfilling their commitment to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also making progress in keeping our locally 

trained doctors in the province. Over the past two years, our 

retention rate of family medicine graduates has increased from 

58 per cent to 75 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the increase of 

international doctors and the retention of our locally trained 

doctors will ensure better care and easier access for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming the 20 new 

international doctors to our great province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Environmental Inspections 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are beginning 

to see a familiar pattern from the Leader of the Opposition and 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6505 

all of his members. Yesterday the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana said, and I quote, “. . . officials within the Ministry of 

Environment have told me they’re no longer allowed to do vital 

inspections because the Sask Party government doesn’t consider 

it to be essential travel.” 

 

The member’s assertion yesterday that vital environmental 

inspections have been stopped is just plain wrong. The 

member’s assertion that the directive was given to the staff to 

cease travel within the province related to inspections and 

audits, wrong again. The Minister of Environment has not 

issued any directive to employees to reduce the number of 

environmental inspections or audits because of fiscal or travel 

restraints.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we take the protection of the Saskatchewan people 

and its environment seriously. That includes ensuring that any 

vital environmental inspections, assessments, or audits are 

completed in a timely manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time that we’ve had to correct 

the record regarding the statements of members opposite. This 

clearly reflects on their leadership. It has been 731 days since 

the member from Massey Place was named leader, yet the 

people of Saskatchewan have yet to see a shred of policy from 

his party. We have consistently seen the same dishonest tactics 

that were so soundly rejected in the 20 election. Mr. Speaker, 

they may have a different leader over there, but it’s the same 

old NDP [New Democratic Party]. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Ambulance Service Fees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government has long known 

about concerns related to the cost of ambulances in our 

province. Here’s some quotes, Mr. Speaker, from this 

government’s very own reports over the years: “I have patients 

with ambulance costs in the 3,000 to $6,000 range. Costs are 

huge.” “The extra expense of the ambulance ride, $2,000 in my 

case, for people living in rural areas may cause people not to 

seek treatment at all. This inequality needs to be fixed.” “The 

patient responsibility for ambulance costs is consistently the 

most common concern reported to the Ministry of Health and 

the health regions regarding EMS.” 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, instead of using the massive 

revenues it has collected over the last years to fix our 

ambulance system, this government, you know what they chose 

to do? They ramped up fees, Mr. Speaker, having Saskatchewan 

patients pay even more. My question to the Premier: is he 

willing to admit that that was a mistake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of 

the Opposition for his question, thank him for raising this issue. 

He’s right. This is an issue that we’ve talked about as MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], we’ve discussed when 

we were in opposition, discussed in government, even at budget 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to note for the record and for members of the House that 

the ambulance services in the province are subsidized to the 

tune of 71 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The government has an 

increased investment in ambulance services in the province I 

think by 50 per cent. Since we were elected, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve sought to improve ambulatory care through STARS 

[Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] so that communities in 

rural and more remote parts of the province could not just have 

an ambulance service, we could quite literally have an 

emergency room land on their doorstep and provide those 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Rural 

and Remote Health have indicated that on a constant basis this 

government is reviewing issues, reviewing things like 

ambulance fees that are paid by people. Mr. Speaker, we know 

there are programs for seniors, programs for those who need 

help but, as we’ve seen, some might fall through the cracks. 

And as we’ve done in health care and in, really, across 

government, we are constantly reviewing for improvement, Mr. 

Speaker, so we can best deliver services to the people of the 

province within a balanced budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you want to know how seriously 

this government takes this issue? The member from Wood 

River just said, what would Murdoch do? Talk about living in 

the past, Mr. Speaker. Talk about dismissing the concerns that 

families bring to this legislature. It’s absolutely ridiculous, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know what this government’s increased? The fees, the fees 

that seniors and young families are forced to pay. Last week, 

Mr. Speaker, we heard from Catherine Olund. We heard about 

Leandra Bucsis-Gunn. Two tragic cases, Mr. Speaker, where 

the ambulance charges were horrendously high for these 

families. Since these stories were in the news, other families 

have contacted us, Mr. Speaker, have shared their stories about 

the costs that they are experiencing. And far too often these 

families say that the huge costs related to ambulance rides, Mr. 

Speaker, cause them to think twice about whether or not to call 

an ambulance. 

 

And just like Sara Bucsis-Gunn said, she told the story of how 

she and her husband, in an emergency with their little daughter 

who was turning blue, Mr. Speaker, that they would drive her, 

race her to the ER [emergency room] because of the huge fees 

that they were facing and the huge interest charges that were 

being piled on top of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is for this Premier, and not to be making these 

excuses and pretending that they didn’t increase fees for 

residents, but when will this Premier admit that it was a mistake 

to jack up the fees? And when can we expect him to start to fix 

this problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

is increasingly angry about all of the issues he presents before 

the Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing I think to have 

some passion about the issues. I think we all do, but I want the 



6506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

member to be fair as well to not just members on his side of the 

House but members on our side of the House. Just because we 

outline the record of the government when it comes to 

ambulance services — which has been to increase ambulance 

funding by 50 per cent, which has been to bring STARS to the 

province, something we’d asked the previous government to do 

and they never did, Mr. Speaker — I would ask him as he’s 

going to do, to say yes, he’d like the government to do more. 

And there certainly are gaps that we need to look at, and we are, 

but, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he should assign some sort of ill 

motive to the answers that we give when we provide the record 

of the government, Mr. Speaker.  

 

I could tell the members opposite that there was a promise made 

by the New Democrats in 1999, and some of those members ran 

under this particular promise with respect to ambulance care. I 

think the member for Lakeview did, and the member for 

Athabasca who is chirping from his seat did. And here’s what 

the quote was from their platform with respect to ambulances. 

The NDP promised publicly funded ambulance services: 

 

We’ll introduce a single reasonable fee for ambulance 

services. And we’ll begin to reduce ambulance charges 

throughout the province, starting by eliminating all fees 

for transfers between health (care) institutions. 

 

That’s why members opposite have very little credibility 

frankly when they bring these issues because their talk is one 

thing but their actions were another, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know we must continue to improve not just in ambulance 

care but in health care across the board. That’s the record of this 

government since 2007. That’s what we’ll continue to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s so bizarre that this Premier 

doesn’t want to stand by his record. It’s a record that increased 

ambulance fees for Saskatchewan people. This Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, wants to talk about things that happened when I was in 

high school. This is the government that has had record 

revenues, Mr. Speaker, at its disposal, and they have failed to 

deliver for Saskatchewan people. 

 

According to this government’s very own documents, patients 

are billed 32 per cent of all ambulance billings. Private 

insurance providers are billed for an additional 5 per cent of 

ambulance billings. So nearly 40 per cent of all ambulance bills, 

Mr. Speaker, patients cover while the provincial government 

picks up roughly 25 per cent of the ambulance bills. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Now patients and their families spent about $15 million straight 

out of their pockets, Mr. Speaker, every year to cover essential 

and vital ambulance services. Now that’s a lot of money, Mr. 

Speaker, for families who have to pay out of their pocket, but 

it’s not a lot of money for this government who’s had record 

revenues and extra billions and billions every year and a 

government. Mr. Speaker, that has spent hundreds of millions 

of dollars on wasteful pet projects, Mr. Speaker, and 

consultants. That has been their record. 

My question to the Premier: will he at least recognize that the 

cost of ambulance fees are a huge burden to families, to 

patients, and will he commit to fix this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, not only did the NDP make 

the promise that I just read in 1999, not only did they make that 

promise and not keep the promise, they raised ambulance fees 

in 2006, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record on his side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wants to talk about revenues to 

the government. He wants to talk about what this particular side 

of the House has decided to do with revenues to the 

government. In health care, Mr. Speaker, here is what we’ve 

done. There are 2,600 more nurses working of every 

designation in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what we 

did with the money. There are more than 400 more doctors 

practising, another 20 confirmed by the member for Wood 

River today. That’s what we did with the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did we do with revenue? We opened up 13 brand new 

long-term care facilities in this province, the Moose Jaw 

Hospital, the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. Countless 

maintenance and capital expenditures across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, that is what this side of the House did for health care. 

 

And what’s the result? We took the longest wait-lists for 

surgeries in the nation, Mr. Speaker, in the dominion of Canada 

under those members, under the member for Lakeview when he 

was the Health minister, and we’ve made them the shortest in 

the nation. That’s what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I wish, I wish that this Premier 

showed even half the concern and enthusiasm he’s showing 

right now for the situations of Leandra, for the situations of 

Sara, for the situations, Mr. Speaker, of Dave who came to the 

legislature. That would be leadership, Mr. Speaker, that speaks 

to the health concerns for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Right here, Mr. Speaker, in the government’s documents from 

December 2014, increased ambulance fees under new 

provincial ambulance fee guidelines. It is this government’s 

record during record revenues that they have piled more and 

more of a financial burden on Saskatchewan’s patients. Thirty 

per cent of ambulance bills, Mr. Speaker, are there when there 

are transfers, medically necessary transfers, between facilities. 

So that is roughly $4.5 million out of the pockets of patients and 

families each and every year. But let’s look, Mr. Speaker, where 

this government has been more than happy to have spent about 

that same amount of money — $4.5 million. 

 

We saw them give a $5 million gift to the American company 

that’s given us the fire-prone, dud smart meters on the sides of 

homes. They had five million bucks for that, Mr. Speaker. We 

see this Premier, he gave $3 million to an American lobbyist. I 

think that money could have been used at home a lot better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see they have spent $4 million, $4 million simply on the 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6507 

travel and accommodation for John Black, Mr. Speaker. 

Absolutely there is no excuse for that when we see these fees, 

when we see these increases on Saskatchewan people. My 

question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why these misplaced 

priorities? Why is he so willing to spend money on American 

corporation, an American lobbyist, or an American consultant? 

Will he at least agree to get rid of the charges for inter-facility 

transfers for patients here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, where did the money go? Mr. 

Speaker, the money went to hundreds more people working on 

the front lines in terms of seniors care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Where did the money go? The money went to 

historic, record income tax reduction for low- to middle-income 

people, including seniors, Mr. Speaker, including seniors, 

especially in that low-income range, who’ve gone from paying 

whatever they were paying under those members opposite when 

they were in government to paying well, virtually, virtually 

little. I think there’s been thousands, 60,000 or so dropped off 

the tax roll completely in the province of Saskatchewan. It 

might be higher than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has taken proceeds, taken 

revenues for the last seven years, and we’ve paid off the 

operating debt of this province, Mr. Speaker — debt that was 

not being supported by members opposite, debt for which there 

was not a timeline to pay off — by 44 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

This government has taken infrastructure investment records of 

the members opposite, which was $3 billion in their last seven 

years, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind the members that their 

words and actions can also be interpreted as unparliamentary, 

and I would caution them not to do so. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in their last seven years of 

office, they spent $3 billion in infrastructure and health care and 

education and highways, leaving behind a massive 

infrastructure deficit including, in education alone, of $1.2 

billion. Where has the revenue gone to this province as the 

result of a growing economy and decisions taken by this 

government? We’ve doubled that, Mr. Speaker, to $6 billion. 

That’s gone into highways and schools and hospitals, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And if that member opposite wants to debate here or in the 

months ahead or in a general election campaign, what’s 

happened to the growth in this province, what’s happened to the 

revenue in the province, we will welcome that debate today and 

every day on into the future, Mr. Speaker, because the record of 

this government stands for itself, and we’ll be happy to put it 

before the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a simple question to the Premier 

with a yes or no answer. That is all that is needed. Will the 

Premier scrap the inter-facility transfer fees for Saskatchewan 

patients? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, ambulance service is a 

priority to this government. It’s very important to the people of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. And as the Premier pointed out, this 

government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I remind the members to please tone it down 

so that we can hear both the question and the response. I 

recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, we know that the regions do work with individuals 

when there is hardships paying bills. They do work with 

payment plans. Many of them do alter the payments. They do 

reduce the cost. They do look at altering the interest fees, Mr. 

Speaker. As the Minister of Health spoke about last week, he’s 

been in direct contact with the regions and reviewing their 

interest charging practices through those, those regions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we have to focus as well on priorities, Mr. Speaker. And 

admittedly some other provinces in the Dominion of Canada 

have different ambulance rates. They have lower ambulance 

rates, Mr. Speaker. But they also don’t have the amount of 

coverage of their health care budget that this province does, 

whether it comes to seniors’ issues; whether it comes to 

pharmaceuticals, as has been pointed out here before; 

anti-nausea cancer drugs, many provinces don’t cover, Mr. 

Speaker. We cover many of those. We have to trade and 

balance things off with ambulances fees as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Seniors’ Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Medical students from the University of 

Saskatchewan have travelled to the legislature today to raise 

concerns about seniors’ care in our province. They want it 

fixed. Dr. Chris Simpson, the president of the Canadian 

Medical Association says, “I think that if we can fix seniors’ 

care, we will go a long way toward fixing the health care 

system in this country.” 

 

To the minister: will he finally admit that seniors’ care needs to 

fixed, and when can we get, expect this government to finally 

get serious about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think all that anybody 

in this Assembly has to do, and the public has to do, is look at 

this government’s record when it comes to health, especially 

seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, initiatives that we do have in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at seniors’ initiatives that we 

do have under this government, many were non-existent under 

the members opposite. And when they were existent under the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, they were sorely neglected. 

 



6508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, we look at issues around health care. We look at 
issues around seniors, specifically around health care and the 
need of seniors for health care. Who’s the largest users of the 
health care system, Mr. Speaker? Seniors. 
 
The members opposite want to talk about increases. Let’s talk 
about increases to the medical training seats that many of the 
guests in the House today will appreciate — from 60 to 100, 
Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, a college that was in risk of 
failing, now admittedly going through issues from time to time, 
but doubling the seats and seeing a lot more graduates coming 
out of there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We look at a system of medical training in the province where 
the residency positions have been doubled, and a lot of those in 
rural areas, Mr. Speaker. And I’m looking forward to more 
questions to bring up more of the advancements this 
government has in health care and seniors initiatives. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it might be helpful if the 
minister actually listened to the question. He clearly needs to 
listen to the independent Provincial Ombudsman who says that 
her office has received many complaints from families about 
the quality of seniors’ care. The Ombudsman says those 
complaints include “. . . poor quality of care, low 
staff-to-resident ratios, a poor organizational culture within 
facilities, lack of communications with families and residents, 
and a long-term care system lacking in accountability.” Not a 
proud record to stand on, Mr. Speaker.  
 
In a letter to the Health minister about those concerns, the 
Ombudsman said, “. . . I can advise you that they come from all 
over the province . . .” 
 
Will the minister finally agree to restore minimum regulated 
care standards and implement safe staffing levels to ensure an 
appropriate quality of care for seniors in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the member 
opposite that the Ombudsman report has been initiated by this 
government, recognizing that there is an issue in long-term care 
and seniors’ care in certain facilities. But for them to 
categorically somehow insinuate that long-term care and 
seniors’ care in this province is in a catastrophic situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is far from the truth. 
 
We know that hundreds and hundreds and hundreds, thousands 
of seniors in this province have great care. They can’t imagine 
being in any other facilities than the one they’re in. Recognizing 
challenges in some facilities, Mr. Speaker, is what this 
government has done. We have addressed, started to address, 
some of the issues where there’s been concerns arise when it 
comes to staffing: hundreds of more health care workers in 
integrated long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, 750 additional 
workers, as well as additional funds on top of what’s already 
allocated to those institutions and facilities. 
 

When there was a noted issue in long-term care, the Urgent 
Issues Action Fund was put into place for those short-term 
initiatives as well as an ongoing $3.7 million fund increase to 
the health budget on an annual basis to address those issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this minister needs to remember 
that it was the Health minister’s chief of staff said the 
guidelines that are in place right now are extremely general, that 
this government put in place, those extremely general 
guidelines are clearly not working. Story after story, Mr. 
Speaker, that come forward. 
 
Chronic short-staffing is hurting the quality of seniors’ care. We 
need regulated minimum care standards and we need regulated 
safe staffing levels. That’s how we fix the quality of seniors’ 
care in our province, and that’s how we build much needed 
accountability into our seniors’ care system. To the minister: 
why is this government so stubborn on this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we talk about minimum 
care standards, and this government acknowledges that we do 
need definite standards in these long-term care facilities for 
seniors. We look at the old bill under the NDP, Bill 606, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 606 under the NDP, a very small document. These 
minimum care standards, these guidelines we have in the 
province today, Mr. Speaker, 193 pages of general guidelines, 
Mr. Speaker. How general can you be in 193 pages? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have quote after quote in my notes here, Mr. 
Speaker, of individuals specifying that staffing levels aren’t 
indicative particularly of the level of care that’s needed in these 
different facilities, Mr. Speaker. We have to be flexible with the 
different facilities, with the needs of certain patients, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would ask the question opposite, talking about minimum care 
standards, where are the minimum care standards in the 19 
facilities they closed, Mr. Speaker? Nineteen facilities, 1,200 
beds, hundreds of people put out of work, Mr. Speaker. They 
drove hundreds of doctors, hundreds of nurses out of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’re increasing the complement of 
health care workers, and we’re rebuilding these facilities and 
increasing beds. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Margaret Warholm, Art Healey, Savannah 
Gunderson, Emma Krushelnicki, Jessie Sellwood, Lorne 
Rowell, Margaret Froess, Adrian Seaborne, Fern Chingos — 
theirs are just some of the heartbreaking stories we’ve heard 
from families that have come forward and spoken out publicly. 
And the Ombudsman has heard from many others from all over 
the province. 
 
To the minister: how many more families need to come forward 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6509 

before this government takes its head out of the sand and finally 

do something meaningful about seniors’ care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again long-term care, 

seniors’ care in this province is a priority of this government. 

And it’s heartbreaking to hear the names of the individuals that 

we have learned over the past number of weeks and months that 

have suffered horrendous treatment in some of these facilities, 

Mr. Speaker. But again, to point out, to categorically, you 

know, insinuate that these facilities are all bad, that this is a 

widespread issue, Mr. Speaker, is not honest. 

 

We know that many of these facilities offer great care. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, just this last Friday we had the opportunity to 

open the new facility in Radville, a lean-designed facility with 

seniors in there, smiles on their faces, great food, great 

treatment, a primary health clinic attached, Mr. Speaker, 

comprehensive long-term care and in-depth care for these 

seniors right in that facility. 

 

[14:15] 

 

So we know there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, and again 

our hearts go out to these individuals and other individuals that 

do run into situations, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve asked for 

the Ombudsman to do this comprehensive report, to come back 

with recommendations, as well as institute the Urgent Issues 

Fund, as well as increasing funding for long-term care through 

the ongoing budget, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue 

doing that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Surface Rights Legislation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for several months farmers and 

ranchers have been waiting to see what this government has up 

its sleeve for a new surface rights Act. The existing legislation 

is outdated, and it doesn’t reflect modern realities. That’s why I 

was surprised yesterday when the government withdrew its bill 

from the order paper. 

 

To the minister: why did this government withdraw The Surface 

Rights Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, oil and gas development 

today in our province is a very complex business, with many, 

many possible concerns which makes every well in 

Saskatchewan unique. You have to balance off all of those 

interests between single well, multi-well pads, horizontal versus 

a vertical well, landowner issues around whether the land is 

owned by an individual or whether it is government-owned land 

or whether it’s rented land or whether it’s land that is farmed in 

a joint venture or custom farming operations. 

 

There are all kinds of different very complex issues around this, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s why after consultation with the many, 

many groups here in Saskatchewan — including the stock 

growers, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], landowner groups, oil companies small and 

large — we’ve decided to take another look at this legislation 

and pulled it at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the bill was drafted. It was ready 

to go. The opposition, we’ve been listening to agricultural 

producers and the serious concerns they have. They have 

concerns about the $1,000 cap on damages being way too low. 

There’s no increases in rent when additional well sites are 

established, and landowners want a guarantee that their land 

will be restored once the well sites and pipelines are shut down. 

 

This isn’t new, Mr. Speaker. There are serious issues for 

farmers and ranchers and rural residents, and they deserve a 

surface rights Act that addresses these concerns. To the 

Agriculture minister: did he advocate for these rural residents, 

and why isn’t this government delivering a bill to address their 

very real concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we’re trying to 

balance the interests of the industry, the oil and gas industry, 

against landowners. It’s a very, very complex situation. 

 

And I find it a little surprising that the member opposite would 

want to try and pit farmers and ranchers against this 

government. I don’t know whether the members noticed or not, 

but we represent every rural seat in Saskatchewan. And the 

reason is, and the reason is really quite simple, Madam 

Member. I’ll tell you the reason: because we understand 

agriculture. We understand the oil and gas sector. We don’t pit 

one against the other like you guys used to do. You weren’t in 

favour of either the oil industry or agriculture, and everybody in 

this province knows it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the actions of actions of that 

government and the members when they were in government — 

closing hospitals, ripping up GRIP [gross revenue insurance 

program] contracts — they will never see another seat in NDP 

Saskatchewan under their leadership. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 619 through 665. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 619 through 665. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 



6510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 163 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate for Bill No. 163, The Education 

Amendment Act once again here today. 

 

I’ve already spoken to this in this Assembly here. Certainly 

there’s important matters for us to follow up with the Education 

minister in committee. We look forward to that opportunity. 

 

Certainly we know the record of this government when it comes 

to education has been one of not listening to the education 

sector, not listening to school boards, not listening to teachers, 

and failing to get the job done where it matters for 

Saskatchewan students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where this government has acted, they’ve done so unilaterally. 

They’ve done so without understanding the consequences of 

their decisions, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve rammed forward with 

simplistic agenda items, Mr. Speaker, like monkeying around 

with the calendar and the school day, Mr. Speaker, all of which 

have had significant negative consequences. We’re hopeful, Mr. 

Speaker, that finally this government will make education a 

priority, but until such time, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud to 

continue to make education a priority and make sure we stand 

up for students across the province. 

 

So as I say, I’ve put some comments onto the record in this 

Assembly already. I do look forward to following up for some 

clarity with the minister. We’ll certainly continue to welcome 

submissions from the education sector and parents and students 

from across Saskatchewan, and we’ll certainly be bringing 

forward those concerns and those questions on this file. 

 

But you know, when you look at the unprecedented economic 

boom that this government has been able to preside over, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s an unacceptable failure to not get the job done for 

students and the next generation, Mr. Speaker, to disrespect the 

important work of the fine teachers in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re willing, any day of the week, to stand up 

for students, teachers, and education in our province. 

 

So with that being said, I move Bill No. 163, The Education 

Amendment Act . . . or I don’t move. I look forward to following 

up with The Education Amendment Act in committee. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 163, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2014, be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014 be 

moved to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 

Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into the discussion on Bill No. 164, The Health Information 

Protection Amendment Act, 2014. Mr. Speaker, this particular 

bill came out of actually some work that was done when a 

working group in 2012 was struck in order to take a look at 

health information privacy, Mr. Speaker. And it was spurred on 

by an issue in 2011 actually, Mr. Speaker, where many peoples’ 

health information were found, many boxes of medical files 

were found in a dumpster, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s a very serious issue, Mr. Speaker, the disposal of 

medical records. And who keeps track of those medical records, 

and who’s responsible for them is an incredibly important issue. 

I know that the then Information and Privacy Commissioner, 

Gary Dickson, had an investigator go and try to track down 

where those came from. It was a huge issue, huge issue, our 

privacy, Mr. Speaker, and so the government put together a 

working group that came up with 11 different 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. They came up with the Health 

Records Protection Report in April of 2014. 

 

I’ll talk a little bit about the 11 recommendations in this report. 

I understand the government has pursued four of those 

recommendations with legislative changes. And there are 11 

recommendations and, from what I’ve been told by 

stakeholders, that there could have been other legislative 

amendments coming out of this as well, and they’ve only 

chosen to pursue four. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will talk a little about the 11 recommendations. 

I’d just like to put them on the record for those who might be 

interested. So again, I just want to let you know, let people 

know that this committee, the health records protection working 

group, was established in September 2012 by the Minister of 

Health for the purpose of examining a couple of issues here, 

Mr. Speaker, and to report their recommendations to the deputy 

minister of Health. 

 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6511 

They were to examine the mechanisms for enforcement of 

trustee responsibilities to protect patient records as required 

under The Health Information Protection Act. And the working 

group was to review not only the current enforcement 

mechanisms but also to comment on specific changes which 

may be desired to clarify trustee responsibilities or to assist in 

achieving trustee compliance with HIPA [The Health 

Information Protection Act]. And they were also charged with 

specific changes which will prevent abandonment of patient 

records, thereby protecting patient confidentiality and reducing 

events requiring need for enforcement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the recommendations, there are 11 of them 

included. Again, I will read them all into the record. I think that 

they’re all important. And I’ve been told that, by stakeholders 

who participated in the working group, that these could have 

been some legislative changes rather than just the four. 

 

So recommendation 1 was: 

 

Strict liability offence. The Working Group recommended 

that a strict liability offence provision should be added to 

HIPA specifically aimed at addressing abandoned records. 

This will forego the need to establish evidence of specific 

intent. When records are found abandoned, once the 

abandonment is established and the trustee determined, 

that trustee will have to show he/she took all reasonable 

steps to prevent the abandonment from occurring. 

 

Recommendation no. 2: 

 

Individual offence for willful disclosure of personal health 

information. The Working Group recommended that 

provisions be added to make it clear that the offence 

provisions for intentional/willful disclosure of personal 

health information apply not only to trustees, but to 

individuals who are employees of trustees. 

 

The third recommendation: 

 

Proposed snooping offence. The Working Group 

recommended the addition of a specific offence for 

inappropriate use of personal health information by 

employees of a trustee who access information without a 

need for that information (snooping). 

 

4. Gaps in the definition of trustee for physician practice 

arrangements. The Working Group recommended that the 

Government take one of two actions to address some 

forms of physician clinic practice arrangements currently 

being utilized, which HIPA does not contemplate. The 

Working Group concluded that the definition of trustee 

under the Act does not apply to these arrangements and 

recommended: 

 

(a) Regulations be passed under HIPA to make the clinic 

operators that control patient records trustees; or 

 

(b) the practice arrangements be precluded by: 

 

(i) making legislative changes to HIPA to make the 

physician responsible for the records notwithstanding 

the arrangements; 

(ii) making legislative changes to The Medical 

Professions Act, 1981 clearly precluding these types 

of operating structures. 

 

The fifth recommendation was: 

 

Proclaim sections of HIPA. The Working Group 

recommended that subsections 17(1), and subsections 

18(2) and (4) of HIPA be proclaimed into force. These 

provisions require trustees to have record 

retention/destruction policies and written contracts with 

information management service providers. 

 

The sixth recommendation: 

 

Take control of abandoned records. The Working Group 

recommended that a system be put in place to quickly 

respond to a discovery of abandoned records and to take 

control of the records. A new provision should be added to 

HIPA authorizing the Minister of Health to appoint a 

person to take over control and custody of the records 

where an active trustee abandons records. 

 

Recommendation no. 7: 

 

Single repository for abandoned records. The Working 

Group recommended that there should be one facility 

where abandoned records associated with an unknown or 

unavailable trustee are taken. The Working Group 

determined that the operator of the existing electronic 

health record system, eHealth Saskatchewan, would be the 

most appropriate party to be that repository. 

 

8. Enact regulations governing designated archives. The 

Working Group recommended that Government pass the 

remaining regulations contemplated by section 63(1)(k) of 

HIPA to complete the responsibilities of designated 

archives for dealing with records transferred by trustees. 

 

9. Designated archives required to accept records. The 

Working Group recommended at least one of the 

designated archives should be required to accept records 

offered by trustees. Ideally, that archive might be eHealth 

Saskatchewan, however, it is possible to designate that 

particular designated archives be required to accept 

records from particular trustees. 

 

The 10th recommendation: 

 

Private record storage solutions be available. The Working 

Group recommended Government consider permitting 

private records storage and processing companies with 

sound privacy practices to be considered for listing in the 

regulations as designated archives to provide for more 

options for transferring patient records. 

 

11. Designated archive storage costs borne by trustees. 

The Working Group recommended that costs associated 

with transferring and storing with the designated archives 

be the responsibility of the trustee. A system should be 

developed to ensure that the funds required covering the 

costs of the designated archive services are paid by the 

trustee in some fashion. The Working Group is not 



6512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

unanimous on how this would be accomplished, but the 

discussion noted the following: 

 

(a) For trustees that are regulated by a professional 

association, the professional association could levy 

annual fees from the members and set up a fund to cover 

the costs associated with record storage where records 

are abandoned by their members. 

 

(b) Trustees licensed to carry on their health operations 

could be required to demonstrate that they have an 

arrangement or plan to deal with patient records on 

winding up operations. Additional licensing fees could 

be assessed for the purposes of establishing a fund that 

the licensing body can access in the event records of an 

operator are abandoned. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are the 11 recommendations by the 

working group, or the health records protection working group, 

Mr. Speaker, that was established in September 2012. And as I 

said, there are only four of those recommendations that are 

being addressed today in legislative changes, and I understand 

that more of them could have been entrenched in legislation. I 

also understand that there was some strong or plenty of 

discussion on the issue of trustee, Mr. Speaker, which the 

definition does not in fact change in this particular Act. 

 

I’d like to talk a little bit about the four recommendations that 

are in, that did make it into the legislation, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’ll look to the minister’s second reading speech here. One of 

them which was, one of the recommendations is that HIPA 

include a strict liability offence. The minister points out in his 

speech that: 

 

 . . . if records are found abandoned or unsecured, the 

trustee responsible for the records will need to show that 

they took all reasonable steps to prevent their 

abandonment. [And the minister says] This change means 

there won’t be a need to prove that the trustee intended to 

abandon the records. 

 

The next amendment makes it an individual offence for 

wilful disclosure of personal information [as the minister 

says in the second reading speech, and he points out that] 

This makes it clear that HIPA offences for intentional 

disclosure of personal health information apply not . . . 

[just] to trustees but to the individuals who are in the 

employment of trustees, or employees of trustees. 

 

The third amendment is a snooping offence. A specific 

offence will be established for inappropriate use of 

personal health information by employees who access 

information without a need for that information. 

 

And the final amendment includes taking control of 

abandoned or unsecured records. A specific provision [the 

minister has said in his second reading speech] will be 

added to HIPA for a system to be put in place to quickly 

respond to a discovery of abandoned or unsecured records 

and to take control of those records. 

 

It’s good to see some of these changes, Mr. Speaker, but the 

minister goes on to say that: 

 

In addition to these amendments . . . [the ministry] will 

examine the other recommendations made by the group, 

including creating a single repository for abandoned 

records, making private record storage solutions available, 

and clarifying the definition of trustee for physician 

practice arrangements. 

 

I’m glad that the ministry is going to continue to look at those 

recommendations, but we have a bill before us today, Mr. 

Speaker, and this legislative session we actually have previous 

bills that have been before us that have come back to the 

legislature for amendments because there have been errors or 

things not included, Mr. Speaker. So I do have some concerns 

that of these 11 recommendations, they’ve only chosen to put 

four into legislation, but they’re going to continue to look, Mr. 

Speaker. I would prefer that they would have given all these 

recommendations a good, hard look before they drafted the 

legislation, so this bill isn’t before us again being amended in a 

year from now potentially or in the not-too-distant future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know we will have an opportunity, I look forward to the 

opportunity to sit down with the Health minister in committee 

and discuss The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 

2014. Our privacy when it comes to health records, people here 

in Saskatchewan take that very seriously and want to ensure 

that their medical information doesn’t get into anybody else’s 

hands except those who need it to provide us the medical 

services we need, Mr. Speaker. So I look forward to the 

opportunity to discuss this with the minister further in 

committee. 

 

With that, I would like to conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 164, The Health 

Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that the Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 

Amendment Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6513 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 2014. I guess 

looking at the bill itself, it’s an amendment to The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act. The bill is going to allow individuals in 

our province to purchase alcohol from other provinces to bring 

to Saskatchewan for personal use. It’s not for retail sale. It’s for 

personal use. They talk about . . . One part of the bill, and I 

don’t want to get into, Mr. Speaker, I know many people have 

wine and they like to have it with their meals, and there’s many 

different varieties of wine out there that people enjoy. And they 

enjoy with their meal and stuff, and I guess the opportunity to 

go out and for personal use get different wines out there, there’s 

an opportunity. 

 

Whether it’s been requested by individuals, residents of the 

province, there must be a reason why. But at the end of the day, 

we’ll get into the details of certain sections of the bill and, you 

know, where government’s going with this. And there must be a 

reason why, obviously, whether government . . . It was 

suggestion. People lobbied, individuals saying it’s time. 

 

And I think it makes it very clear that it’s for personal use. It’s 

not for retail sale or for someone to resale, go out and get . . . 

This bill is coming forward and the amendment is to clearly do 

that. 

 

Section 3 of the bill will allow Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming to enter into agreements with other provinces, territory, 

and Canada, to regulate for going to other provinces and 

territories and wherever for personal use, as it says. So they go 

into that section. And I want to make it clear. But having said 

that, again it’s opportunity for individuals who want to do that. 

 

This may take some time, and we’ll see where we go with it, 

whether it’s in committee, questions, and you know, the good 

work has been done with consulting residents and the industry. 

Hopefully those that are in the industry have had their say and 

the government has listened to them, taken their input and their 

suggestions, ideas. I don’t know if this will impact some of the 

retail sales or individuals or liquor stores and how that’s going 

to affect it. But this is giving individuals an opportunity to go 

forward. 

 

Section 4 of the bill . . . [inaudible] . . . and it talks about the 

alcohol from other provinces. But again we talk about only for 

personal use. When you get into that section of it, and I know 

we’ll have opportunity to ask questions in committee and to 

find out some details, talk to individuals and maybe some of 

them that are in the sale of alcohol, to make sure how will this 

impact them. Maybe there’s good ideas, suggestions. I know 

some might be opposed to it; some are happy with it. We’ll see 

where that goes, and I think government has an obligation to 

reach out and find out. 

 

Section 5, the bill gives cabinet the power to regulate certain 

areas. And you know, another, they’re going to look at the 

purchase of alcohol from other provinces. Which provinces can 

we go to? If it’s negotiated, the government will negotiate. It 

may not be that every province will. In some provinces there 

might be a reason why they don’t enter into an agreement. But 

we’ll have to look at that and in committee finding out. And I 

don’t know if this will be something that they’ll move forward 

on with one or two provinces, one of the territories. We’ll have 

to see and, you know, monitor it as a process goes forward and 

see where they’re going with it. 

 

I guess the other thing is, will they look at . . . And hopefully 

we can find out the kinds of alcohol that can be purchased. Is it 

going to be wines? Is it going to be, you know, beer, hard 

liquor? We’re not sure, you know. So in committee we can ask 

that. But obviously the regulations will give the cabinet the 

powers to determine that. 

 

The other area they will look at again, purchasing and bringing 

over alcohol. And I guess they’ll look at the volume that 

individuals can purchase for personal use in Saskatchewan. 

They’ll have to regulate the volume on how much, you know, at 

one time can they haul, you know, bring into Saskatchewan for 

personal use. Those are questions that regulations will have to 

be worked out. 

 

And I know at the end of the day, government will and I hope 

will make sure they’re consulting with the residents, consulting 

with the industry, those professionals out there that run it as, 

you know, it’s their business, get the advice from the 

government liquor store and to make sure that Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming has the input and the information that it 

needed to move forward on this. 

 

Again I talked about the, you know, out of province where they 

could purchase them. And it’s going to be about the volume, 

and they’ll determine those regulations. And I’m hoping that it 

won’t just be, go ahead. They’ll do a little bit of research 

finding out what’s the best way to do this. And you know, we 

want to make sure we get it right. We don’t want to have 

problems where we come back later on saying, well now we 

have to amend it. Maybe this will give cabinet the power to 

regulate the rules and how people can use it. But having said 

that, you know, they’ll also have those provisions, I imagine, in 

there for any other conditions deemed necessary that will come 

up that cause, I guess, problems when it comes to regulating 

and enforcing personal use of alcohol. 

 

So at this point, you know, the way it’s going, I know that 

we’re going to get a lot of time in committee to look at the bill 

and ask questions. And you know, we’ll be able to ask the 

minister and the ministry officials some of the details. And 

hopefully we can find out what some of the regulations will be, 

and maybe we’ll get a chance to look at those prior to them 

introducing the regulations when the bill’s passed. And later on, 

we see how sometimes they’ll come forward with regulations, 

hopefully some of that information. And the minister will 

clarify what so far regulations will come forward when they 

introduce the bill, and what they’re looking at. And just in that 

conversation in committee, that can be asked and clarified. So 



6514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

at this point, you know, Mr. Speaker, I have no further 

comments on this bill and will wait to ask questions in 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Crown and Central Agencies that Bill No. 

165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 2014 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, 2014 be committed to the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 166 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 

Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

speak to Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act. Just 

a little bit of background here, Mr. Speaker. This bill repeals the 

current local elections Act and replaces it with a whole new 

one. There were many, many . . . So it’s not an amending Act. It 

is a whole new Act unto itself, Mr. Speaker, and it came out of 

some work the minister points out in his second reading speech 

that back in — what year was it, Mr. Speaker? — in 2005 there 

was a brand new municipalities Act that was passed, and it 

replaced The Rural Municipality Act and The Urban 

Municipality Act, and at that time the minister points out that 

“. . . the provisions governing rural elections needed a new 

home and were tacked on to the end of The Local Government 

Election Act [but] without any attempted integration with those 

provisions governing urban elections.” 

 

So the minister points out: “. . . there were many repetitive 

provisions, and slight variations existed between urban and 

rural provisions as a result of history rather than policy.” And 

what the minister has undertaken here is to entirely rewrite the 

Act and update the language and, he says, simplify it. The urban 

and rural provisions are now housed in the same sections and 

combined when there is the opportunity to do that. And he 

points out that: 

 

Differences between urban and rural provisions are 

retained when it makes sense and is requested by the 

sector, such as for voter eligibility and determining in 

which division or ward a voter should vote. Staggered 

elections are also retained for rural municipalities so that 

elections for even-numbered RM [rural municipality] . . . 

are followed by elections for odd-numbered divisions, and 

reeve, two years later. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister points out that: 

 

. . . [Many] provisions that currently only apply to urban 

municipalities are extended to RMs for consistency and 

convenience. Many of the amendments to this Act since 

2005 have had the objective of providing RMs the same 

options as urban municipalities when running elections. 

Now most provisions apply to all municipalities, providing 

more options for rural voters such as polls in hospitals and 

personal care facilities for residents or curbside voting for 

voters who cannot enter an inaccessible polling station. 

 

The minister mentions all of this in his second reading speech. 

 

[As well] . . . in urban municipalities [he points out that] 

candidates may now submit nomination papers by mail or 

fax, and the returning officer may directly authorize 

advance polls rather than the council, whereas before these 

options were only available to rural municipalities. 

 

So there are also a number of wording changes that the minister 

argues: 

 

. . . ensure clarity where issues have been encountered in 

previous elections. [In terms of those clarifications] . . . 

provisions for eligibility to vote and the division in which 

to vote for rural municipalities have been simplified and 

clarified. Other clarifications include a six-month deadline 

for councils to fill vacancies by holding a by-election 

unless the vacancy occurs in the same year as a general 

election. 

 

Some of the other amendments also include, the minister points 

out in his second reading speech, some minor policy changes, 

he says, to improve the democracy and integrity of the electoral 

process. And it clarifies procedures for determining the 

sufficiency of petitions for referenda and plebiscites and 

protects the neutrality of municipal employees during a 

referendum while allowing designated spokespersons to 

promote a particular position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will remove eligibility requirements for 

advanced polls. So voters won’t any longer need to meet certain 

requirements for voting ahead of election day, but may vote for 

reasons of personal preference and convenience. 

 

This bill . . . [also introduces] residency exceptions for 

students and members of the Canadian Armed Forces. 

Because students and members of the Armed Forces are 

likely to temporarily live in a place other than their usual 

place of residence, they may vote in the municipality in 

which they reside regardless of how long they have lived 

there. [And these] . . . exceptions and advanced voting are 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6515 

consistent with the election Act, 2014 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important when we talk about encouraging 

and supporting people to vote, any time we have legislation 

before us talking about elections and how we get people out to 

vote, it’s important to remember that we can look to voter 

turnout here in Saskatchewan and across the country for that 

matter, Mr. Speaker. And it’s imperative that we remember that 

the goal should be to ensure that people have the opportunity 

and the right to cast a ballot in an election. And in 2012, 

actually in the government’s election Act, they changed the 

rules around provincial elections and tightened up some of the 

rules around voter ID [identification]. So they were in essence 

looking for a solution to a problem that didn’t exist, Mr. 

Speaker, at that particular time. 

 

I know in my own constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale and in 

constituencies across the province, voter ID and coming up with 

the appropriate ID can sometimes be a challenge for people, 

particularly people living in poverty, Mr. Speaker. There are 

many people who don’t have the kinds of ID that you and I 

would have, Mr. Speaker, for many different reasons. If you 

live in a foster family, Mr. Speaker, and don’t have your birth 

parents, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t have the name of your birth 

father, it can be difficult to get a birth certificate. There’s all 

kinds of things that make it very difficult for people to have and 

produce ID. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Sutherland talks about Project 

ID which was a very good but a very short project in terms of 

trying to get ID into the hands of folks who didn’t have 

identification. Great project, and there are other organizations 

that continue to work at ensuring that people have proper 

identification, but it continues to be a problem for many people. 

And ensuring that citizens have the opportunity to cast a ballot 

in elections should be I think all our responsibility here in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. And there are many barriers that are in 

front of people who live in different circumstances that you and 

I might not have first-hand experience with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with respect to Bill No. 166, The Local Government 

Election Act, I know that there are other of my colleagues who 

would like to speak to this and we’ll have an opportunity in 

committee to further discuss this bill, so with that I would like 

to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 

Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

speak to Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. This is the companion 

bill for the previous bill, Bill No. 166, that I just spoke to. 

 

This bill, Mr. Speaker, is a simple bill and the amendments only 

change the name of the Act in the section number being referred 

to. The references remain accurate. My comments on the 

previous bill stand for this and with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 

Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion of Bill No. 168, An Act 

respecting Government Relations. The minister has put some 

comments onto the record. I’ve reviewed those comments. I’ve 

reviewed some of the substance of the bill, but certainly we’re 

going to require greater clarity from this minister through the 

committee process, and we look forward to that. 

 

I know that some of the measures brought forward simply are 

sold by the minister as a consolidation of some of the general 

authorities that stem from four different Acts that are currently 

in place. Those would be The Northern Affairs Act, The Rural 

Development Act, The Rural Affairs Act, The Urban Affairs Act. 

So I know that’s one of the pieces that are there, as well as 

some dispute resolution mechanisms that the minister is 

bringing forward that he’s suggested are new. 

 

He’s also suggested that the municipalities have supported the 

changes that he’s bringing forward. I do look forward to 

follow-up and direct input from certainly SARM and SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and New 

North on these matters. 

 

Certainly I want to just simply recognize the leaders from 

across Saskatchewan who serve communities small and large, 

rural and urban, Mr. Speaker. These are leaders that take on 

important responsibilities within their respective communities 

and municipalities. They do so certainly not for big pay, Mr. 

Speaker, and I know they certainly engage in a lot of activities 

that are often thankless. But I want to take this opportunity to 

thank all the exceptional rural and urban municipal leaders 



6516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

We know SARM is meeting here this week and engaged in 

dialogue that is important to rural municipalities, and it’s 

important for government to be listening to municipalities and 

municipal leaders from across Saskatchewan. I always find 

sitting down with municipal leaders, whether that be rural or 

urban, whether that be a small town or a village or one of our 

larger cities, Mr. Speaker, is a time where you have an 

incredibly constructive dialogue with people that care deeply 

about their community and engage in improving their 

community in very common sense ways. 

 

We know that when it comes to areas like municipal 

infrastructure, this government just hasn’t been the partner that 

they should be, Mr. Speaker, to municipalities across 

Saskatchewan. Certainly Saskatchewan people see the evidence 

of that with the property tax increases that they face, Mr. 

Speaker. The reality is we’re growing as a province and this is 

something that should be supported by this government because 

there’s certainly inordinate impacts back to our municipalities. 

 

It’s critical, Mr. Speaker, that we urge this government towards 

establishing long-term dedicated infrastructure funding that’s 

predictable for our municipalities. In absence of that right now, 

we see the pressures and challenges that municipalities are 

facing, Mr. Speaker. We see the impact, the cost impacts back 

on to homeowners and to businesses by way of their property 

taxes. 

 

We have a government right now, Mr. Speaker, that is actually 

looking at reneging on a very important promise that was made 

to municipalities across Saskatchewan when it comes to the 

operating grant. That’s something that’s important for 

communities to plan with. And it’s a big concern to many, Mr. 

Speaker, that instead of better supporting and working with our 

municipalities, rural and urban and northern, Mr. Speaker, we 

see a government that’s actually looking at breaking its 

commitments and promises that they’ve made in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Another couple of pieces that certainly we want to get a full 

understanding of, Mr. Speaker, by working with municipal 

partners and leaders across Saskatchewan, is what the impact of 

this bill is on the role of engagement in northern affairs, Mr. 

Speaker. It seems that this government, by way of changes here, 

have really stepped away from any responsibility or being an 

active partner in working together with those northern 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know when you look at our vast North, our beautiful North, 

our North that’s rich with resources and rich with great people, 

Mr. Speaker, we see diverse communities. We see communities 

that have tremendous opportunity, and we see significant 

challenges as well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s certainly a concern for 

the opposition, the New Democrats, if this government is 

further stepping away from being an active partner here. This 

being evidenced in the legislation. 

 

Certainly we can also judge a government by their actions, and 

certainly this government has not been a good faith partner to 

work together with northern communities, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

I find it unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, that we have a sitting 

Premier that hasn’t taken the time in his two terms to engage 

throughout northern Saskatchewan with meetings. Because we 

have a lot of wealth in the North by way of our resources but, 

Mr. Speaker, we have tons of wealth in our North by way of the 

people and by way of the opportunities, and government should 

be an active partner on these fronts. 

 

We know this government as well has collapsed their 

responsibility of First Nations and Métis relations and have 

placed that within Government Relations, Mr. Speaker. It seems 

again to be a minimization of that very important role that a 

government should have with First Nations and Métis people in 

this province, recognizing the critical opportunities and the 

significant challenges that we face, Mr. Speaker. And I note it’s 

different than places like Alberta where the new Premier has 

taken on that responsibility himself, I believe suggesting that 

there’s some recognition of how important that relationship and 

that partnership is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that being said, you know, we’ll continue to listen and 

work with municipal leaders from across Saskatchewan of our 

rural municipalities, of our urban municipalities, whether it be 

villages, towns, and cities, Mr. Speaker. We’ll hold this 

government accountable and hopefully hold them to their 

promise when it comes to the commitment to the municipal 

revenue sharing, the operating grant that’s so important to those 

municipalities. It’s a real concern for municipalities and 

certainly for property taxpayers that this government’s actively 

looking at tearing those dollars back and breaking that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And members opposite can shout from their seats, Mr. Speaker. 

What would be preferable is that they could provide a firm 

commitment back to municipal leaders in this province and to 

property taxpayers and families who deserve nothing less, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I say, it’s too bad at a time that this 

government is actively pulling away its commitments from 

municipalities that we don’t see them actually expanding that 

role of laying out plans of how this government can be a better 

partner as it relates to infrastructure. 

 

But we’ll have time to follow up with the minister to have a full 

understanding of his consultations to date, the analysis that 

they’ve had, Mr. Speaker, and provide clarity on the legislation. 

We don’t have any side-by-side analysis at this point in time, 

Mr. Speaker, but we’ll certainly be following up in due course. 

 

So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, we’ll engage and can look 

forward to engaging in committee as we move forward on Bill 

No. 168, An Act respecting Government Relations. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 168, The 

Government Relations Administration Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6517 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 

Administration Act be committed to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 170 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 

Safety Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Interesting bill to join debate on today, Bill No. 170, The Fire 

Safety Act. This was of course brought forward to the House by 

the Minister for Government Relations in his capacity as having 

responsibility for fire safety in the province and what used to be 

the old public safety function of government, but also the office 

of the fire commissioner and indeed working with the different 

partners that present when it comes to the question of fire safety 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s an interesting bill, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve certainly got far 

too much evidence in front of us in terms of what can happen 

when fire safety isn’t correctly secured, when we don’t get it 

right and the terrible consequences in terms of lives and 

property that can be exacted but particularly in lives, Mr. 

Speaker, and well-being when fire safety isn’t properly looked 

to. 

 

In terms of the legislation that is brought forward here, we’re 

not entirely certain that some of the more outstanding problems 

that are there as we look across the province to assess whether 

or not fire safety is there for every community, that every 

citizen should have that basic expectation of what happens in 

the event of a fire. 

 

In terms of again the legislation itself, on the whole, sort of a 

refresh, the last major rebooting of the legislation taking place 

in 1992 but the current Act seeking to replace that or to repeal 

The Fire Prevention Act and then replace it as such. 

 

In terms of the innovations we see in the Act itself, there’s 

section 11 that allows for the creation of fire chiefs in provincial 

and regional parks, a provision that did not exist in the previous 

Act, and section 51(e) of the bill which gives cabinet many 

powers to create regulations and provide exemptions for almost 

any provision of the Act, stating specifically section (e), 

exempting on terms or conditions “. . . any land, premises, 

person or thing or any class of land, premises, person or thing 

from all or any part of this Act or the regulations.” 

 

So that’s the legislation that has been . . . or what’s new and 

what’s different in this Act, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the minister 

had a lot more to say than that in his speech but in terms of the 

brass tacks of the legislation, those are them — allowing for the 

creation of fire chiefs in provincial and regional parks or the 

carving out for cabinet a great deal of residual power as regards 

the conduct of fire safety activities in this province. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of again what we’ve seen in 

recent days and indeed in recent years as regards the conduct of 

fire safety activities in this province, given the role and the 

authority that the provincial government has laid out in 

something like Bill 170 here today, you’d think there’d be more 

to be undertaken at least as regards to the legislation than what 

we have here under consideration. But that is not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. And we think of the situation as regards the provision 

of fire safety on First Nations and again the kind of complexity 

that that can kick up as regards jurisdiction and the need to 

partner in this province. But certainly what should be foremost 

is the safety of citizens and, as we’ve seen too tragically, Mr. 

Speaker, the safety of our children. 

 

And I think of the work of a fellow by the name of Ken Gaddie 

that I had the honour of knowing, and just to put on the record, 

Ken Gaddie was a 30-plus-year member of the Regina Fire 

Department, retired as a fire captain and passed away at the 

beginning of February, all too soon, at the age of 62, Mr. 

Speaker. And in his retirement, Ken Gaddie and a fellow 

firefighter friend of his and partner, a fellow by the name of 

Laurie Gervais, were seeking to provide better fire safety 

education prevention work in conjunction with First Nations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Ken Gaddie was not just a 30-plus-year member of the 

Regina fire department, but he was also a proud member of the 

Cowessess First Nation. And when he, as somebody with a 

tremendous amount of expertise, looked around the province, 

and he and his partner, Laurie Gervais, when they looked 

around the province, they saw that need on First Nations, Mr. 

Speaker, in particular, as something that needs address, needs 

redress in this province. 

 

We’ve seen too much talk and too much walking away when it 

comes to the work of partnership, the work of sincere 

consultation, but the work of providing something which is a 

basic expectation and should be a basic expectation of citizens 

right across this province as regards fire safety. 

 

And it’s I think a capstone on a life and a career that was 

dedicated to the service of others that in retirement Ken Gaddie 

was seeking to provide that better way forward where it was 

most needed, by his account and his assessment, in conjunction 

with First Nations and partnership with First Nations. 

 

And you know, it was a tremendous occasion when the 

community came out to honour Ken and his family and friends. 

The honour guard that was provided by the Regina fire 

department and many of Ken’s former co-workers and people 

that had had their lives impacted in a really positive way by 

Ken Gaddie came out to pay salute to their fallen comrade. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that bond that grows up — and you see 

this not just with the professional firefighters but certainly also 

with volunteer firefighters and people that work on the question 

of better safety and fire prevention and fire safety — you see 



6518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

that bond that is pretty inspiring develop between these people 

as they work in such dangerous conditions for the service of the 

broader community. 

 

And it’s that spirit that I don’t know if we’ve done justice to, 

that approach to public safety, that drive for looking out for our 

neighbours. I don’t know if that is fully given its due by this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I think about the work that Ken and Laurie were 

doing in terms of trying to again turn their two lifetimes of 

expertise as professional firefighters working with on-reserve 

populations to try and improve the whole question of fire safety, 

that’s to me what I think of in terms of what should be driving 

us forward, is that look to the well-being of our neighbours, that 

look to the well-being of the broader community. And you see 

that certainly in the question of the professional firefighters. 

You see that with the volunteer firefighters around this 

province, Mr. Speaker. You see that with the chiefs of the 

professional firefighter association departments, and you 

certainly see that with the chiefs of the volunteer fire 

departments. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that this legislation 

straightens out questions as to what is the inventory as we look 

across the province of today. What are the gaps that exist as 

regards to the securing that basic level of fire safety and fire 

prevention work in this province? What are those? Where does 

the system fall down? And again, Mr. Speaker, the consequence 

to not being able to answer that question properly and 

appropriately is of course one of life and death. And that’s not 

. . . Sadly that’s too accurate a statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as regards to the whole question of what this does to reset 

the relationship, and certainly the minister had made reference 

to the whole question, and I quote from December 2nd, 2014 

Hansard, where he said: 

 

Whether volunteer or paid departments or shared services 

and mutual aid agreements with other municipalities and 

First Nations, the new Act ensures these are 

accommodated and not limited in any way by [the] 

legislation. In fact, the new Act will better facilitate 

inclusion of First Nations, regional entities, and private 

industry in fire service agreements and arrangements to 

encourage area and intercommunity co-operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, would that be so. Would that be so in terms 

of providing and having that peace of mind for citizens across 

this province that fire safety is assured, that, yes, these are still 

emergency situations, Mr. Speaker, and there’s certainly no 

guarantee of everything turning out all right. But in terms of 

response times, in terms of the provision of basic service, Mr. 

Speaker, there is still . . . We find too much left to chance as 

regards to what are the gaps in the provision of this basic 

fundamental service across this province. 

 

And you know, where we see a need for more partnership, for 

cooler heads to prevail, we don’t see that at present, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess that is my hope is that, as we go forward 

with legislation like this, that that’s, you know, those that do the 

work, be they volunteer or professional, those that do the work 

of fire prevention and fighting fires, fire safety, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And might I say, I know this in spades in terms of the fire hall 

that is located in my home neighbourhood and the great work 

that is done. Again, Mr. Speaker, I always think that the thing 

that’s remarkable about firefighters is you’ve got, you know, 

usually when you’ve got an emergency situation, folks are 

running away from it. These are people that are running towards 

it, running into the danger to see if there’s something that they 

can do. 

 

So in terms of the legislative regime that we’re bringing about, 

Mr. Speaker, does that support the individuals that put 

themselves on the line like that? Does that support a structure 

that makes sure that our citizens, in terms of the basic 

expectation they should have of fire safety being secured across 

this province, does this legislation improve that circumstance or 

does it not? And these are the questions that I think we should 

be asking ourselves as we evaluate this legislation. 

 

And as I get back again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of there’s been 

some good work done in recent history in terms of reaching 

across jurisdiction to address the needs of citizens first and 

asking the questions about jurisdiction second, and would but 

that that is the mindset that is brought to this whole question. 

But we see some very great causes for concern on that in a 

situation where the need for partnership and for open and 

honest communication is even greater. We see a lot of cause for 

concern in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again it’s not the various politicians that pay the price for 

that. It’s people that pay the price, people that pay the price in 

terms of life, in terms of loved ones, and in terms of danger and 

property loss, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as regards to this legislation, I don’t know that there’s much 

to argue against the trend we’ve seen of late, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of not making certain that that basic level of security that 

citizens in this province should be able to expect, I don’t know 

that this legislation raises that bar in a way that it should be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

It’s not to take away from the good work of our volunteers and 

our professional firefighters or the folks in the fire 

commissioner’s office or the people, the hard-working civil 

servants that work in conjunction on all of these kind of 

questions. But rather, Mr. Speaker, it’s to remember the work of 

people like Ken Gaddie and Laurie Gervais and the far too 

many people that we’ve lost because of an inadequate response, 

Mr. Speaker, some of them children that should have their 

whole lives in front of them but have been laid to rest. These 

are the things that should be motivating us as we look to this 

legislation and see if there isn’t a new path forward, a better 

path forward that secures that for all people. 

 

I know that we’ve got some interesting questions that we’ll 

certainly want addressed as this bill approaches committee, Mr. 

Speaker. But for the time being, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6519 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 172 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 

Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in Bill 172, 

The Naturopathic Medicine Act, to get in and have I guess a 

little bit of a discussion. And seeing from the minister’s 

comments, it’s modernizing the Act and the legislation to 

modernize from the year, whether there was amendments were 

made or not. But what it refers to is modernizing the Act itself 

and bring it into today’s, I guess, legislation, the way that we 

look at legislation that’s past and modernize, and that’s what 

this bill is doing. 

 

It also takes the name of the association that represents 

naturopathic doctors. It actually refers it to the college now, and 

does that name change and gives that body I guess . . . We’ll see 

what kind of duties they do under their own organization. And 

something like the college of physicians, they set up their own 

organization, and I guess kind of have a process to oversee the 

practice. 

 

But at the end of the day, it’s to make sure that we have 

individuals who go through the process and seek that it’s with 

the public, that they have access to that. And it kind of refers to, 

you know, giving the protection to the public, and the minister’s 

comments talked about that. But I know for myself and 

members on this side, in committee sometimes you get to flesh 

out some of the questions you want. But looking at the 

minister’s comments, he referred to a few points on the Act, 

like I said, and I have referred to that. 

 

So at this point, I have no further comments on this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 172. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 172, the naturopathic Act. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 174 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 

Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to join debate on Bill No. 174 and 175. Of course 174 is 

setting the table, and then there’ll be consequential amendments 

coming in 175 shortly thereafter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It’s an interesting piece of legislation and again, as is the case 

with a great number of the pieces of legislation that come 

forward in this House, it deals with the question of regulating a 

professional body. Now as regards the regulation of a 

professional body, you know, you want to make sure that that 

leans towards self-regulation. It would seem that after a sort of 

interesting start, or sort of an inflammatory start to the whole 

question, Mr. Speaker, that the government settled down and 

did some actual consultation with the sector, education being 

very much a partnership in this province. And when it’s worked 

best for kids is when those traditions have been respected, that 

partnership has been respected. 

 

But with the bills, Mr. Speaker, 174 of course creating an 

arm’s-length regulatory board that will oversee teacher 

discipline and certification where the board will be made up of 

seven teachers and two members of the public, the provincial 

government having the power to appoint three teachers and two 

members of the government, the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] having the ability to appoint three teachers, and the 

League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents being able to appoint one teacher, LEADS of 

course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again in terms of the whole question of self-regulation and 

making sure that the questions of appropriate credentials being 

retained and that problems that arise being dealt with in a timely 

and transparent and just manner, and not just having due 

process being done, but having it seen to be done, this 

legislation, we’ve got some cautious optimism in terms of both 

the scope and the ability of the legislation to get that done. 

 

Now we’ll be interested to see how much this particular 

legislation costs. When it was introduced by the minister, he 

had estimated that there’d be about a $2 million price tag 

attached to this. The question remains, will that be borne by 

teachers themselves or how does that cost get paid? Of course 

it’s certainly a concern that that question hasn’t been 

satisfactorily answered at this point, but we are hopeful that the 

government again will not be looking for another way to tax 

teachers on their time and on their resources, Mr. Speaker, but 

instead will look for a way to address this concern. 

 

We’re interested that Alberta and Manitoba have similar 

processes, and we’ll be interested to gain further clarification in 

terms of what lessons there are to be learned from those 

jurisdictions. We take again some encouragement from the fact 

that from different of the sector partners, there is a measured 

support being stated. We think that that’s obviously important. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’d be interesting to see how this goes 

ahead in terms of what happens when a complaint’s being 

brought forward, be those complaints put forward by students 

or parents or teachers or school administrators, in terms of 

complaints being directed to the board, how those are 

adjudicated, the obligations for different of the partners around 

reporting. We’ve had a case in the news just recently, Mr. 

Speaker, where there is an incident that went unreported, and 

then when there was a change in personnel in the particular 

school division, then that change was reported. We think that 

again it’s good to clarify the responsibilities as regards what 



6520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

should be getting reported. 

 

In terms of the way that the arms-length nature of this works 

out, again it got off to a fairly rocky start, Mr. Speaker, but we 

do take some encouragement from the work that has been done 

since, so we’ll be interested to see how that shakes out. And in 

terms of the overall relationship with the government, the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association, the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation, and groups like LEADS, we’ll be 

watching closely to see how this legislation continues to 

progress. 

 

But certainly we’ll have more questions come the committee 

stage hearing of this bill, and I know others of my colleagues 

are interested to take their place. Some already have, but I think 

some may still be yet to come. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move to adjourn debate on The Registered Teachers Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 175 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 

Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Bill 175, the consequential amendments, certainly I’ve just 

discussed the bill that has rendered necessary the consequential 

amendments. 

 

Just to briefly go through of those, certain of them deal with 

rendering bilingual the changes necessary. But again as is often 

the case, consequential amendments are just that. The main 

event is Bill No. 174, and this is but an afterthought or the 

rippling forth of legislative change that is brought, that is made 

necessary by Bill 174. Certainly we’ll be dealing with these as a 

package, and I’d anticipate that we can see them going to the 

committee in the not-too-distant future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And in that regard, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

175, An Act to make consequential amendments resulting from 

the enactment of The Registered Teachers Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 176 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the discussion on Bill No. 176, The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2014. This Act, Mr. Speaker, is doing a 

couple of things here. And these amendments have come out of 

some concerns that businesses raised with the government this 

summer around vehicle impoundment and not having the 

capacity to appeal that, so a vehicle impoundment if you were 

arrested, or if your vehicle was impounded under section 280 of 

The Traffic Safety Act. 

 

Section 280 under The Traffic Safety Act, Mr. Speaker, is a 

piece, a part of the Act that allows police officers the 

opportunity to act without a warrant when they see things that 

they need to respond to. I just want to tell you a little bit about 

what section 280 does, Mr. Speaker. And in my conversations 

with police officers a couple of years ago when we had the 

Traffic Safety Committee, examining the many causes of traffic 

deaths in Saskatchewan — whether it’s speeding, impaired 

driving, use of cellphones, intersections, those kinds of things 

— in leading up to that, I had the opportunity to, prior to that 

process I had the opportunity to speak to several police officers 

who expressed their concerns at that time that 280 was going to 

be taken out or obliterated at one point. But it has remained in. 

But there are people who’ve expressed some concerns with it. 

 

280, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read it into the record, of the 

original Act: 

 

When vehicle may be seized and impounded 

 

(1) In this section, “impounded vehicle” means a vehicle 

or a combination of vehicles seized and impounded 

pursuant to subsection (2). 

 

(2) Without a warrant, a peace officer may seize and 

impound a vehicle or a combination of vehicles: 

 

(a) if that vehicle or combination of vehicles is being 

operated in the prescribed manner; or 

 

(b) if that vehicle or combination of vehicles is parked 

on a highway at a place, or in a manner, that constitutes 

a hazard to other users of the highway. 

 

(3) An impounded vehicle must remain impounded for the 

prescribed period. 

 

(4) A peace officer may retain the impounded vehicle in 

the peace officer’s possession or direct a garage keeper to 

impound the vehicle. 

 

(5) A garage keeper who impounds a vehicle pursuant to 

this section is deemed to have a lien on the vehicle 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6521 

pursuant to section 3 of The Commercial Liens Act with 

respect to vehicle for all unpaid amounts prescribed fees, 

costs and charges relating to the impoundment of that 

vehicle, and that Act applies, with any necessary 

modification, to the enforcement and realization of that 

lien. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I think you get the picture here, Mr. Speaker. It provides peace 

officers the opportunity to seize vehicles when they see 

dangerous things happening, Mr. Speaker. An Act to end the 

dangerous behaviour. 

 

The bill, Bill No. 176 amending the Act, will be adding into this 

particular bill, which is added after section 280.1 in the section. 

 

(a) ‘commercial vehicle’ means a prescribed vehicle; 

 

(b) ‘driver’ means the operator of a commercial vehicle. 

 

In the prescribed circumstances, if a peace officer seizes 

and impounds a commercial vehicle pursuant to section 

280: 

 

(a) the peace officer shall immediately: 

 

(i) suspend the driver from driving a motor vehicle; 

 

(ii) if the driver is the holder of a driver’s licence or 

any other permit authorizing the driver to drive a 

motor vehicle, require the driver to immediately 

surrender his or her driver’s licence or permit; and 

 

(iii) issue and serve a notice of suspension on the 

driver; and 

 

(b) on being required to do so pursuant to subclause 

(a)(ii), the driver shall immediately surrender his or her 

driver’s licence or permit to the peace officer. 

 

(3) If a driver is served with a notice of suspension 

pursuant to this section, the driver is suspended from 

driving a motor vehicle for a period of 72 consecutive 

hours. 

 

(4) If a peace officer suspends the driver’s licence of a 

driver pursuant to this section, the peace officer shall: 

 

(a) keep a written record of the driver’s licence 

suspended by the peace officer; 

 

(b) provide the driver whose driver’s licence is 

suspended with a written statement, in the prescribed 

form, of the time from which this suspension takes 

effect; 

 

(c) if the driver surrenders his or her driver’s licence, 

give the driver a receipt for the driver’s licence; and 

 

(d) promptly send the driver’s licence of the driver to 

the administrator. 

 

(5) A driver’s licence surrendered pursuant to subsection 

(4) must be returned to the driver by ordinary mail at the 

address shown on the licence unless the driver calls for the 

driver’s licence in person. 

 

(6) A driver whose driver’s licence is suspended pursuant 

to this section may, in the prescribed circumstances, apply 

to the board for a review of the suspension. 

 

(7) An application for review pursuant to subsection (6) 

must: 

 

(a) be in the prescribed form and manner; and 

 

(b) be accompanied by the prescribed fee. 

 

(8) A review pursuant to subsection (6) must be conducted 

in the prescribed manner. 

 

(9) An application for review pursuant to subsection (6) 

does not stay [on] the suspension. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister has pointed out there were some 

concerns when changes had been made and vehicles were being 

impounded, Mr. Speaker, a seven-day impoundment that 

commercial owners . . . So hypothetically, Mr. Speaker, I have 

several employees and someone is caught, one of my drivers in 

my commercial vehicle is caught texting or speeding, a police 

officer could seize that vehicle. And there was no consequence 

to the driver, just simply the vehicle was suspended for seven 

days, Mr. Speaker, but there was no consequence for the driver. 

 

So the minister now has put in place . . . This bill will introduce 

a three-day licence suspension, but on top of that I think another 

provision that was missing is the opportunity for the owner of 

the business to be able to appeal that. So this is adding the 

driver’s licence suspension for three days, and as well adding an 

appeal process for early release of the vehicle due to actions of 

the employee. So right now the vehicle can be impounded for 

up to seven days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And actually I have strong feelings on vehicle impoundments. I 

think in many circumstances it’s been shown to serve very well 

as a deterrent, particularly when we talk about alcohol. We can 

look to BC [British Columbia] and Alberta, Mr. Speaker, who 

in their warning range, in the .05 to .08, put in place vehicle 

impoundment for first-time offenders, Mr. Speaker, a three-day 

vehicle impoundment. And this started in 2010 in BC and I 

believe it was 2011 in Alberta, but I could be mistaken about 

the Alberta date. 

 

But with respect to BC, or both these jurisdictions, they saw a 

50 per cent decrease in impaired death rates, Mr. Speaker, 

which is substantial. Having spoken to many people who work 

in the area of traffic safety, they said that . . . Well one person in 

particular, who’d been in this field for 30 years, said they’ve 

never seen a public policy in traffic safety that had such a 

dramatic effect, Mr. Speaker. So I think the seven-day 

impoundment of people, of employees who are driving 

commercial vehicles, who are caught texting or speeding — 

putting other people’s lives at risk — is fair, but adding that 

mechanism to be able to appeal is very important and necessary 

as well. 



6522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2015 

So I think that that is a good response to concerns that people 

have brought forward, and adding and ensuring that there is also 

a punitive measure placed on the driver who’s actually texting I 

think or speeding for that matter, is actually important as well. 

Although one could argue, if you get your employer’s vehicle 

seized, chances are that may have some impact on your 

employment as well, Mr. Speaker. So although we might argue 

that there was no penalty for the driver, I think if someone had 

their boss’s vehicle seized because they were breaking the law, 

I suspect that there will be some employment consequences, no 

doubt. But again just to emphasize, I think the impoundment is 

a fair measure but putting in that mechanism to be able to 

appeal is a good step, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with respect to Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment 

Act, 2014, we’ll have an opportunity in committee to speak a 

little bit further about this and ask questions of the minister, and 

I look forward to that opportunity. So with that I would like to 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 176, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 177 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 

Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

on Bill 177, The Insurance Act. Initially if you look at the Act 

itself, I think it’s about 300 pages, and I guess, you know, 

they’re doing a complete overhaul of The Insurance Act. 

 

And I guess, you know, many families rely on insurance. And 

we know that in our province we have many insurance 

companies, brokers, who sell insurance. There’s ones that 

provide, you know, the liability, whether you know, fire 

insurance. I mean the list goes on — your car insurance, your 

registration. You pay insurance. There’s certain policies that 

you want to make sure you have to protect you. Sometimes I 

guess people look at the costs, and some will shop around, and 

they make sure that they have and provide themselves and their 

family with the best insurance plans that they can. And 

sometimes it’s affordability, and individuals want to make sure. 

 

But overall to see what the government’s doing, and like I said, 

a complete overhaul. It’s over 300 pages, 300 pages, the bill 

itself. And I know there’s going to be a lot of opportunity. I 

know there was even a . . . They had an opportunity briefing to 

see what’s kind of being shared to the public or what’s being 

changed or what the amendment is in the Act. 

 

And when you take a bill the size that it is, obviously there’s a 

lot of work to be done. And we’re hoping that at the end of the 

day, you know, those individuals, whether they’re individuals 

who use a service of insurance for whatever, whether it’s 

personal liability insurance . . . I know there’s many different 

types of insurance and different agencies, whether they’re in 

Saskatchewan, Canada, you know. Even some boards have 

board liability insurance. I know there’s that. There’s fire 

insurance, you name it, slip and falls. 

 

If you own a business, you want to make sure you’re protected. 

Should the public come in to your facility, you want to make 

sure that you have adequate insurance to cover you. Should 

something happen and you’re found or you’re, you know, 

hauled into court and there’s an action being taken out against I 

guess for whatever, a slip and fall — there’s many of them — 

you know, retail stores, they deal with that. 

 

So overall the insurance is something that protects I guess those 

individuals who want to purchase insurance, so they’re going 

over and having a good look at it. Again I’m hoping they’ll 

consult with the industry, consult with those individuals who 

are using it, obviously, and require that type of a plan or, you 

know, a policy to protect them. 

 

And you think about all the different areas where nowadays, a 

liability, people are left with. And many people have the extra 

insurance, and there’s a good reason why you want to have 

good insurance. I mean just thinking out, you know, they own a 

package policy, like I said, fire insurance, flood insurance. 

There’s many different types of insurance. And you’re seeing 

nowadays that those that can afford flood, and we’ve seen some 

have insurance. And there are individuals who for whatever 

may not be able to afford or don’t have the opportunity to have 

flood insurance . . . [inaudible] . . . So you have PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program]. It’s a program that 

covers those individuals. It’s supposed to be a program that 

covers those individuals. 

 

So there are opportunities to, like I said, to get the insurance. I 

know in committee we’ll have the opportunity to question, and 

my colleague who is the critic will obviously want to ask a lot 

of questions and get details, being that this document is so thick 

to go through, and I guess getting information from officials 

and the minister as to the details and see exactly where to go, 

what kind of changes are they talking about. Like just the size 

of the bill itself is huge in going over it. But I know that we’ll 

have an opportunity at some point in committee, and my 

colleagues will have more questions in the House and debate 

the bill, and then we’ll go through that process and maybe, you 

know, consult with a few individuals, organizations to find out, 

is it something that they requested? Is it good? Is it covering off 

what they do? That we’re not rushing this bill, that we’ve made 

sure we’ve done due diligence or the government has, and that’s 

sometimes not always the case over there. 

 

But it’s important for them to do the due diligence to make sure 

they’re not coming in later to fix things up and say, well oh now 

we’ve got to make these amendments. So let’s make sure, you 

know, that they do it right, that they go through the process, 

they consult, they get it right, and that we move forward and 

don’t have to make a bunch of amendments to the bill and 

legislation. Take the time, do the due diligence, make sure you 

get it right. And if that’s the case, then great. 



March 10, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6523 

And it helps for Saskatchewan people, protects them. But also 

for those that are providing insurance service in the province, it 

gives them the added security that their voice is heard, and the 

challenges facing their industry, if it can be all with government 

changing Acts and legislation, regulations, gives them that 

protection they need. 

 

So at this point I have no further questions on this bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I’m prepared to adjourn debate on the bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:43.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6501 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6502 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6502 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6502 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6502 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6502 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6503 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Talented Saskatchewan Curlers 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6503 

 Business Women of Moose Jaw Host Sparkle & Shine Event 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6503 

 Regina Sexual Assault Centre 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6503 

 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6504 

 The Athletics Commission of Saskatchewan 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6504 

 Doctors in Saskatchewan 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6504 

 Environmental Inspections 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6504 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Ambulance Service Fees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6505 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6505 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6507 

 Provision of Seniors’ Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6507 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6507 

 Surface Rights Legislation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6509 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6509 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6509 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6510 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6510 

 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6510 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6512 

 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6513 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6514 

 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6514 

 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6515 

 

 



 

 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6515 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6517 

 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6517 

 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6519 

 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6519 

 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6520 

 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6520 

 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6522 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


