
























































Hansard: May 11, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 62A  MONDAY, MAY 11, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7173 
 May 11, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Requirement for Royal Recommendation 
 
The Speaker: — I have a statement to make regarding a ruling 
on Bill No. 613 and the requirement for a royal 
recommendation. Standing on the order paper for second 
reading under the name of the member for Saskatoon Nutana is 
Bill No. 613, The Green Energy, Green Jobs and Diversified, 
Sustainable Economy Act. The bill was introduced on May 4th, 
2015. 
 
As Speaker, it is my obligation to ensure that all bills are 
reviewed to determine whether a royal recommendation is 
required. The authority is found in rule 67(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan which 
states, and I quote: 
 

Any vote, resolution, address or bill introduced in the 
Assembly for the appropriation of any part of the public 
revenue, or of any tax or impost to any purpose 
whatsoever, or to impose any new or additional charge 
upon the public revenue or upon the people, or to release or 
compound any sum of money due to the Crown, or to grant 
any property of the Crown, or to authorize any loan or any 
charge upon the credit of the Province, shall be 
recommended to the Assembly by Message of the 
Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the 
Assembly. (See section 54 and 90 of the Constitution Act, 
1867.) 

 
The practice of this Assembly is for bills to be introduced and 
read the first time, with further progress being contingent upon 
the Speaker affirming that they are in order under rule 67. In 
Saskatchewan practice, consideration is taken to mean the first 
opportunity for debate. Pursuant to rule 24(3), this Bill could be 
designated a priority consideration. For this reason it is 
necessary for me to rule on the admissibility of this bill. 
 
When a private member proposes a public bill to the Assembly, 
the test is to determine if it imposes a new responsibility, task, 
or commitment on the government that requires expenditures 
from the public treasury. That is, is there existing legislative 
authority for the expenditure of public funds? 
 
Bill 613, The Green Energy, Green Jobs and Diversified, 
Sustainable Economy Act focuses on the promotion of energy 
efficiency, energy conservation, and renewable energy. The bill 
sets out specific reductions in electrical usage and greenhouse 
gas emissions while detailing specific targets for electricity 
generated from renewable energy sources. Clause 6 of the Bill 
requires the government to use existing resources. 
 
The inclusion of this non-appropriation clause in effect requires 
that the new targets must be achieved within existing resources. 
In the absence of clause 6, this bill imposes substantial financial 
commitments on current and future governments. The new 
significant duties and costs outlined in the bill contain legislated 

reductions in electrical usage, greenhouse gas emissions, and 
specific targets for non-hydro renewable energy sources. It is a 
well-established principle and detailed in several former 
Speaker rulings that a charge upon the public revenue for new 
or increased expenditures which are not already covered by 
legislative authorizations require a royal recommendation from 
the Crown. 
 
There may be legislative authority to promote energy 
conservation, energy efficiency, fostering the growth of 
renewable energy projects, transitioning to clean, renewable 
energy sources, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Bill 
No. 613 goes further to provide specific targets to be met by 
2050. These provisions require the government over the next 35 
years to achieve the targets outlined in clauses 3, 4, and 5. 
Clause 6 of the bill requires the costs to achieve the targets must 
be from “using the existing resources available to them.” It is 
not reasonable to expect that the requirements to use existing 
resources could be sustained in perpetuity. 
 
On August 7, 1997, Speaker Hagel ruled a similar 
non-appropriation provision out of order. The private member’s 
bill sought to create a health ombudsman and office of a health 
ombudsman. The bill established that the health ombudsman 
would not be remunerated or reimbursed from the General 
Revenue Fund, but may act on a fee-for-service basis. The bill 
provided no indication on how to fund the office’s 
accommodation, equipment, or other administrative expenses. 
Speaker Hagel ruled that “it is reasonable to expect that such 
operating costs will be incurred which consequently will create 
a charge on public moneys.” 
 
I find that clause 6, the non-appropriation clause in Bill No. 
613, is of a similar nature. In the absence of a non-appropriation 
clause, the bill would require a royal recommendation. The 
non-appropriation clause is used as a procedural device to avoid 
the conditions set out in rule 67. For that reason I must rule that 
Bill No. 613 requires a Crown recommendation, and because 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana is not a member of the 
Executive Council, I must rule the bill out of order and direct 
that it be removed from the order paper. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I present herewith the report of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the financial 
statements of Crown agencies for the years ending 2014 
calendar year according to the provisions of section 14.1 of The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
As well I lay on the Table the report of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 2014 fiscal statements of 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] Crown 
corporations and related entities according to the provisions of 
section 14.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



7174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask leave of this honourable Assembly to make an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to do an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an honour for me to be able to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the House the coaching staff for the 2015 
Saskatchewan Roughriders football team. Mr. Speaker, we had 
the opportunity to invite the staff in last spring at about this 
time and introduce them both to the legislature and in the 
province and thank them for what they were about to do. And 
I’m happy to see that we are able to do it again. Maybe it can 
become a bit of a tradition each spring, just as winning the Grey 
Cup could be a tradition in the fall every year. That would also 
be good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that May is a great month for a number 
of reasons. Seeding is happening in earnest across the province, 
and training camp for the Riders is just a few weeks away. So I 
want to introduce to you and through you, all the members of 
the coaching staff. 
 
You’ll note, Mr. Speaker, there are a few changes from last 
year, quite a few changes. In the parliamentary system of 
government, which we were talking about a moment ago, we 
have cabinet shuffles from time to time. Well Coach Chamblin 
has undertaken a bit of a cabinet shuffle in advance of the 
season this year, and so there are some new faces we want to 
welcome and introduce. Of course the delegation — we’ll ask 
each one maybe to give us a wave as I introduce them — the 
delegation from the Riders is led by the 2013 Annis Stukus 
award-winning Coach of the Year, Coach Corey Chamblin. 
There he is right there. There’s our head coach. 
 
Joining Coach Chamblin today are brand new offensive 
coordinator and quarterbacks coach, former British Columbia 
Lions staff member, Jacques Chapdelaine is here. Greg Quick is 
the new defensive coordinator. He has experience on both sides 
of the border. We’re looking forward to what happens on 
defence this year. And back for a sixth season with the Riders 
and just a welcomed institution with the Saskatchewan 
Roughrider Football Club, Bob Dyce, the teams coach is here as 
well. Cory McDiarmid is here, the assistant special teams 
coordinator. Now, Mr. Speaker, members will know Cory 
worked with the team in 2013. Then he moved to Winnipeg and 
realized his mistake, and he’s back with the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders this year. 
 
Tyrone Pettaway is the linebackers coach. He’s in his first year 
with the Riders. He’s got both collegiate and NFL [National 
Football League] coaching experience. Now Jeremaine 
Copeland caught a lot of balls against the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders for the Alouettes, for the Argos, and for the 
Stamps, but he’s now our receivers coach so we’re welcoming 
him back. For the most part we’re over all of those things, I 
think. We’re probably over those. Tony Missick is another 

first-year Rider coach. He’s in charge of the DBs [defensive 
back]. We stole Tony from the Stamps, and we’re not going to 
apologize to them for that. 
 
Avon Cobourne is back for another season. He was obviously 
an excellent running back for the Montreal Alouettes and now 
is coaching up a great stable of running backs that we have in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce 
Mike Sinclair, the defensive line coach. Mike has coached with 
the Alouettes, coached with the Chicago Bears. He must be 
behind the clock. Mike is big, but that clock is very, it’s pretty 
big. He played a number of seasons, 11 seasons actually with 
my son’s favourite team, the Seattle Seahawks, and a team 
that’s well known to the province because their punter is of 
course from, their touchdown-throwing punter is from Canada 
in Jon Ryan. But he played 11 seasons with the Seahawks and 
was a pro bowler on the NFL Pro Bowl team three times. 
Finally, Justin Chapdelaine is an offensive assistant. He’s going 
to be helping out on offence as well this year, coaching. He 
went to Queen’s. He’s a Golden Gael that played football at 
Queen’s. 
 
Dan Dorazio, the new offensive line coach, couldn’t be here 
today. He has 43 years of experience, including 18 in the CFL 
[Canadian Football League], Mr. Speaker. They’ve been having 
meetings, the coaches tell me, and getting ready for camp and 
getting ready for the draft. 
 
And I just want to say on behalf of the province, I want to say 
thanks to them. Their life will be very much in a fishbowl over 
the entire season, a little bit like politics probably, frankly more 
severe in terms of the attention they get, and lots of us coaches 
watching every weekend and second-guessing the calls that 
they make. 
 
And so we know they’re here for all the right reasons, to bring 
home a championship for the Riders and also to be involved in 
the community. And I wonder if we should all just thank them 
for that, in addition to welcoming them here today to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming Coach Chamblin as well as the entire coaching and 
leadership of the Riders. It’s great to see them here in the 
Assembly today. 
 
And there are a few things in the province, Mr. Speaker, that 
certainly transcends politics, and I think the love for Rider 
nation is certainly one of those things. So welcome. We look 
forward to your contributions and the leadership that you’ll 
provide to the team over this season, and it is something so 
important to all people in the province. I think every youngster 
in the province can remember, and then we remember as adults, 
that time where we got to meet with a Rider as a kid and all the 
activities out in the community. So thank you also for setting 
that tone and that expectation for the players as well. 
 
[13:45] 
 
You know, there’s been occasion, Mr. Speaker, where on both 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7175 

sides we’ve worn Rider jerseys here in the Assembly as a show 
of support, but I’ve never seen a watermelon worn in the 
Assembly here. I think if that request came in, we’d need one of 
those lengthy rulings by you. And I’m not sure who would do it 
on each side, but that’s maybe something up for discussion in 
the coming days . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Education 
minister thinks the Speaker could wear it, so perhaps. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, a big 
welcome to the leadership of the Riders. We’re looking forward 
to great things this season. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your gallery are 30 grade 8 and 9 students from Ituna School. 
They are accompanied today by their teachers, Mrs. Cindy 
Yanko and Ms. Rachel Groff. Also accompanying them are 
educational assistants Mr. Todd Schnell and Mrs. Alison 
Boczulak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that these students have been very well 
prepared for their visit here today because one of their teachers, 
Mrs. Yanko, was an active participant in our recent Social 
Science Teachers’ Institute. And I’m so pleased that she was 
able to bring, be part of this visiting group here today, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m hoping to have an opportunity to have a visit with 
them after they watch the proceedings in the Chamber here, and 
I would ask my colleagues to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to welcome two exceptionally strong community leaders to 
their Assembly here today: Ms. Renu Kapoor and Ms. Rani 
Bilkhu. These two are driving forces of so much good within 
our community on so many fronts, raising dollars for important 
causes, and such an incredible investment of time and 
leadership into the India Canada Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
And whether it’s upcoming Mosaic, where I look forward to 
joining them in attending bar, serving up some cold Kingfishers 
and mango lassi, or whether it’s India in the Park or whether it’s 
India Republic Day or whether it’s India Night, these two 
leaders do an incredible job of enriching our province and 
bettering the lives of so many. So I ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming Ms. Rani Bilkhu and Ms. Renu Kapoor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, 
Recreation and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite as well in welcoming Renu and 
Rani to the legislature today. They are tireless workers in 
relation to India Canada Association. I’ve enjoyed their 
hospitality on a number of occasions. And I’d just like to join 
with the member opposite in again welcoming you here and 
congratulating you on all your efforts plus all the awards that 
you seem to collect in your wheelbarrow there, Renu, and well 
deserving. But again I’d like to have all members join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
my pleasure today to introduce 38 fabulous grade 12 students 
from the Humboldt Collegiate Institute in Humboldt, along with 
their teachers, Mr. David Millette and Mrs. White, and parent 
chaperone, Mrs. Janet Nunn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Millette has brought his students here every 
year for I’m not sure how many years now, but he is very 
dedicated to bringing a classroom to this Assembly and 
showing them how democracy works here in Saskatchewan. So 
we always enjoy his class coming, and I’m looking forward to 
meeting with them later. So I want everyone to join me in 
welcoming this fabulous grade 12 class to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce someone who’s seated 
in your gallery who has visited the Assembly before. That’s Mr. 
Adam Duke who is our candidate in the next provincial election 
in Humboldt-Watrous. And it’s great to have Adam in the 
Assembly today, an energetic individual who does a 
tremendous amount in his community, and we’re very happy to 
have him on the team. So I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Adam to the Assembly today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for support for better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that the 
Sask Party government eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions, and that students often do not get the 
one-on-one attention that they need, and that the condition of 
many of our schools is run down, unsafe, or unexpected. And 
this government refuses to release the information on the $1.5 
billion of known repairs that are needed in our schools and, Mr. 
Speaker, this is not acceptable given the record revenues this 
government has had over the last eight years. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
supports for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition. 
People who signed this petition would like the Assembly to 
know that there is a definite need for a long-term care facility in 
Creighton, Denare Beach, and area and that the health region is 
in a code red when it comes to senior care beds. And they want 
the Assembly to know that most seniors in the North cannot 



7176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

afford private care homes and the lack of services in 
Creighton-Denare Beach puts a huge financial burden on the 
elderly and their families. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 
citizens with respect and dignity and to immediately invest 
in a new long-term care facility in the Creighton-Denare 
Beach area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday and 
Friday I, along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 
participated in the ninth annual Family First Radiothon in 
Moose Jaw. The 36-hour radio marathon was hosted by Moose 
Jaw Health Foundation and the CHAB 800 radio station at the 
Town ‘n’ Country Mall. Funds raised through the radiothon go 
toward the Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s capital equipment 
campaign to help equip the new Moose Jaw regional hospital 
which is set to open later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundraising total goal for the radiothon was 
$750,000. I am pleased to announce that this goal was well 
surpassed with the final tally of funding totalling $1,004,529. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the largest and most surprising donation was 
announced just before the radiothon ended at 6 o’clock Friday 
evening. Kelly McElree, executive director of the Moose Jaw 
Health Foundation, presented a gift of $600,000 from the estate 
of the late Catherine Klassen, a retired teacher and published 
author. Generous donations were also made by area businesses, 
community groups, individuals, and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation and 800 CHAB on the success 
of the Family First Radiothon, and to thank the people and 
businesses of Moose Jaw and area for their outstanding 
generosity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Caring Canadian Award to Regina Volunteer 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly to recognize a remarkable 
Regina resident, committed volunteer, and friend, Ms. Renu 
Kapoor. Renu has called our city home for more than 40 years 
and her volunteerism is legendary. It was for her years of 
community service and dedication to improving lives of others 
that she was recently awarded a Caring Canadian Award by our 
Governor General, the Right Hon. David Johnston. This 
prestigious award is given to Canadians who demonstrate an 
outstanding commitment to volunteer work, and it’s hard to 
imagine how anyone could be more deserving than Renu. 
 

Over the years she has shown leadership through her work with 
the Canadian Centre for Substance Abuse, the Regina Public 
Library, the Regina Housing Authority, SaskCulture, the 
Regina chapter of Osteoporosis Canada, the Regina Association 
of Fundraising Professionals, the South Saskatchewan 
Community Foundation, just to name a few. 
 
I’ve observed Renu’s tireless leadership on so many fronts in 
our community but I want to specifically recognize her 
incredible leadership and support of the India Canada 
Association of Saskatchewan, a very active and very vibrant 
association that contributes mightily to our province on so many 
fronts. Appropriately she was also this year’s recipient of the 
University of Regina President’s Community Award. 
 
So I ask all members to join me in congratulating Renu Kapoor 
on her well-deserved awards and also in thanking her for her 
years of leadership, making Regina and Saskatchewan a better 
place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Girl Guides Clean Up New Home 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I had 
the opportunity to bring greetings at the Tim Hortons 
Community Clean-Up event put on by the Girl Guides 
Evergreen District. The Tim Hortons Community Clean-Up is a 
special event which brings Girl Guides together each spring to 
perform community service in the Prince Albert area. 
 
This year’s event was extra special as it was the Girl Guides’ 
first gathering at their new home in the Prince Albert Wildlife 
Federation building. This group had to search for a new home 
after discovering that the roof of the Girl Guides’ hall in Prince 
Albert was in need of extensive repairs. 
 
The wildlife federation has gladly welcomed the Girl Guides 
into their facility and look forward to having a mutually 
beneficial relationship. In the past, the wildlife federation has 
had difficulty finding volunteers to clean up its site. The Girl 
Guides will now play a major role in this task. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Girl Guides of Canada started in 1910 and since 
then 7 million Canadian girls have been involved in guiding. 
Girls from ages 5 to 18 can participate in Girl Guides, which 
aims to aid in cognitive and educational development for young 
girls and professional development for young women. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Girl Guides 
Evergreen District on their new home and in thanking them for 
their community service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Support for Breastfeeding in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m so pleased to 
rise in the House today to recognize an important new initiative 
in Saskatoon. Last week Saskatoon Breastfeeding Matters, a 
not-for-profit organization of mothers and health professionals 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7177 

working together since 1988 to protect, promote, and support 
breastfeeding in the community as a biological, ecological, and 
cultural norm, announced that it has partnered with the 
Saskatoon Health Region to develop two new programs, the 
breastfeeding protection pledge and the passport to 
breastfeeding. 
 
The breastfeeding protection pledge is a training program for 
businesses, community centres, and other public spaces where 
the employees learn about the benefits of breastfeeding and how 
they can make sure that they provide a welcoming environment 
for breastfeeding families. 
 
The passport to breastfeeding provides moms with a list of 
places in the city that have taken the breastfeeding pledge. The 
passport is given to new mothers by the health region at their 
child’s two- and four-month checkups. 
 
Despite the fact that the right to breastfeeding any time, 
anywhere is protected in human rights legislation, many moms 
don’t feel comfortable breastfeeding in public because of a lack 
of public awareness and understanding. These new projects will 
help to promote and support breastfeeding in our community 
and raise awareness about the benefits of breastfeeding. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Saskatoon 
Breastfeeding Matters as well as the Saskatoon Health Region 
and all the participating businesses and community centres that 
are taking the pledge and making sure that breastfeeding 
mothers feel safe and included in Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Long-Time Business Changes Hands 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. International 
companies are recognizing the benefits of doing business in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, last week Finning International 
reached an agreement to buy Kramer Ltd. for approximately 
$230 million. Finning International is the world’s largest 
Caterpillar equipment dealer. Finning serves customers in 
various industries including mining, construction, petroleum, 
forestry, agriculture, and a wide range of power system 
applications. Finning’s will build on Kramer’s strong heritage 
by growing the business, providing great customer experience, 
and contributing to Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Scott Thomson, the CEO [chief executive officer] and president 
of Finning International, said that, and I quote, “Expanding 
Finning’s Western Canadian operations into Saskatchewan is a 
great strategic fit and represents a compelling growth 
opportunity for our company, employees, customers, and 
shareholders.” Mr. Speaker, our government welcomes business 
ownership and investment in the province. We are excited to 
see a business like Finning International choosing to build, 
work, and invest in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to thank the whole Kramer family for 
what they’ve contributed to Regina and Saskatchewan over the 
last 70 years. Founded by Robert A. Kramer in 1944, then 
headed by his son Don Kramer, and for the last 20 years, Tim 
Kramer has been at the helm, the Kramer name was 

synonymous with not only great customer service and a quality 
product but with giving back to the communities in which they 
worked in business. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Kramer for their 70 
years of business, and I’d like to welcome Finning International 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Shelter Rebuilds Following Construction Fire 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to talk about this government’s recommitment 
to an emergency shelter that will provide a safe haven for up to 
20 women and children who are victims of family violence. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve spoken about this shelter before, and I don’t think 
anyone needs to be convinced about what a good project it is. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Thanks to the vision and commitment of the North East 
Outreach and its supporters, this shelter in Melfort is being 
rebuilt after a construction fire destroyed it last November. That 
fire, although devastating to the community, didn’t bring this 
dream of this emergency shelter to an end. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very proud that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, along with 
their federal counterpart CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation], are jointly contributing over $1.6 million 
to this shelter. 
 
The whole northeast of the province believes in the good that 
this shelter can bring. In fact I attended the Walk a Mile in Her 
Shoes event just last week to raise money for the shelter, as well 
as awareness of domestic violence. Although I was unable to 
put on the sky-high red heels this year, it was amazing to join 
with the men wanting to spark the conversation about domestic 
violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing the 
good work of the North East Outreach and Support Services on 
this project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The new 
unemployment numbers were released on Friday by Statistics 
Canada. Lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan once again 
has the lowest unemployment rate amongst all the provinces for 
April at 4.3 per cent. More importantly, this province has the 
lowest unemployment rate in the country for 19 straight 
months. That’s four premiers in Alberta time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s 7,700 more people working year over year in the 
province, and full-time employment is up 14,800 year over 
year. These are quality jobs in educational services, health care, 
and social assistance, support services in businesses across 
Saskatchewan, and jobs in finance, insurance, and real estate. 
Even our young workers are enjoying the strength of 
Saskatchewan, as our youth unemployment rate was the lowest 



7178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

in Canada at 9.3 per cent. 
 
Even though the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t even want to 
mention highways, agriculture, or the economy in estimates, it’s 
clear that business is still strong, thanks to a diversified 
economy here in Saskatchewan. And if the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition was really worried about manufacturing jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, he could have voted in favour of the tax incentives 
for manufacturers in this year’s budget. 
 
So for all our Alberta neighbours who may be looking east for 
opportunity, SaskJobs has more than 11,000 jobs as of this 
morning. And in this side of the House, we’ll be working to 
ensure businesses and entrepreneurs keep creating more jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Quality of Care in Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Dolores Surbey was 84 years old. Last summer 
on the evening of June 30th, Dolores and her husband were in a 
car accident because the other driver ran a red light. The jaws of 
life were required to get Dolores out of the car. Dolores’s 
daughter says: 
 

They were taken to RUH emergency department where 
they were eventually assessed and discharged that night. 
Both my parents have numerous medical conditions, with 
my mom being anticoagulated on warfarin for 
approximately 12 hours. At no time during the emergency 
room assessment was admission for observation offered, as 
there were no available beds. My wonderful, loving mom 
experienced a massive brain bleed on July 2nd at home, 
transferred to RUH, placed on life support, and died July 
3rd surrounded by family. My dad is now living without 
his partner of 62 years. 

 
Dolores’s family wasn’t even told that she had broken ribs 
when the hospital sent her home, and just a couple of days later 
she suffered a massive brain bleed. My question to the Premier: 
what does he have to say to Dolores’s family? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for raising these questions and this particular case. 
To Dolores’s family, we offer our deepest sympathies and 
concerns for the case that has just been described by the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if members of the family are here today, I know 
the Health minister will want to meet with them and determine 
exactly, you know, what happened in this regard in that process 
and ask the questions that should be asked with respect to what 
happened to Dolores, which we don’t want to happen to 
anybody in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know the Minister of Health will be ready for that meeting 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, two of Dolores’s daughters are 
here today as well as a son-in-law. Dolores’s daughter, Jan, is a 
registered nurse and is a certified geriatric nurse, so she 
certainly has a lot of experience and insight to draw upon. Jan 
says this: “My mom lived a full, productive life as a 
contributing member of the community of Saskatoon. Her end 
of life should not have looked like this.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the severity of the car accident, 
because of other medical conditions, Jan says Dolores should 
have been kept for observation, and she should have been 
monitored and given some other tests, Mr. Speaker, that could 
have saved her life. The story in speaking with the family, Mr. 
Speaker, is absolutely heartbreaking. Does the Premier 
recognize that overcrowding in emergency rooms and hospitals 
has tragic consequences? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question. I’m not sure, in the case of the 
tragic loss of Dolores, if there has been a critical incident 
investigation undertaken, as is often the case with respect to 
tragedies like this within the health care system. The Minister of 
Health informs me that the region, I think, or perhaps the 
quality care coordinator has been in contact with the family. I 
don’t know the nature of that interaction, whether there were 
any satisfactory answers provided to the family, answers that 
they would consider to be satisfactory. But I also understand the 
minister’s office is aware of this particular tragedy. 
 
And again we offer our condolences to the family and commit 
to look into this particular case so that if there is something that 
can be prevented in the future, that it would be prevented. 
Although that isn’t any particular solace, understandably, to 
Dolores’s family today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Dolores’s family, they do not 
blame the doctors or the nurses or the other front-line workers, 
Mr. Speaker. They know that these people are doing their best 
to provide care under challenging conditions. What they’re 
concerned about are the decisions that are made by politicians 
and upon layer upon layer of health care administrators, Mr. 
Speaker, decisions that are really out of touch with what the 
reality is like on the front lines of health care. 
 
This leads to cuts in areas that really matter, while funds are 
inappropriately allocated. This leads to hospitals being turned 
into factories, moving patients as fast as possible. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this leads to premature deaths. 
 
My question’s for the Premier. Does this government keep track 
of these types of tragic situations? How often are people being 
sent away from emergency rooms without a proper diagnosis or 
treatment, and dying? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for the question. The 
answer is yes, if it is a critical incident, no matter the 
circumstances surrounding the critical incident with respect to a 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7179 

discharge or any other event within the health care system that 
would have caused, that might be a part of the reason for a 
critical incident occurring or the entire reason. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that in health care in the province 
of Saskatchewan, we need to continue to invest in new 
resources so that the experience that people have with the 
system can be something decidedly different than what we’re 
talking about with respect to what has happened to Dolores. 
 
And that’s why, over the last number of years, we have 
significantly increased both human resources so we have more 
of those front-line people working in the province today in 
terms of nurses, in terms of doctors, in terms of care aids — 
more, significantly more in respect of all of these different 
categories. It’s why we’ve invested record amounts in capital as 
well too.  
 
And more work is needed with respect to the system in terms of 
our structures. You know, we acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is more work that needs to be done. We have though, 
however, been undertaking record-breaking investments in 
health care on the human resource side, on the capital side, on 
the operating side. 
 
We’re also looking to make sure the money is used most 
effectively and have a concern, with respect to that particular 
issue, that the money is being used efficiently in the interest of 
patients, in the interest of people like Dolores and her family. 
And so we’re going to continue to do that good work. In this 
specific case, we’ll do whatever we can to find out what 
happened, on behalf of the family and the loved ones of 
Dolores. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Capacity of Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the family has been working very 
strongly and co-operatively in trying to find out answers to their 
mom’s situation. As far as they know, there’s been no critical 
incident investigation, Mr. Speaker, as the family informs us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from doctors and nurses and 
front-line health care workers that terms like overcapacity alert, 
bed crisis, and hallway medicine are now incredibly common. 
And we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, from families whose loved ones 
have gone to an emergency room and have been sent away 
without a proper diagnosis or treatment, and they have died. 
 
A coroner’s jury even recommended that this government 
increase the hours for the emergency room at Saskatoon City 
Hospital in order to address this exact problem. Mr. Speaker, 
having City Hospital emergency room operating longer and 
properly would take the pressure off of RUH [Royal University 
Hospital] and St. Paul’s. And we know that it would mean 
people like Dolores wouldn’t be sent home when they should be 
kept for observation.  
 
My question to the Premier: will he finally do the right thing 
and expand the hours for the emergency room at Saskatoon City 
Hospital? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the waits that people are waiting in our emergency 
departments have been something that has been a concern for 
this government for several years now. Mr. Speaker, I can 
inform the House, as the members opposite will know, that in 
this budget in fact our emergency department initiative dollars 
have gone up from $1.7 million last year to $4.7 million this 
year, a $3 million increase. What that is providing for is a 
provincial team that is made up of physicians, providers, 
partners from the health regions, the ministry, but most 
especially patients and patient representatives, looking at ways 
to lower our wait times. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that emergency department waits are 
really a symptom of other problems that are happening in our 
health care system. That’s why this government has provided 
for funding for a new process for patient treatment and 
assessment at Regina Qu’Appelle. That’s seeing a reduction in 
time to assessment. We’re also investing in police, police and 
crisis teams both in Regina and Saskatoon to see those people 
that don’t need emergency rooms getting the service where they 
need. So, Mr. Speaker, we are concentrating on the emergency 
department to reduce those waits, but we have to concentrate 
outside of the ED [emergency department] as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that response isn’t addressing the 
question. And the issue at hand here is the fact that Dolores was 
sent away without a proper diagnosis and treatment, Mr. 
Speaker, when she needed observation. She needed to be 
watched. 
 
You know, Saskatoon City Hospital, Mr. Speaker, is 
significantly underutilized. Much of this beautiful hospital is 
filled with offices and clinics. If City Hospital were actually 
open for acute care beds, it would take significant pressure off 
of RUH, Royal University Hospital, and St. Paul’s Hospital. It 
would mean that people like Dolores, when they arrive in 
emergency rooms by ambulance, that there would be space 
there to observe them and save their lives, Mr. Speaker, instead 
of rushing them out the door because there aren’t any beds. 
 
My question to the Premier: why won’t he agree to reopen 
Saskatoon City Hospital to acute care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I do want to 
correct the Leader of the Opposition. City Hospital does 
provide for acute care. I don’t want him to be able to leave the 
impression that it doesn’t offer acute care for the people of 
Saskatoon and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there are pressures within the 
system, particularly around the capacity within our major 
tertiary centres. That’s why under this government, the total 
number of hospital beds in the city of Saskatoon has been 
increased by 17 per cent since this government formed office in 
2007. That’s the total number of hospital beds. When you break 
that down to acute care beds, it’s up 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 



7180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

So the days are gone where we had our tertiary facilities in this 
province closing acute care beds to the citizens of this province. 
We’ve worked hard in the last seven years to actually open, 
reopen acute care beds that had been closed over those years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that Saskatoon, I think we all know that 
Saskatoon has been working on their capacity issues. They went 
through a 14-day challenge to empower their front-line staff 
that’s actually seen a reduction in the number of temporary beds 
and patients waiting without a bed, Mr. Speaker. They’re going 
forward with a 90-day process, and I think we’ll see some 
positive benefits after that process is complete. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know at City Hospital most of 
the space is used for offices and for clinics. The minister, Mr. 
Speaker, needs to speak with front-line physicians who are 
incredibly frustrated, incredibly frustrated with the direction 
that this government has taken Saskatoon City Hospital when it 
comes to providing acute care. 
 
We need Saskatoon City Hospital to be properly utilized. We 
need more long-term care spaces, better home care supports to 
take pressures off of care facilities. We need to cut bloated 
administration and put an end to the massive amount being 
spent on consultants and this government’s lean pet project. We 
need to make sure that resources are put onto the front lines and 
empower doctors and nurses and front-line workers to make the 
decisions that they are trained to do. And, Mr. Speaker, we need 
a seniors’ advocate as an independent officer of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Those are meaningful steps that would go a long way to 
ensuring that no other senior like Dolores is sent away from the 
emergency room because there’s no room for her because the 
hospital is overcrowded. My question to the Premier: will he 
agree to any of this? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly agree to 
continuing to make improvements when it comes to the health 
care system in this province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Health 
Region has used City Hospital space to open an additional 28 
beds for convalescent care. This began in November of 2014 to 
help take capacity off of the other two sites. As well, I can 
inform the House that through funding from this government 
we are seeing, for example, funding provided to ensure that the 
people that actually need to be in the emergency room and the 
beds are available in our hospitals, that we’re providing services 
outside of the areas where the health care system has those 
interactions. 
 
So for example, Lighthouse has a paramedic pilot project that 
has a paramedic station at Lighthouse for 12 hours a day, 7 days 
a week in order to reduce the number of calls and reduce ER 
[emergency room] visits. This came about as a part of the 
14-day challenge in that health region. Mr. Speaker, I 
mentioned the police and crisis team. I can tell members in the 
first six months of the program, there were almost 250 patient 

contacts with less than half of those requiring an emergency 
room visit. Mr. Speaker, I think in the past that nearly all of 
those visits would have seen patients inappropriately going to 
the emergency department. 
 
So we need to better utilize the capacity that we do have in the 
system. That’s certainly what Saskatoon Health Region is 
looking at, and we are supporting that as a ministry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Dolores’s family, they loved their 
mom and they loved their dad. They’re an incredibly reasonable 
family, well informed, Mr. Speaker, well spoken. They want to 
have answers for their mom’s situation, but they don’t want this 
repeated for any other family. They don’t want a list read. They 
want to be heard, and they want some real answers, Mr. 
Speaker, about how this could happen to their mother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from many other families who have 
been let down when they show up in our emergency rooms. 
Dolores’s daughter, Theresa, has this to say: “If anybody thinks 
the system is working, I would just get them to think about their 
loved ones and elderly parents and then maybe do a little 
worrying.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, families need to stop being put through this, where 
they need to come to the legislature to get answers, Mr. 
Speaker. Every person deserves care, top-quality care here in 
the province. My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what 
will it take for the Premier and his two Health ministers to take 
this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we 
take this very seriously. Mr. Speaker, this is something that we 
have, as a ministry and as a government, have put a great deal 
of focus, whether it be on shortening the wait times that people 
wait for surgery in this province which was unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, the amount of time that people are waiting in 
emergency departments. We know that that is too long and 
we’re working to address that as well. 
 
That’s why this government, despite the fact that this was a 
more challenging budget, this government found three 
additional millions of dollars to put into our emergency 
department waits, Mr. Speaker, where we not only have 
clinicians but also family members being a part of looking at 
solutions to these problems that we have in the system. And I 
would certainly not only make the offer to Dolores’s family for 
me to meet with them, but to be a part of that, Mr. Speaker, if 
they feel like that’s something that they want to contribute back 
to the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the initiatives that we are working at, 
we know that more has to be done. That’s why we are taking 
direct action. That’s why we are funding action in our health 
regions to see that this never happens again to any family 
member in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7181 

Support for the Lean Initiative 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Last year just one in four nurses had a 
positive view of this government’s lean pet project. That was 
bad enough, but that number has plummeted over the last year. 
Now less than 1 in 10 nurses in our province have a positive 
view of lean. From 1 in 4 to less than 1 in 10 — are either of the 
two Health ministers alarmed by this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to take this question. Mr. Speaker, it allows me an 
opportunity to perhaps talk about even what we just have 
finished talking about, about our emergency departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in Saskatoon Health Region for 
those patients presenting at RUH, for cardiac patients 
presenting, because of work using a lean tool, lean 
methodology, the time that it has taken from a person entering 
the emergency department to when they . . . a wait time for 
somebody at RUH has been a 58 per cent reduction, Mr. 
Speaker, using lean principles. This is empowering front-line 
staff to make those changes. 
 
At St. Paul’s Hospital a RPIW [rapid process improvement 
workshop], a lean tool, was used at the emergency department 
to reduce the time that a patient waited to enter the emergency 
department to when they had a bed and were placed in a bed is 
down by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, at that one hospital. So we 
know that it is one tool that we use but it has to be, go in line 
with ensuring that we have the right number of front-line staff. 
And that’s what this government has worked hard to achieve. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Less than 10 per cent of nurses have a 
positive rating of this government’s approach to lean, about 27 
per cent have a neutral view, and more than 60 per cent of 
nurses in our province have a negative view of this 
government’s lean pet project. They say lean is not patient 
centred, and they say it’s not appropriate for health care 
settings. Are either of these two Health ministers ready to admit 
that this government has made huge mistakes and wasted a ton 
of money with its lean pet projects? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
well I can tell you that lean has been used at the Moose Jaw 
Union Hospital in the emergency department. That has seen a 
reduction in the time it takes for a level 3 — so in our CTAS 
[Canadian triage and acuity scale] 1 to 5 — a level 3 patient 
arriving to have an initial assessment by a physician is down 
because of lean tools by 46 per cent. 
 
Here’s what Nicole, an RN [registered nurse] nurse in 
emergency room said, “These changes will decrease the patient 
load I am responsible for, lower frustrations, and improve the 
care that I’m able to provide to my patients, hopefully 
improving patient’s satisfaction of their time in ER.” Dr. Allie 
from emergency says about this process, “Exciting is the word 

that comes to mind when I think about an RPIW, a rapid 
process improvement workshop. It has positively contributed to 
the patient journey in ER and efficiency of clinical processes.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that for some health care workers 
perhaps haven’t had an experience, front-line staff haven’t yet 
had an experience with being part of a lean process or a lean 
project, but we know, Mr. Speaker, that we’re seeing positive 
results by those that have had an effect, have had an interaction 
with it, Mr. Speaker. We think that this is something that will 
prove to be a benefit for the system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, less than 1 in 10, I think speaks 
volumes. Here is what one nurse said: 
 

It really boggles the mind that lean was even considered in 
the first place. As caregivers, we are dealing with human 
beings under stress and anxiety concerned about their 
condition. We also have to communicate with family 
members. It may take X number of minutes to administer a 
medication, but it may also take X number of minutes to 
listen to a patient’s concerns, answer questions, and maybe 
even sit at the bedside and hold a hand while they express 
their fears. We are not robots. We are caregivers. 

 
No wonder the vast majority of nurses can’t stand this 
government’s lean pet project because it’s all about 
stopwatches, and it’s not about making decisions that are in the 
best interests of each patient. And when you take away the 
freedom of doctors and nurses to make important health care 
decisions, the consequences for patients like Dolores can be 
tragic. 
 
To the minister: will this government finally recognize that its 
lean pet project is harmful, and will it redirect those resources 
to the front lines where they are desperately needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what certainly a number of health 
care providers have been saying as it relates to their 
involvement in lean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the member opposite is very interested 
in the mental health services that we provide as a province. In 
our in-patient, 50-bed unit we’ve seen wait times of up to 18 
hours, and 36 per cent of patients were inappropriately admitted 
into the ward. Lean initiative has dropped that wait time for 
admissions to three hours and 37 minutes — from 18 hours to 
three hours and 37 minutes. 
 
This is what Dr. Abdulla has to say about it: “I was a physician 
skeptic. Now I’m a physician champion for lean initiatives.” 
Here’s what a patient had to say. This is Jessica who’s been a 
patient in the Regina Qu’Appelle mental health: 
 

Prior to my participation, I was very frustrated with the 
admission process from emergency to mental health unit. 
Over the past week, I’ve seen a vast change in the 



7182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

admission process, and I’m so glad to see the standard 
work has been implemented. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing real results for the patients in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Gay-Straight Alliances 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday Sask 
Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] used some 
very strange logic while discussing gay-straight alliances or 
gender sexual alliances. Some of the social media responses 
about them included the following, and I quote, 
“Condescending and rude.” “Dismissive attitude.” “Horrifically 
disrespectful to LGBT students and family realities in our 
province.” 
 
When it comes to GSAs [gay-straight alliance], the Sask Party 
is bending itself into a pretzel trying to please social 
conservatives while still pretending they take this seriously, and 
vulnerable kids are paying the price. Mr. Speaker, can the 
Education minister please explain the government’s position? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and 
myself share something in common. We have a strong belief in 
the benefit of GSAs and the benefit that they give to 
gay-straight students. Recently I was at an event at Bethlehem 
collegiate in Saskatoon. I heard a grade 11 student speak to 
several hundred classmates, several hundred other students 
about the benefits that he had experienced as a result of his 
participation in a GSA. 
 
The fact that he had come forward voluntarily and was able to 
speak says where our society is now. It talks about where 
school boards are. It talks about where teachers are, and where 
our society is right now. The STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] recently passed a resolution in favour of 
gay-straight alliances, not in favour of legislating, but in favour 
of having them, and the support from teachers. And that 
resolution, Mr. Speaker, was passed unanimously. 
 
We want to give people the credit, the respect that they deserve 
for going forward and doing that type of thing, Mr. Speaker. 
We will continue to work in that direction, Mr. Speaker. If they 
know somebody that is not receiving the supports they need, 
we’d invite them to tell us so that we can make sure that it 
happens. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, a Sask 
Party MLA said over and over again that enshrining within 
legislation the rights of students to establish GSAs would 
infringe on the autonomy of school divisions. And the former 
minister of Education, the member for Regina Douglas Park 
said, “They are the best ones that are in the best position to 
make decisions around what is best for their communities, and 
it’s our intent to allow them to do that.” 
 

To the Education minister: is it the government’s policy that 
school divisions should be allowed to say no to GSAs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from Connie 
Bailey, president of Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 
dated April 28th. I will read a portion of that: 
 

We feel it is unnecessary, as school divisions are 
responding to diverse and changing student needs every 
day and will continue to do so. 

 
She writes in favour of the autonomy of school boards, and she 
goes on to say: 
 

Whether it is starting a GSA or any club, boards of 
education in Saskatchewan respect diversity and are 
committed to providing students with opportunities to 
connect within their schools. We know that school 
divisions in our province are doing a great job in 
responding to student respect by ensuring they have places 
that are supportive, safe, and secure for clubs to meet. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan School Boards Association is in 
favour of that. We are unable to locate a school division or a 
school that has been unable or unwilling to provide a GSA 
when asked. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite raised the 
issue last week and, Mr. Speaker, I wrote to the members 
opposite and I said, if you know of specifics, please tell us so 
that we can deal with it directly. I do not have any specifics 
from them at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, but if the specifics 
come, we will deal with them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015/Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée 

legislative 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 180, The Legislative 
Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 be now introduced and read a 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Later this day with leave. 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7183 

The Speaker: — Later this day if leave is granted. 
 

Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 181, The 
Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 181, The Officers of the 
Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Later this day with leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day if leave is granted. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a 
procedural motion regarding bills 180 and 181. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. The minister 
may proceed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Procedural Motion Regarding Bills 180 and 181 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That rule 139(9) and 142(3) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan shall not 
apply to the consideration of Bill 180, The Legislative 
Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 and Bill 181, The Officers 
of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment 
Act, 2015. 

 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved: 
 

That rule 139(9) and 142(3) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan shall not 
apply to the consideration of Bill No. 180, The Legislative 

Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 and Bill No. 181, The 
Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I wish to announce to the Assembly the 
receipt of the Royal Recommendations for two bills. They were 
not received in time to appear on the order paper; therefore I 
beg to inform the Assembly that Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matters of Bill 
180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 and Bill 
181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015, recommends them to the consideration 
of the Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I request leave to consider all stages of Bill 
180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 and Bill 
181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015 immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to consider 
all stages of Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment 
Act, 2015 and Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative 
Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 immediately. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General to move second 
reading on Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment 
Act, 2015. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015/Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée 

legislative 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 
will do a few things. First, it will create a stand-alone status for 
the Office of the Speaker and his or her employees separate 
from both the Legislative Assembly Service and the public 
service. It will require the Board of Internal Economy to 
establish an anti-harassment policy for members; set out 
appointment, removal, suspension, and salary provisions for the 
Clerk in a manner consistent with other officers of the 
Legislative Assembly; require the Clerk to prepare and maintain 
human resource and financial management policies and file 
them with the board; add requirements for the Clerk to stay 
within budget and file quarterly financial forecasts with the 
board; add a special warrant provision applicable to the 
Legislative Assembly; provide that the Clerk, rather than the 
Speaker, will appoint the Legislative Assembly Service 



7184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

employees; require all government ministries, agencies, and 
Crown corporations, and officers of the Legislative Assembly to 
provide the Legislative Library the number of complimentary 
copies of publications requested by the Legislative Librarian 
rather than the eight copies that the Act currently requires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes are presented following a series of 
consultations with the Office of the Speaker, the Clerk, the 
officers of the Assembly, as well as the opposition members. I 
would like to thank them for their participation in this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s just 
an opportunity to get some things on the record in terms of the 
bills 180 and 181 that are before the House but certainly to, you 
know, not just have the minister indicating our support, which 
is in fact the case, but to get a few words on the record, as a 
friend of mine would say, for our own selves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly over the past year, from the time of the introduction at 
the close of proceedings last spring of bills 137 and 138, at that 
time two bills with very similar aims put on the order paper to 
get them out there for debate, to elicit better commentary, a 
more precise commentary from the independent officers 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a fair distance from that 
time until now. 
 
I want to say on the record, thank you very much to officials, to 
the Minister of Justice, and also to certainly my opposite, the 
Government House Leader, but also the government . . . the 
shadow House leader — only the shadow knows, Mr. Speaker 
— but also the government lead on the Board of Internal 
Economy, the Minister for Trade, Immigration . . . He’s got a 
few things going on there, Mr. Speaker, but the member from 
Meadow Lake. Thank you for his work in terms of making sure 
that we were in fairly close consultation on these pieces of 
legislation, going forward. 
 
Again as is often the case, some of the matters are fairly 
picayune, responding to the request from the Legislative 
Library on the precise numbers of legislation that are required 
in paper copy with each government document, moving that 
from eight to what is required in a given circumstance but, more 
fundamentally, making sure that we’ve got our independent 
officers on a common platform and to standardize various of the 
practices that are there. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the independent officers — I won’t go 
on at too great a length — but certainly they provide 
tremendous service for the people of Saskatchewan and they 
provide tremendous service to us as legislators and certainly 
I’m sure for the executive branch of government as well in 
terms of the work that there is to be done for the people of 
Saskatchewan, be it the Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate, 
the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, the various independent 
officers, Mr. Speaker, but also for the Chief Electoral Officer 

and the Provincial Auditor, the folks that do some very 
important work in service of democracy and in service of the 
people of Saskatchewan. So we’re glad to see this piece of 
legislation here, and we’re glad to see that the government 
approached it in a spirit of co-operation and in a spirit of 
listening that again is reflected in the legislation that is here 
today. 
 
Some of the measures in the previous pair of bills, Mr. Speaker, 
raised some questions about what the implications would be for 
the independence of the officers, certainly the whole question of 
whether or not Board of Internal Economy should be signing 
off on the HR [human resources] plans of the independent 
officers and what that could imply for the independence of 
those offices. Again it’s been changed and will be brought 
forward as not so much giving the Board of Internal Economy 
the right of authorizing but certainly to have those human 
resource policies in place for individual independent officers, to 
have that being posted with the Board of Internal Economy so 
that they’re known for all to see but again not interfering with 
the independence of the various officers. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say at this particular 
juncture as regards Bill 181, but certainly we see a marked 
improvement from the bills 137 and 138. We’re thankful for all 
the work that was undertaken to get these pieces of legislation 
to this particular stage. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I conclude 
my remarks on the bill and allow the minister to proceed 
through the remaining stages. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney 
General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 180, 
The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 be committed 
to the Committee of the Whole on Bills and said bill be 
considered in Committee of the Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to move second reading of The Officers of the Legislative 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7185 

Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015. Mr. Speaker, 
The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015 will amend The Advocate for Children 
and Youth Act; The Election Act, 1996; The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act; The Members’ 
Conflict of Interest Act; The Ombudsman Act, 2012; The 
Provincial Auditor Act; and The Public Interest Disclosure Act, 
and make the appointment, suspension, acting, and termination 
provisions for these officers of the Legislative Assembly as 
uniform as possible. 
 
It will provide for the renewable five-year terms for the 
majority of officers. The Provincial Auditor will move from a 
ten-year renewable term to an eight-year non-renewable term. 
The Chief Electoral Officer will continue to serve for two 
general elections. We will retain the Public Accounts 
Committee rather than the Board of Internal Economy as the 
governing board for recommending the appointment and 
suspension of the Provincial Auditor or the appointment of an 
acting Provincial Auditor. 
 
We will amend the Acts to provide for substantially uniform 
staffing powers for the officers. The officers will have the 
ability to hire and manage their own staff under their governing 
legislation. It will confirm that the employee benefits applicable 
to public servants apply to employees of the officers; provide 
that each officer shall administer, manage, and control the 
officer’s office and the general business of the office; and 
oversee and direct the staff of the office. 
 
It will require the officers to file quarterly financial forecasts, 
require each officer to prepare and file human resource and 
financial management policies, add a special warrant provision 
to each officer’s Act, and confirm that the officers cannot 
exceed their budgets. These last two provisions do not apply to 
the Chief Electoral Officer, since that budget is statutory. 
 
These changes are, again, presented following a series of 
consultations with the Office of the Speaker, the Clerk, the 
officers of the Assembly, as well as the opposition members, 
and I would again like to thank them for their participation in 
this process. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 
reading of The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and with 
thanks to former Speaker, the member from Moosomin. We’d 
like to say our piece on this one as well but certainly it is . . . As 
the Minister of Justice has indicated, we have been certainly 
consulted on the legislation. 
 
Again dating back to and certainly previous to the introduction 
of Bills 137 and 138, our Deputy Leader on this side was 
speculating that, you know, at different times people say to him 
in political life, you guys never agree on anything. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to be expecting the 
presses to screech to a halt that we found agreement on a piece 
of legislation or two pieces of legislation. Double the wonder, 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, but it is noteworthy that we’ve been able 
to find agreement on these pieces of legislation. 
 
Again that builds upon some significant work undertaken by 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of work that had gone on, by 
work on the part of the Clerk and officials but also, as the 
Minister of Justice has referenced, the good folks in drafting 
over at the Ministry of Justice to whom fell a significant amount 
of I’m sure what some would refer to as cat herding in getting 
everybody to the place where there was something that could be 
agreed upon. And again I would indicate my thanks to the 
member from Meadow Lake, the government lead on the Board 
of Internal Economy, for making sure that we were able to be 
fully briefed and to participate in a constructive way in the 
process. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the independent officers are tremendous 
servants of this parliamentary democracy that certainly we all 
seek to serve as well in the name of the people of 
Saskatchewan, so in terms of the different changes that are 
indicated in this particular piece of legislation, again striking 
that balance between seeking to adhere to what is best practice 
but also seeking to preserve and protect the independence of 
those officers. 
 
And it’s at this point I would note with particular interest the 
exceptions that have been made for the different practices that 
have grown up over the years around the work of the Provincial 
Auditor, maintenance of that Act, but also as well, Mr. Speaker, 
moving to an eight-year, non-renewable term as opposed to the 
previous 10-year with an option to renew. This puts us more 
squarely in the middle of the pack or around best practices as 
regards the work of the Provincial Auditor and the term, and 
certainly that is a change from the bills 137 and 138 that were 
brought forward last fall as regarded the term of appointment 
for the Provincial Auditor. And again, Mr. Speaker, this has 
been further complicated or further made more demanding, a 
more challenging process, by the fact that of course for the last 
time we’ve been looking for a new Provincial Auditor. So then 
the good folks on the Public Accounts Committee have had to 
undertake a search for a new Provincial Auditor while having 
some degree of uncertainty around the terms of reference for 
that position. This legislation will put those questions to rest 
and will allow the process to carry forward and to move us from 
an acting basis with the Provincial Auditor to the hiring of a 
full-time Provincial Auditor. 
 
I’d note also, Mr. Speaker, that the practice around a statutory 
budget for the Chief Electoral Officer is retained. And again in 
terms of the relationship of that individual to being the 
referee-in-chief of the electoral process by which no members 
should be interfering, Mr. Speaker, and again one of these 
demanding balancing acts that our system calls for, it’s good to 
see that that is retained, and then certainly, as had been 
referenced earlier, the independence and the ability of the 
officers to have their own HR policies and to have that known 
for a fact and to have that protection there for the employees 
and the staff of these different institutions, but at the same time 
to have that accountability back to the people’s representation 
through the Board of Internal Economy and posting that 
information with that body. 



7186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, there’s many thanks that are due to 
many people for these two pieces of legislation. And certainly 
it’s a bit of an unusual process, and it will certainly underline 
the importance for us to see that that which was intended is in 
fact that which is carried out as the legislation proceeds, Mr. 
Speaker. But in the main I think this has been a good process 
again with the tabling of bills 137 and 138 last spring and then 
the work coming forward here today. We’d have liked to have 
seen them introduced earlier in the session, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide for that broader public investigation and opportunity for 
comment, but with that one note of concern, again it doesn’t 
take away from I think what is largely good work and work that 
has had the opportunity to be scrutinized and to be 
constructively questioned. 
 
So here we are on a day when we’re able to agree on two 
things, Mr. Speaker, so we’re glad to see that. And again when 
we’re being reasonably approached, we’d like to think that we 
can be reasonable people as it comes to the official opposition. 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d welcome the Minister of Justice 
shepherding the bill through its remaining stages. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
that Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 181, 
The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015 be committed to a Committee of the 
Whole on Bills and that the said bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 
Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair to go into 
Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015/Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée 

legislative 
 
The Chair: — The first item of business before the committee 
is Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Act, 2015. Clause 1, 
short title, are we ready to vote? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment 
Act, 2015. I recognize the Minister of Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 
No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 
without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Chair: — The last item of business before the committee 
is Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015, clause 1, short title. 
Ready to vote the bill? Okay. Clause 1, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: 
Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 
No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 without amendment. Is 
that agreed? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7187 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave 
to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. We await the return of the Speaker. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 180, The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 
2015/Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée 

legislative 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 180, The 
Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 181, The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 181, The 
Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization 
Amendment Act, 2015 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — At the next sitting of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The MRI Facilities 
Licensing Act. Mr. Speaker, this new legislation will pave the 
way for patients to choose to directly pay for a private facility 
for an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scan in our province. 
 
Providing timely and high-quality diagnostic imaging services 
to patients is a high priority for the government. We’ve already 
successfully implemented a model of third party care within the 
public health system. The private delivery of day surgery and 
specialized medical imaging in Saskatchewan has reduced wait 
times and reduced costs since being introduced in the health 
system in 2010. 
 
Most recently, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has entered 
into contracts with one private firm and is in discussions with 
another to provide community-based MRI service through the 
publicly funded and administered system. While there are 
several jurisdictions across Canada where patients can choose 
to pay for specialized medical imaging services, current 
legislation does not allow this in Saskatchewan. 
 



7188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, our government is interested in removing 
legislative barriers to allow patients the option to pay for MRI 
services right here in Saskatchewan, in turn improving patient 
access and satisfaction with health services. 
 
The MRI Facilities Licensing Act will provide the ability to 
make and update regulations that will require patient vendors to 
provide a second scan at no cost to a patient on the public list 
every time a scan is provided to somebody who chooses to pay 
for their own MRI. Just like today, an appropriate physician 
referral will still be required to obtain an MRI scan. This model 
will provide options for Saskatchewan people closer to home 
without the added cost of travelling to another province for 
quicker access to an MRI. The requirement for a private 
provider to deliver a second scan at no cost to a patient on the 
public list will increase MRI capacity in the health system and 
is expected to reduce overall wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this model is similar to the long-standing 
arrangement between the Workers’ Compensation Board and 
the Saskatoon and Regina Qu’Appelle Health regions where the 
WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] funds MRI scans for 
WCB patients and provides additional funding to cover patients 
from the public list. This model is also similar to an 
arrangement with the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Mr. Speaker, 
both of these arrangements were entered in prior to this 
government being elected in November of 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regulations to support the administration and 
operation of private pay MRI services in Saskatchewan must 
still be developed. This will include a framework for private 
vendors to set their own private pay rates to ensure that the 
second scan is provided at no cost to the patient on the public 
list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the proposed legislation 
will also ensure uniform quality standards. The Act takes the 
authority of licensing of all MRI facilities out of the current 
health facility licensing Act. Regulations will allow for the 
provision of a specific category of licence that will enable that 
facility to accept private payment for MRI services. Licensees 
will be required to maintain accreditation standards, and an 
appropriate physician referral is necessary before any patient 
can opt to privately pay their MRI scan. 
 
For each licence application, regional health authorities will be 
required to report on the expected impact of the MRI facility on 
public system operations. This will ensure that the addition of 
private services do not have a detrimental effect on the public 
system. 
 
Following the passage of the Act and the establishment of 
regulations, private pay MRI services could be implemented, 
starting with our existing private MRI facilities. The model will 
be evaluated after one year to ensure that it’s meeting the goal 
of improving access to safe high-quality care. 
 
The government is committed to putting patients first, and we 
believe that allowing patients to choose to pay for MRI services 
will enhance access to MRI services in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, this is another innovative, made-in-Saskatchewan 
approach that will ensure both fairness and access. And with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of 

The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important time 
for us to have this debate. It’s an interesting time as we’re in 
our last week, with only two more days of government business 
before we break and return home. And so this is an interesting 
piece that comes before us, and we really have to have . . . The 
question before us is why all of a sudden has this come forward 
in the last week? What really brought this forward in the dying 
days? 
 
You know, I heard people shout over there, game changer. Is it 
a Hail Mary? It might be a Hail Mary, closer to Hail Mary when 
you’re talking about game changers. Paving the way, I’m not 
sure what kind of metaphor that is. But I have to say, there are 
an awful lot of people who have an awful lot of questions about 
this. And while the minister would like to say, let’s pass this 
today, and it may be the way that they operate things over there, 
this takes a lot more work and needs a lot more attention. 
 
And besides the rhetoric we hear from the other side about how 
we need to rush this through, clearly, Mr. Speaker, when we’ve 
seen the letters in the paper, the editorials, the commentary 
from doctors who have a lot of questions about what does this 
really, really mean for health care in Saskatchewan, I mean, 
even if you put aside the ideology, put aside the ideology, is it 
common sense? How does it work when you have two lines and 
one person can jump the queue by paying for an MRI and then 
have the results, and are they just going to sit with the results? 
Are they going to sit with the results when their time comes 
again? How does this all work? And this has not been 
explained, and I’d be curious to know. I’d be curious to know. 
 
And the minister didn’t — and I was listening carefully to his 
comments — did not talk about who called for it. Who did he 
consult with? Did he consult with the medical association? Did 
he consult with people on this? Who was bringing this forward 
to say we’ve got to do this, that it’s urgent and that we break the 
norm of how we do legislation, where we introduce legislation 
like this in the fall and then we have a chance to look at it over 
the winter months and pass it in the spring. And he’s talking 
about a one-year test pilot and then it’s going to be an 
evaluation. And I’m thinking, is that really . . . How quick is 
this all happening here? I mean clearly, clearly have they got all 
their ducks in a row over there, with the outcry from lots of 
people saying, what does this really mean? 
 
And so Bill No. 179, An Act respecting the Licensing and 
Operation of certain Facilities providing Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging Services and making consequential amendments to 
other Acts, so it’s quite a thorough Act. But we have to say that 
really, when you think about other things that this government 
. . . And we’ve been calling on response and a decision about 
the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw. What’s going to happen 
with that? We’ve been talking about that for several, several 
weeks. People have been coming to the legislature and saying, 
what’s happening with the hyperbaric chamber, and we’ve not 
got a response. 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7189 

This government says we need time to study that. We need time 
to study that, but here we have something brought in — as they 
would say, a game changer or Hail Mary pass — as we end this 
session. And I think it is a bit of a political game and really, 
when they talk about game changer and they’re throwing 
something in the last days . . . We have two more days after this 
of government business and clearly, clearly it’s a Hail Mary. 
I’m really deeply concerned about the political game that’s 
being played here, and many other people have raised that 
concern as well. 
 
And so we’ll talk about this, and there will be lots of questions. 
I do have some comments I want to get on the record. And I 
know all of us over on this side will have comments to make as 
we look at this closely, just because it’s our duty and our 
responsibility as opposition to make sure this government has 
really thought out this idea. Because too many people are 
saying, it doesn’t look like you’ve really thought it all out. 
 
And you know, sometimes when you see the Premier 
responding and acting from social media and whether he has a 
Twitter out there, so what do you think. Then he works from 
there. And I think, Mr. Speaker, you know, when you have a 
Health budget the size it is and how critically it is important to 
people here in this province, and we have some of the best 
services and the best traditions and best people working in 
health care, that this in many ways can be even considered as a 
bit of a reckless move when they really haven’t thought this out. 
So we have those questions. Where does this come from? 
Whose idea was this? Was this from the doctors? Was it from 
the patients? Where did it come from? Where did it come from, 
and why aren’t we seeing those people here? We’ve not seen a 
petition calling for this, you know, and of course there is a lot of 
questions that we’ll have to ask about this. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, clearly when we think about . . . 
This will essentially create two lineups for MRI scans, but at 
the end of the day there will only be one line for the surgeries 
because that in reality is why people are getting MRIs. And 
then they’ll talk about this as we look at some of the comments 
that have been made by some of the professionals in the field 
who’ve asked real questions about, you know, when we’ve had 
the MRIs here in Saskatchewan, what has been the impact? And 
particularly people are now asking questions about how 
effective are they? Clearly they help an awful lot in diagnosing 
situations that need surgeries or need treatments, but how has it 
been? 
 
[15:15] 
 
You know this would be a good time. Why do we have to wait 
one year? And it would be very interesting to see what that 
study the minister talks about that will happen in one year’s 
time. Why doesn’t he do a study right now to connect with the 
people who are raising those concerns and say, so what has 
been the impact of MRIs here in Saskatchewan? What has been 
the impact, and has it had a real impact on the health situation 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
And of course and that would have been in days gone by, part 
of the issue for the Health Quality Council. They could have 
been very, very helpful in that field, but now they are too busy 
really promoting lean. And this would have been the perfect 

thing for them to come forward and say, listen, you know, 
really in terms of MRIs this has been the positives of MRIs in 
Saskatchewan and how it’s been utilized and the impact it’s had 
on health care, on our waiting lists, and all of that type of thing. 
And where should we go? But I would like to know, has the 
minister talked to the Health Quality Council? What have they 
said about this? 
 
You know, that’s one of the things that I was really struck by 
the minister’s comments. Often we have people say, the 
ministers will say we were consulting with this group and this 
group and this group, and it adds an awful lot of weight. And 
we have to say, well if they have, then clearly many people 
have thought about this. 
 
When a minister gets up and doesn’t mention one group, not 
one group that he’s consulted with, particularly when we’ve 
talked about this kind of impact on health care, and he can’t 
name one group that he’s been consulting with, that’s a real 
problem. And whether it’s the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association], the medical association, with the Health Quality 
Council, there are people out there I’m sure, I’m sure could give 
him an opinion about the directions he should be taking. 
 
We know, we’ve had people come into this Chamber and into 
the galleries saying, if you’re thinking about innovations, think 
about keeping the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw. And 
we’ve had good debate about that. We’ve had lots of questions 
about that, but the government is silent about the innovation 
around that. 
 
We have areas that we really need to talk about in health care. 
And I know, for example, and we’ve not heard from the two 
Health ministers what has been their response about Craik. 
Craik is still up there. On the very first day, the very first day of 
the spring sitting, we had a demonstration out in the front of the 
legislature. And it’s not a common day when we have folks 
who come from rural Saskatchewan, whether it’s because of 
travel or distance or whatever, but they came, and they had 
some comments to make about what’s happening in their 
community about health care. 
 
So if this government was truly interested in making innovation 
happen, you would think that probably one of their priorities 
they might want to talk about, and the Minister of Health has 
been silent about, places like Craik. Why is it that Craik and the 
people there feel they’re not being well served by this 
government in health care when it comes to providing the kind 
of health care they need in their community? 
 
But instead, on the dying days of this session and in fact as 
we’re heading into, you know, in the course of . . . The election 
is actually scheduled for November 4th, and until the federal 
election is actually called, technically this is it for us. This is the 
dying days of this government. And you know, this is what they 
do in their final days. It is quite shocking and it really shows 
still how people haven’t, on that side, haven’t thought through 
what might be the unintended consequences of this. 
 
You know, we often make the comments that we’ll see, and of 
course there’s no explanatory notes to go along with this 
because this is a bill that is fresh starting out. There is no other 
legislation dealing with it, so it’s not . . . While it’s amending 



7190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

some other Acts, there’s no other main. It’s not an amendment, 
so there’s no explanatory notes. But we probably will see some 
if this bill happens to pass, that we will see amendments. But 
we’re not sure, really clearly, how serious is this government in 
doing this bill. Because if it was, they would’ve introduced it in 
the fall and it would’ve been here as a bill like any other bill 
and it would be going through the regular process. 
 
This has just got too many problems with it, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why I know, on this side of the House, we will have lots 
and lots of questions about it. And again as I said, the minister 
with his comments, we were very, very disappointed with the 
lack of clarity about the implementation of this, but more the 
language of paving the way. I think this is really problematic, 
and we really have a lot of concerns. 
 
We see that there might now well be two lineups for the MRI 
scans, but really there will only be one line for surgeries. And 
allowing queue jumping really means that most people will 
have to wait longer for both. This government has been not 
been clear, and as we go through . . . And I will demonstrate 
from some of the letters that I have here with me that there will 
be a lot of questions about, how does this actually work? Have 
they really thought this through? Where did it come from? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, evidence from other provinces, including 
Alberta, shows that introducing user-pay MRI clinics makes 
wait times longer for everyone. And in Saskatchewan, 90 per 
cent of the people now get their scan within 88 days, but in 
Alberta, 90 per cent of people wait up to 247 days. So this is not 
good. This is not a good situation that we want to emulate, in 
Alberta. 
 
Now why isn’t it? And of course as we will find out, of course 
it’s easy enough to get people through and get their scans, but 
then you have to do something with those people. Everybody’ll 
be waiting around holding their scans and saying, I want and I 
need. And many of them will be . . . And I can understand 
exactly where they’re coming from because they’ll have the 
medical results, and that will create anxiety. And the next 
question will be, I jumped the queue to get my scan; can I now 
jump the queue to get my surgery? That seems to be the 
thinking that this government may be okay with, and I think we 
have a lot of questions around that. 
 
We see the results of what has happened in Alberta, where their 
waiting list went up to 247 days because they did not have the 
capacity really to deal with all of this, and there is some real 
concerns. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have a health care system that we can be 
really proud of in terms of the fact that it is a system that allows 
people to get services that are paid for. But now it will be . . . 
People will be thinking, really should I take a look, should I 
take a look at getting a loan? Should I be taking at look at using 
my credit card? Because they may have the idea that they’ll get 
an answer or treatment sooner for their loved one. Now 
unfortunately that may be a bit of false hope, and I think the 
government will have to be responsible for that, Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of the day. Because if you’re giving the idea that you 
can get your scan faster, then people will automatically think 
that they’ll be able to get their surgery or their treatment 
quicker, and that may not be the case, Mr. Speaker. That may 

not be the case, and in fact it may cause some more issues. 
 
You know, and, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve talked about issues 
already, whether it be the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw or 
the Craik hospital, we have also brought forward many times 
concerns around ambulance charges. And we know for 
example, Saskatchewan, we already have the highest rates in 
Canada. In fact we charge way too much, and we’ve shown the 
inconsistencies, the problems that we should be focusing on 
when it comes to ambulance charges. That would have been a 
much more reasonable innovation for them to bring forward. If 
they were thinking about a Hail Mary pass, this would have 
been one that they should have really thought about. 
 
And I’m surprised actually that members over there have not 
been paying attention to questions in question period, whether it 
be the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw, the Craik situation, 
the ambulances, why they have not brought forward at this 
time, if they are interested in doing something innovative . . . 
This is what has been in the papers. This is what’s been brought 
to the House. This is what’s been brought here by patients. It’s 
been patients who’ve been coming forward. And while they 
will chirp from their seats, it’s patients that’s driving . . . Yes, 
patients have been driving down here. Patients have been 
driving down here to call for better, more reasonable fees for 
ambulances. They’ve been calling for work around their 
hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw. They’ve been calling for 
better services in Craik. 
 
Yet the folks over there will say no, this is the time we want to 
do something to create a second line for MRIs. And 
everybody’s wondering why. Why? Yes, and I think that this an 
interesting process that we’re going through. It is a diversion. 
We’re coming to the end of the session. They don’t want to talk 
about things that were brought up in the House. They don’t 
want to talk about their performance, whether it be lean, 
whether it be the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw, whether it 
be Craik, whether it be the ambulance charges. This is 
obviously hitting a nerve, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t realize they 
were so sensitive about this, but clearly they are because they 
have been listening during question period to what people have 
brought forward as concerns, as concerns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re not against a study into MRIs. And as 
we see from Dr. Steven Lewis, in fact he calls for some more 
research on that. I think that would be reasonable, but this is 
putting the cart before the horse. And then to say we’re going to 
take a look back at it a year later is even sillier. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, I really think it is a case of doing your homework and 
paying attention to people who, coming down here, coming 
down here . . . And you know, we’ve had petitions. We’ve had 
petitions about lean. We’ve had petitions about the hyperbaric 
chamber in Moose Jaw. We’ve had the fire folks come from 
Moose Jaw. We’ve had the doctor talk about that. We’ve had 
the doctor from Craik talk about the situation in Craik. Why 
aren’t we dealing with those issues? 
 
Here we have in the dying days, the dying days, Bill No. 179, 
talk about MRIs. And that’s what they want to talk about. 
That’s what they want to talk about. And, Mr. Speaker, we hear 
what people want to talk about, whether it’s lean, John Black 
and his gravy, gravy plane. Let me just . . . I don’t want to 
downgrade him too much. He doesn’t ride no train. He takes the 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7191 

plane. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got issues. We have issues that 
they should be looking at. And seniors’ long-term care homes, 
we could really talk about that if we wanted to talk about 
innovation that that minister should be talking about. That’s 
what people on the doorstep are talking about, seniors’ 
long-term care. And we know the Ombudsman is really taking a 
look at that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have some real, real concerns about 
this. And you know, we are deeply concerned that when people 
have come forward . . . For example, when you talk about 
ambulance charges and the fact they’re too high and people are 
stuck with these charges, and in fact the suggestion from the 
other side is, you know, people have raised money through 
steak nights. That is their level of innovation when it comes to 
dealing with ambulance charges — hold a steak night. That’s 
outrageous, Mr. Speaker, and here yet the minister can stand up 
in the House and talk about this Bill No. 179 about MRIs. 
 
I think we’ve got a real issue here, Mr. Speaker, as we finish up 
session and really how this government has not paid attention to 
what people are really talking about. You know, we saw a 
budget in the spring that kicked off, that middle-class seniors 
were kicked off the drug plan. We’ve seen more and more 
families are paying for extra private care at homes and senior 
care and even in the hospital because of understaffing on the 
front lines. And today we saw we had questions that one in ten 
— one in ten — nurses don’t believe that lean is the direction 
we should go. Nine in ten believe we should be doing other 
things to make our hospitals and our health care system better. 
This is a real, real problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have a lot of questions and I 
have a lot to say here. And I know that we already have private 
MRI clinics to handle patients, and the government pays. Now 
they say they’re going to cut that work in half. The experience 
in other provinces is poaching of professionals from the public 
system, like technologists, so the existing capacity of the public 
system is likely to suffer, and that’s a concern. That’s a 
concern. That’s a huge concern about this. 
 
[15:30] 
 
You know, the other day we had a discussion about pharmacist 
technologists, and the government had not made any plans. 
There’s 1,300 technologists in the pharmacies across the 
province. Two hundred work in the hospitals. Two hundred 
work in the hospitals. And they’re going to have to get 
registered. They’re going to have to do upgrading. It’s going to 
cost thousands of dollars. They’re going to get one year to do it 
but the minister cavalierly just brushed them off saying, you 
know, we don’t know what the impact is going to be. 
 
So we don’t know what the impact of this is. We’re going to 
know a year after the fact, a year after the fact. We should know 
a year before the fact. This is a government that prides itself on 
being business oriented. Have they made the business case for 
this? Have they shared the business case with us? What’s the 
impact on the professionals, and what will that do for the public 
sector? 
 
You know, when we’ve asked about pharmacists and the 
pharmacist technologists, they had no idea. They shrugged their 

shoulders. We’ll see what happens. We’ll see what happens. 
We asked what happened in Alberta. Well they didn’t ask that 
question. They travelled to Alberta. They asked about other 
things, but they didn’t ask about what’s the impact on the 
human resources aspect of it. 
 
I would ask the minister, what is the impact on this Hail Mary 
as we finish this session? As we finish this session and the four 
years of this government, they throw a Hail Mary pass because 
there are things that we should be talking about in health care 
and things that should be addressed. But they decide to throw 
this, and this is something else. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real, real questions. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to talk about some of the public stuff that’s out 
there. I could go on about some of the questions we have, but I 
want to make sure because I really want . . . And I know people 
are going to be anxious to get into this debate. But here is The 
StarPhoenix editorial. And I know, I know the other side reads 
these editorials because we had them shown to us last week. I 
forget what the topic was, but everybody brought that in. And I 
just wondered if those folks brought in today or if they’ve read 
the editorial from May 7th, The StarPhoenix. And this is The 
StarPhoenix’s opinion, and it’s “MRI legislation reaches too 
far.” 
 

Just because something is billed as a “Made in 
Saskatchewan solution” doesn't make it sensible or even 
particularly effective. 
 
That appears to be case with the legislation Health Minister 
Dustin Duncan introduced Wednesday to bring in more 
private provision of magnetic resonance imaging services 
to the province. 
 
[And it goes on.] From a government that has managed to 
shorten the wait lists for select surgeries by opening up the 
market to private care providers and paying them directly 
from the public health care envelope, this approach to MRI 
privatization is confounding. 
 
Either it amounts to a case of forcing private companies to 
offer a two-for-one discount on MRIs, or cashing in on the 
desperation of potentially seriously ill people — who either 
have the money or will find it in order to [spend for] . . . 
their diagnoses — by making them pay not only for their 
own scans but also someone else’s. The fact that it 
emulates the model currently in use for Workers' 
Compensation and SGI claimants as well as Roughrider 
players doesn't make it any more desirable. 
 
[And I go on.] What Mr. Duncan is proposing, however, is 
a further privatization of health care based on one's ability 
to pay, even if there's provision made to provide a no-cost 
second scan under the public system. Not only does the 
legislation create a potentially huge administrative 
nightmare in terms of policing the service providers, but 
also in questions about equity. 
 
Mr. Duncan justifies the move by saying Saskatchewan 
people already are paying out-of-pocket for private MRI 
scans in Alberta and the U.S. and says, [and the quote is 
for the minister] “We're trying to balance off what already 



7192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

happens in Saskatchewan with allowing for a little bit more 
patient choice and trying to tackle what is a public wait list 
using private dollars. 

 
But I go on, and I quote The StarPhoenix: 
 

It’s a questionable strategy for a Saskatchewan Party 
government that has faced enough public skepticism on 
privatization that it couldn’t go as far as Alberta did on 
liquor sales. While Saskatchewan has a 5,000-person wait 
list for MRIs, it’s the second best in Canada and the 
government has ample room under its current outsourcing 
model to tackle the problem. 
 
Instead of an innovative solution, this comes across as a 
poor strategy that crossed a line it didn’t have to in order to 
get the job done. 

 
So it just doesn’t make sense. Ideologically it doesn’t make 
sense, doesn’t make sense. Here we are in the dying days, and it 
simply doesn’t, doesn’t add up. And so today, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, those folks over there, they appreciate the editorial The 
StarPhoenix board has come up with. You know, they’ll come 
in, and maybe they’re picking and choosing what editorial they 
live by. You know, this one is bad; this one’s good. You know, 
you should try to be consistent and really think and listen to 
these folks. They’re thinking, they’re hearing from the public as 
well. They’re hearing from the public as well. 
 
But here’s one from Steven Lewis, and it was in today’s paper 
on page 6 in The StarPhoenix. And I think this one makes a lot 
of sense. Now they may not, I mean, but I think he’s got 
something interesting to say. Now Steven Lewis is the president 
of Access Consulting Ltd. and is adjunct professor of health 
policy at Simon Fraser University: 
 

Whether the Saskatchewan government’s legislation to 
allow private MRIs is good public policy depends on what 
problems it wants to solve, and whether the proposed 
solution will solve them. 

 
That’s the question before us really. Does this make any sense? 
Does this make any sense in the dying days of session and of 
the four years of this government that all of a sudden they throw 
this Hail Mary pass? You know, I don’t know what they’re 
hoping for to come out of this. But when we have people 
talking about long-term care, when we have people talking 
about the $40 million consulting contract to John Black, when 
you have people talking about the hyperbaric chamber in Moose 
Jaw, when you have people talking about the situation in Craik, 
the list is long of where people are demanding innovations. The 
list is long. Emergency rooms, today we had a situation about 
emergency rooms, a situation that was tragic, tragic. And we 
can all identify with that. That’s something that we need 
innovation on. That’s something we need innovation on. 
 
So what is the problem they’re trying to solve here? Is it a 
deflection as we wrap up the session? I think it is. I think it is 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the fellow from Moose Jaw, 
the fellow from Moose Jaw does not want to talk about the 
hyperbaric chamber. He doesn’t want to talk about that. Clearly 
he wants to talk about MRIs. That’s what he wants to talk 
about. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, from the situation that we have, 
where we have people coming to the legislature, as we did 
today and we’ve had in the past, to talk about a whole host of 
problems — whether it’s long-term care, whether it’s fees for 
ambulances, whether it’s emergency rooms, you know — the 
list goes on. And people are losing faith with this government, 
as we saw with the nurses, where it was 1 in 4 who thought lean 
was not a bad idea. Now we have, it’s 1 in 10, 1 in 10. There 
are some serious challenges in health care, serious concerns. 
 
Now I want to quote a little bit more from this article, “MRI 
law wastes money, makes system less fair” by Steven Lewis. 
And I go on, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has doubled capacity since 2007. The 
question is whether all scans are genuinely needed and 
clinically appropriate. Before 2007, were there legions of 
undiagnosed patients whose health status was 
compromised due to inadequate MRI access? Has the 
doubling of capacity improved patient outcomes? I know 
of no studies that answer either question. We have no clear 
idea of what the doubled capacity has achieved, except 
more scans. 
 
There is a growing, physician-led movement across North 
America called Choosing Wisely. Physicians started the 
campaign to raise awareness of a growing concern in 
contemporary health care — overuse of services. Many 
tests and procedures do nothing to improve patient care or 
outcomes, and some — like excessive CT scanning, which 
subjects patients to high doses of radiation — actually 
cause harm. 
 
Adding MRI capacity without identifying and eliminating 
inappropriate scans simply feeds the beast. Doctors have 
come to realize that more is not always better. 
Policy-makers should take note. 

 
And I think this is something the minister should pay attention 
to. And if he can make his case on what has been the impact of 
the number of scans that we’ve had, the increase . . . And I’m 
hoping and I think everybody hopes they’re all . . . You know, 
we’re disappointed when we hear that services that have been 
paid for have not actually been useful. In fact they’re harmful. 
We’re all disappointed in that. So we’re all hoping that good 
things will come out of this. It’s a great thing when we hear that 
the doubling of capacity since 2007, but the question really is, 
so what’s been the impact? What’s been the impact? Has it been 
really the priority that we should have set? Or should we have 
paid attention to the people in Craik? Should we have paid 
attention to the people in Moose Jaw about the hyperbaric 
chamber? Should we have paid more attention to long-term 
care? Should we have done more about ambulances and more 
about mental health? 
 
And we know, and we know those are real challenges. Those 
are real challenges. So clearly, you know, I’ve been on both 
sides of the House. I know how difficult it is to make decisions 
about budgets. You have to make difficult decisions, I 
understand that, but you should make it on evidence. You 
should make those decisions on evidence, and we see no proof 
of evidence from this minister today. 
 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7193 

Nobody is . . . he’s not said who’s, who called for this. He’s not 
brought forward any proof of evidence that this would be a 
worthwhile initiative. Now maybe there is, maybe there is. And 
if there is, we’re very happy, we’re very happy to take a look at 
it and read through it, and we will do that. But when we have 
such a thin speech from the minister, on the third-last 
government day of the session on such a significant bill, leaves 
a lot of questions open. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is how Steven Lewis asks the question. 
And this is one, I think maybe they’ve got it all figured out over 
there, so maybe they’re going to become the administrators of 
this process. But what he says, he asks, “So let’s see the 
accounting in full light of day. And then there’s fairness.” He 
asks, this is the fairness. And I’m quoting: 

 
Suppose Harriet and Jim go to their doctors on the same 
day with the same symptoms. Both doctors send them for 
an MRI. Harriet pays for a private scan three days later. 
Jim gets his four months later from the public system. The 
scan results reveal that both need surgery. Harriet’s 
diagnosis is confirmed 117 days before Jim’s. How will 
Harriet not get her surgery before Jim? If she does, she has 
paid to jump the queue. 
 
Maybe the government is clever enough to figure out how 
to prevent that, but I can’t. 
 

And that’s really, that’s the big question. How do you do that? 
How do you do that in fairness to everyone involved? You’ve 
made a promise to Harriet. You get this scan, you get the 
information, then there’s sort of a half-promise there that’s left 
in silence. What do we do? People are expecting that they will 
get the next thing happen, right? But in fairness, they were in 
the line together for public, for services from the public system. 
And if we let Harriet jump ahead of Jim because he didn’t have 
the money to pay for a scan, that’s not fair. That’s not fair. And 
that’s a real problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to ask . . . This is what he says, 
“MRI scanning presents the government with a golden 
opportunity to apply an appropriateness and equity lens to 
policy-making. Appropriateness is one of the Ministry of 
Health’s formal . . . [policies].” 
 
And that’s so true, appropriateness and equity. We can do a lot 
of things. We can do a lot of things. But we know a lot of things 
don’t help, and we know that a lot of things may give false 
hope. And we know that a lot of things cost a lot of money. So 
it’s all about being appropriate, and that’s what the Ministry of 
Health’s role is. 
 
And also there’s a sense . . . And we have a strong tradition here 
in Saskatchewan — we’ve always been worried about this 
government in terms of its sense of equity — here we have a 
strong commitment to equity right across the board here in 
Saskatchewan. Whether you are rich or whether you are poor, it 
doesn’t matter; all people are equal when it comes to health. 
And we value that, and we value that as Canadians. We value 
that as Canadians. 
 
So I have some real questions about this when it comes to this 
kind of process, and so does Steven Lewis. Where is the 

Ministry of Health in this innovation when he asks about that? 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been several letters so quickly 
written, and we’ll see many, many more about this. But I do 
want to get on the record some of these letters because they are 
so thoughtful. So this one is from Gilbert Will, and he writes in 
the Leader-Post “Wrong way to fix MRI wait list.” He writes: 
 

Here we are again: the government has done its polling and 
has come out with another way to push private health care. 
 
The government has had time to fix the MRI . . . list since 
the last time it floated private MRI scans, yet it seems . . . 
[to have] done nothing, but polling. The premier should be 
ashamed for not fixing this problem. 
 
I know I can get a private MRI, but it shouldn’t come to 
that. If we need more MRIs done, then get it done. The 
government wants to grow this province and that must 
include building health capacity, and not just for MRIs. 
 
The government spent large sums of money on the lean 
process, but it has failed to fix this simple problem. We 
pay taxes to cover the bills . . . [but] that isn’t enough . . . 

 
So there’s, you know, I think that’s exactly what we’ve been 
talking about, exactly what we’re talking about. 
 
Now here in The StarPhoenix, a letter written by Stan Rice. 
Stan Rice writes that: 
 

New legislation that allows private, for-profit operators to 
charge patients to access an MRI ahead of those who 
cannot afford to pay or choose to access the public system 
creates two distinct problems. 
 
The first is allowing private operators to provide insured 
services in our health-care system. Numerous American 
studies have shown that not-for-profit health care agencies 
consistently provide better quality and safer care than 
for-profit agencies. 

 
The second issue is allowing people to pay for a private 
MRI. Access to health care should be based on need, not 
ability to pay. This principle has served us well for 
decades. The SP quoted Premier Wall saying in 2008, 
“Offering medical services such as an MRI for a fee seems 
to be outside the Canada Health Act (CHA) and is an area 
where the government doesn’t want to tread.” 
 
Alberta was forced to repay patients for medically 
necessary MRI scans that were deemed to be in 
contravention of the CHA. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, it goes on and it concludes: 
 

. . . Saskatchewan MRI wait . . . [lists] are the second best 
in Canada. Wall has a choice. He can continue to 
strengthen our public health system, or venture forth in a 
way that’s extremely risky. 

 



7194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2015 

And here’s a letter in the Prince Albert Daily Herald: “MRI 
decision will lead to every man for himself?” Albert King 
writes that: 
 

If I have decided that I was going to purchase an airplane 
ticket to anywhere, knowing that the person beside me was 
going along at my expense, how would I feel? 
Then why would I pay twice as much as I should so that 
this person rides free, and gets there at the same time as me 
to see the same surgeon at the same time as me. I would 
look around and notice that there were people coming in 
and filling up the waiting . . . [list]. 
The airline would be over booked, they were trying to find 
more planes and pilots, they were not able to and therefore 
hired more pilots from another airline. 

 
And you can see where this is going about the human resources 
capacity, stealing from the public sector and creating this for 
people who really need services, and then creating this idea that 
if you want to jump ahead, then you can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll wait, and we’ll see more letters I’m sure in 
the days ahead. We have CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees] Saskatchewan, they have added their voice to this 
concern. Tom Graham says those with large wallets can get 
MRIs quickly while the rest will have to wait. He points to the 
provinces which use a pay-for-use model and studies have 
shown an increase in overall wait times, and that again is so 
true. 
 
But I want to . . . And I know that many others will want to get 
into this debate, but I want to have two physicians, and what do 
they say about this? What do they say about it? And this is a 
story from The StarPhoenix just a couple of days ago on May 
8th. SMA president quotes private MRI plan, and I quote from 
the paper. The president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association is skeptical of a government plan to allow MRIs, 
saying the proposed cut structure may not be viable. It goes on 
to say: 
 

The provincial government has tabled legislation that 
would allow private clinics to offer MRIs to paying 
patients — as long as they offer one free to another patient. 
 
[The doctor says], Dr. Dalibor Slavic, whose term as SMA 
president ends today, said the two-for-one plan would 
make it difficult for radiologists to cover their costs. As for 
passing the added cost to the patient, he said most people 
would rather get a cheaper scan in Alberta. 

 
There is another idea. I hadn’t thought about that. So if you’re 
paying more in Saskatchewan and if you’re already thinking 
you’re going to pay, then you probably will end up going to 
Alberta. So that’s what Dr. Slavic raises and he says, and I 
quote: “The concern among the radiologists is that it’s going to 
be a two-for-one deal where they are going to have to cover the 
cost.” 
 
And it’s very interesting that, you know, and he does raise this 
and this is one that I think that we have to think about. You 
know, it’s interesting as we think about the history of 
innovation. You know, he raises again like Dr. Lewis around 
the appropriateness of tests: 

Although the patient would still require a doctor’s referral, 
Slavic said the appropriateness of the MRI should be the 
main concern. He said many couples have paid for [and he 
quotes ] “entertainment ultrasounds” to look at a pregnant 
woman’s abdomen since they became available. “Will this 
open up that possibility?” 

 
So there’s a lot of work that needs to be done beforehand and 
that’s the kind of thing I think Dr. Lewis has really, really 
raised. And I think that, as I said, when we have the long list of 
health care concerns that have come to the House over this past 
spring session, whether it be long-term care, whether it be the 
ambulance fees the highest in the province, whether it be 
emergency rooms and the overcrowded services, 
overcrowdedness of emergency rooms, we have a lot, a lot of 
work. 
 
And here is Dr. Ryan Meili, and you know, both sides of the 
House . . . And I’m glad to see that he’s doing a lot of work on 
poverty and these folks over here have come to appreciate his 
good work. And so I’m glad that Dr. Meili has also jumped into 
this because this is his primary area. He is a physician and he 
does want . . . And you know, when I’ve heard him speak . . . 
And he really does talk about the holistic approach to health 
care that we need to take and not an obsession with testing. But 
really we need to look at the root causes of what’s happening in 
our health care. He really has some questions. And so what he 
says, and I’ll quote: 
 

This past week, Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall took to 
Twitter to ask the question “Is it time to allow people to 
pay for their own private MRIs in Saskatchewan like they 
can do in Alberta?” 

 
And so and it goes on to say: 
 

It’s a real problem. For that reason we should be wary of 
false solutions, and look first to evidence before rhetoric 
takes over. 
 
The best place to look for evidence is the province Wall 
references as a model: Alberta. Many Saskatchewan 
residents have sought out care in Alberta’s private MRI 
clinics, giving the impression that the experiment there has 
been a success. It turns out, when we take a closer look, 
that things are not so rosy in the land of private MRIs after 
all. 
 
Perhaps the most surprising fact is that the wait list for an 
MRI in Alberta, rather than having been shortened by the 
presence of private imaging clinics, is actually the longest 
in the country. 

 
In Canada it’s the longest. And we want to emulate Alberta? 
We want to go to that . . . [inaudible]. As the minister would 
say, he’s paving a road and this is the road that he wants to 
pave. 
 

According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information 
(CIHI), patients in Alberta can wait from 87 days . . . to up 
to 247 days . . . compared with a 28 to 88 day wait [list] in 
Saskatchewan. These waiting lists exist despite Alberta 
having the second highest number of scanners per capita in 



May 11, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7195 

the country, suggesting that [there’s an] overuse may be a 
problem — a phenomenon that may actually be 
exacerbated by excess capacity. 

 
It may seem counter-intuitive that the public wait list 
would lengthen in the context of more MRI clinics and 
scanners. It appears that capacity, in the form of physicians 
and technologists, is siphoned off from the public system 
by parallel patient-pay . . . [system], a pattern that has been 
seen in surgery as well as imaging. 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

More troubling yet is the question of equity. If an MRI 
scan is the limiting factor for getting a surgery, and I can 
pay for my scan, I get to have my publicly-funded surgery 
before someone in as much need but less able to pay out of 
pocket. This is the principal reason that the existence of 
patient-pay MRI clinics, as Wall pointed out . . . is against 
the Canada Health Act. 

 
This is also the reason that Alberta has in recent years: 
 

. . . moved away from the patient-pay model. Many of the 
private clinics charge the public system for the scan and 
charge the patient a premium on top. Alberta was also 
forced to repay some patients who had paid for 
medically-necessary scans out-of-pocket. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Expanding hours of use, training programs for personnel, 
and the number of machines in the public system is 
another. [We can all learn from] Anyone can learn from 
their mistakes, a true leader learns from the mistakes of 
others. Saskatchewan should look closely at the 
experiences of other provinces before choosing a path [and 
as the minister would say, “paving a path,” choosing a 
path] that, while seeming to offer solutions to our 
challenges in healthcare, could actually make them worse. 

 
And that’s Ryan Meili, and I know those folks over there listen 
to Dr. Meili and they’ve often quoted him. And I hope they 
quote him when they think about the MRIs. This is a problem. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we know there is a lot of 
reasons that we’re looking for innovation from this government 
in health care. There are a lot of needs. And they should just 
think about the people who have been in the galleries, the 
people who have been in the galleries since March and in the 
past years, who have called for better long-term care, better 
long-term care for our parents, those who we love dearly and 
are put in dangerous situations because there just hasn’t been 
the resources put forward. 
 
Emergency rooms, like we learned today . . . We need to really 
think about that. What are the innovations there? What about 
ambulance charges? When we know they’re the highest in 
Canada, the highest in Canada, why are we putting forward 
MRIs this way when we really have a challenge there? 
 
Mental health. Mental health, we had a study done last year, a 
study done last year, and this government has done nothing with 

it. They’re saying they’re taking some time to think about it. 
We know, we know that’s a huge issue, and too many families 
are faced and touched with that. And it’s a tragedy when they 
are because it can manifest in so many different ways. 
 
There are challenges before us, and I look forward to hearing 
from my colleagues on this. And as I said, I was disappointed in 
the minister’s comments who didn’t really set out the plan, 
didn’t talk about who called for this. This is a real problem. 
And if we’re in the final, the dying days of this session in this 
four years of this government, and this is how they think they’re 
going to change the channel — change the channel — because 
you’ve got to know, Mr. Speaker, and they will talk about how 
they’ve been on the doorstep, but if . . . I’d be surprised if, when 
they’re on the doorstep, that they’ve not heard about long-term 
care. Clearly, clearly people are talking about that. Clearly 
people are talking about that, and they’re looking forward to 
hearing about what the Ombudsman’s going to say about that. 
And there’s going to be demand for resources, and we know the 
government has to be ready for that. 
 
But if they’re going to say no, we want to do this MRI scheme 
where some will pay for one and get one free and how that’ll 
work and then they’re going to do an evaluation after a year, 
I’ve got to tell you, we have some real, real concerns about 
what’s happening here. 
 
As Dr. Steven Lewis talked about, this government and this 
ministry has a real obligation to look at equity and look at 
appropriateness of training. And so many people are talking 
about what’s really gone wrong, what’s really gone wrong in 
Alberta, and how they’re backing away. They’re backing away 
from it because it just doesn’t work. It doesn’t work at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that many of us will want to talk about this 
so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment of 
Bill No. 179, the Act respecting licensing and operation of 
MRIs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Requirement for Royal Recommendation 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7173 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7173 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7174 
  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7174, 7175 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7175 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7175 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7175 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7176 
 Caring Canadian Award to Regina Volunteer 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7176 
 Girl Guides Clean Up New Home 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7176 
 Support for Breastfeeding in Saskatoon 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7176 
 Long-Time Business Changes Hands 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 
 Melfort Shelter Rebuilds Following Construction Fire 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 
 Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7177 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Quality of Care in Health Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7178 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7178 
 Capacity of Health Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7179 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7179 
 Support for the Lean Initiative 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7181 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7181 
 Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7182 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7182 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 
 Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée legislative 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7182 
 Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7183 
MOTIONS 
 Procedural Motion Regarding Bills 180 and 181 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7183 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 
 Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée legislative 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7183 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7184 
 Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7184 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7185 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 



 

 Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée legislative .............................................................................................. 7186 
 Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 .......................................... 7186 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 180 — The Legislative Assembly Amendment Act, 2015 
 Loi de 2015 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l'Assemblée legislative 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7187 
 Bill No. 181 — The Officers of the Legislative Assembly Standardization Amendment Act, 2015 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7187 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7187 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7188 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.
	The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House Leader.
	Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again.
	The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed?
	Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.
	The Chair: — That’s carried. We await the return of the Speaker.
	[The Speaker resumed the Chair.]

