






















































Hansard: April 20, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 20, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6949 
 April 20, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate that. I hope your throat is feeling a little bit better 
later on in the day. I have two introductions to make for groups 
that are both seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first introduction is of Tina Beaudry-Mellor, and she has 
some guests with her. Mr. Speaker, she is well known to 
members of this House as someone that’s very much involved 
and has been involved in the political life of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m happy to report to the House she’s also the 
Saskatchewan Party candidate in the constituency of Regina 
University for the upcoming election. She’s a long-time 
instructor at the department of politics and international studies 
at the University of Regina. There, she has been awarded for 
outstanding teaching as both a sessional instructor and with the 
President’s Teaching and Learning Scholars Award for 
Excellence in her collaboration on teaching civic engagement 
for post-secondary institutions. 
 
She is the former Chair of Equal Voice, another group well 
known to members on both sides of the House and served on 
the national board, as well as being a former board member of 
the Saskatchewan Arts Board, the community investments 
committee of the United Way, and the Regina Transition 
House. In addition to her academic work, she’s an entrepreneur. 
She has a business, and she’s joined today by her children, by 
13-year-old twins Kayman and Montana. Maybe they’ll give us 
a wave. They’re in grade 7 at Hawrylak School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of members in the House, I want to 
welcome them all here to their Legislative Assembly and thank 
her for her interest in the public life of the province and wish 
her well in the upcoming campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, there is another delegation 
seated just in front, as I can see, of Tina here today. They are 
from India, and also they’re from Viterra, from North America 
Glencore Viterra. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important group that has come and 
joined us today in the Legislative Assembly to watch the 
proceedings. They are led by the Chair of the India Pulses and 
Grains Association, Pravin Dongre. Now Pravin is involved in 
this sector in a number of ways, including with Glencore, but 
chairs this neutral association that has been a strong proponent 
of the relationship between about 18,000 pulse growers in our 
province and the amazing market of India. And he is joined 
today by Kyle Jeworski — no stranger to the House — 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of North American 
Viterra, and also Quinton Stewart of Viterra. 
 
And importantly there are buyers of pulses in the gallery with 

them, including Mr. Guru Rao — and I apologize for any 
mispronunciation — Mr. Pawan Mundada and Mr. Arshad 
Jimal. They are buyers of product, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve 
joined us today. 
 
It’s important to note, all members of the Assembly I hope will 
know that Saskatchewan accounts for 75 per cent of Indian 
lentil imports. This is a huge number: 79 per cent of all of 
Indian pea imports come from our farmers. We say to our 
visitors, thank you very much for the relationship. We hope we 
can do more in the future. And we welcome them here to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming this Indian delegation to the 
Assembly today. The Premier appropriately highlights the 
important relationship with respect to pulses and crops that are 
grown here in the province and the trading partnership with 
India, so we wish the delegation all the best with their 
discussions that will be ongoing and hope that they bear much 
fruit for India as a trading partner but also especially for 
Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker. So I’d join in the 
welcome to this important delegation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
each year at this time I have the opportunity to welcome a 
company of some of the most dedicated and compassionate 
people this province has to offer. Seated in your gallery are a 
number of long-serving victims services staff and volunteers 
who devote their time to help fellow members of their 
communities to recover from instances of crime. 
 
Accompanied by Dwight Lawrence and Pat Thiele from the 
Ministry of Justice, we have several 10-year nominees, Mr. 
Speaker: from Red Earth, Anita McKay — maybe we’ll get 
everybody just to wave a little bit; thanks, Anita — from 
Regina, Heather Kurz and Bernadette Lorence; from Saskatoon, 
Cathy Anderson and Ted Deacon; from Vanguard, Melanie 
Clark; and from Swift Current, Penny L’Heureux. 
 
There’s eight individuals, Mr. Speaker, celebrating 15-year 
milestones. They are: from Kinistino, Wilma Burns; from 
Hudson Bay, Brenda Guderyan, Betty-Lou Palko, and Vickie 
Piwtorak; and from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, Theresa Baumung, 
Eugene Duchnitski, and Gail Kaban; and from Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker, Abbie Houston. 
 
And last but certainly not least, there’s three people who are 
now been serving 20 years in their capacity: Donna Blondeau 
from Moose Jaw, Joanne McClenaghan from Yorkton, and 
Linda Perrett from Saskatoon. 
 
I had the pleasure of thanking them earlier today on my behalf 
and on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, and I would 
invite my colleagues to extend their gratitude to these staff and 
volunteers as well who contribute so selflessly to the people of 
this province in their hour of need. 



6950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d introduce two 
other people that are in your gallery. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce Phyllis Hallatt and Conrad Mitzel from Child Find 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Child Find is a provincial charity that assists in locating 
children that have been the victim of an abduction or who may 
wandered off or ran away. They also advocate for the protection 
and rights of children and youth as well as promoting awareness 
on missing children’s issues. Phyllis and Conrad were in the 
building today to meet with a number of my fellow caucus 
members, and they were kind enough to stay and join us for 
question period. So I would ask all MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] to join me in making them feel welcome 
in their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
Minister of Justice in welcoming the people who have been 
involved for many years in the victims services program. 
There’s no way to fully thank you for all the work that you do, 
but I know that in your communities you provide a very safe, 
stable place for people who are caught up in the criminal justice 
system. And so we thank you very much for your work. 
 
I also want to say welcome to the members from Child Find 
who are here today. And we thank you for your work as well. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a constituent of Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. Sitting in your gallery is Michelle Grunerud. Michelle is 
the communication and vital signs manager for the South 
Saskatchewan Community Foundation. The mission of SSCF is 
to advance community well-being by supporting and assisting 
charities, companies, and individuals in achieving their 
charitable goals and dreams. With over 35 million in 
endowment funds, the SSCF distributed over 1.4 million last 
year to over 165 different charities in southern Saskatchewan. 
They’re doing a lot of good work right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Michelle is a good example of young, strong leadership in our 
communities, and she is one to watch. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members of the Assembly to join me 
in welcoming Michelle to her Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce Damien Bolingbroke. He’s 
certainly active right now with the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program, or SLIP. 
 
He’s originally from in and around Foam Lake. He was a Royal 
Canadian Air Cadet as a young man. As he graduated from high 
school, he went to the University of Regina, where he enrolled 

in environment systems engineering. He not only got an applied 
science degree, but also then went on to get a Bachelor of Arts 
with distinction in economics. He’s worked with Engineers 
Without Borders and has also applied his talents to helping 
young children with disabilities. I’m delighted that he’ll be 
joining me in helping to serve the people of Saskatoon 
Greystone. We’re going to do some research together and also 
get him into the constituency. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to help me welcome Damien not 
simply to the House, but to his new role over the course of the 
next coming weeks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most of the 
members will be aware that the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] 
meetings are under way this week, and seated in your gallery 
are a number of people that are participating in that process. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce those people by name. 
 
They are Yvonne Gueguen, Darcy Howe, Trevor Geiger, 
Michael Ross, Jonas Kiedrowski, Cindy Yanko, Elizabeth 
Phipps, Brenda Doud, Chad Wellman who until very recently 
was my next door neighbour until his parents chose to move 
away, perhaps because of the neighbourhood. I don’t know. 
Anyway I’m glad to see him here. Julie Wilson, Delores Bear, 
Adam Wilson, David Hambleton, Michael Wolf, Ann 
Dusterbeck, Cory Redl, Larissa Snider, and they’re also joined 
by Taylor Gunn who is the president and CEO of Civix from 
Toronto. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome all of those 
people to the legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also 
welcome Phyllis Hallatt and Conrad Mitzel from Child Find. 
They are neighbours of mine who have not yet moved away. 
Their office for Child Find is just down the hall from my 
constituency office so we’ve shared, passed stationery back and 
forth as is required, and they’ve been good neighbours, good 
lenders, and we’ve been even better borrowers. So I want to 
thank them and welcome all of those people to their legislature 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Education minister and welcome all 
those that are a part of the SSTI institute here that are joining us 
here today. Certainly that would include ministry staff, Mr. 
Brent Toles, for his work and leadership on this project and as 
well the steering committee that works throughout the year to 
bring together this important teachers’ institute on 
parliamentary democracy. 
 
But most importantly I want to welcome those teachers that 
have joined us here today from all across the province. I’ve had 
the chance to meet with them briefly and say hello. I look 
forward to getting to know them throughout the next couple of 
days. But I want to thank them for what they do each and every 
day. And in many ways what they do is foundational to the 
health of our democracy and that parliamentary process. 
 



April 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6951 

So I hope as they engage in this process, they find it to be a 
rigorous and challenging and engaging institute, as I know that 
they will. I hope that they enjoy Regina, but then I hope they 
take that learning back to their students and instill that 
importance of being engaged in our democratic processes and 
how important young people and all people are in being a part 
of that process. So I welcome these teachers here today and I 
thank them in playing their part in keeping a healthy, strong 
democracy here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
join in with the Minister of Education and the Minister of 
Justice and a couple of members across in welcoming some of 
the guests from Yorkton here today: Ms. Julie Wilson, a 
Yorkdale school teacher from Yorkton and here for the SSTI — 
welcome, Julie — as well as Joanne McClenaghan, years of 
service to the Red Cross throughout the world. It’s great to see 
Joanne here today. She was hiding behind the clock. I couldn’t 
really get a good view of her there. As well Theresa Baumung 
and Gail Kaban of victims services, the volunteers in Yorkton. 
 
Special recognition of Eugene Duchnitski up there. He’s a good 
friend from Yorkton, heavily involved in victims services. I’ve 
had the opportunity to introduce him here before as well. 
Eugene and I have done a lot of flying over the years together. 
He’s very involved in Civil Air Search and Rescue Association 
in Saskatchewan and involved around Canada. And he’s one of 
the best spotters I’ve ever had, and navigator and safety officer 
for Civil Air Search and Rescue. So outside of victims services, 
he does a lot of that as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in welcoming these 
citizens of Yorkton to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Justice and my colleague from Lakeview in 
welcoming the victims services delegation here, the folks who 
volunteered, the long-serving volunteers with victims services, 
as well as the staff. I want to give an especially big shout out to 
Linda from Saskatoon who . . . I can attest to the services that 
victims services provides. 
 
Many, many years ago, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to 
utilize their services, not a good opportunity. I had experienced 
a break-in and then, not long after, another incident while I was 
hiking in California. And it was through the help and support of 
victims services, and Linda in particular who was incredibly 
compassionate and empathetic and helped me connect with the 
services that I needed. I know first hand that you all make a 
really big difference in the lives of those with whom you 
connect, so thank you. 
 
So I’d just like to ask all my colleagues to join in in welcoming 
these folks from victims services across the province. Thank 
you. 
 
[13:45] 

The Speaker: — Well thank you to those members that helped 
me save my voice by introducing the SSTI. I think there was a 
few that may have been missed: Mr. Michael Wolf from Miller 
Comprehensive High School here in Regina; Mr. Jonas 
Kiedrowski who is the public legal education foundation 
association from Saskatoon; Mr. David Hambleton, Miller 
Comprehensive High School, Regina; and Ms. Emily Barrette 
who is with Civix, student vote out of Toronto. 
 
As well we have with us the steering committee which helps 
oversee the entire process: Mr. Doug Panko from Vanier 
Collegiate, Moose Jaw; Ms. Laurel LaBar-Ahmed, Campbell 
Collegiate, Regina; Mr. Terry Leibel, Wynyard school; and Ms. 
Karen Blackwell Jones from the Dinsmore school. 
 
And I would like to welcome all of the teachers here today and 
all of our other guests as well. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition that calls for support for better schools here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced and that the 
condition of many of our schools are rundown, unsafe, or 
uninspected. This government refuses to release information on 
the $1.5 billion of known repairs that are needed in our schools 
and this government’s plan to rent schools from private 
corporations is expensive and reckless. And none of this is 
acceptable, given the record revenues this government has had 
over the last eight years. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan calls on 
this government to immediately stop ignoring schools and 
start prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, 
increasing support for students, and developing a 
transparent plan to build and repair our schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Regina and the Lloydminster area. I do so present. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again to present petitions as it relates to concerns of residents 
around the unsafe conditions created by that government on 
Dewdney Avenue, with their failure to properly and safely plan 
for heavy-haul truck traffic. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 



6952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These are signed once again by Saskatchewan citizens. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place today to present a petition calling for 
the second bridge for Prince Albert: 
 

The petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan, as well as the city of 
Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from senior 
governments. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular 
petition will ever pray. And they’re primarily from Moose Jaw 
but, as we’ve indicated from time to time, there are thousands 
of pages of petitioners from all throughout Saskatchewan. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term 
care are deteriorating under this government. They ask that the 
Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for 
safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents. They 
point out that the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, which has 
resulted in neglect. And they point out that chronic 
understaffing in long-term care facilities results in unacceptable 
conditions, including unanswered calls for help, infrequent 
bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to commit to the 
creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team and to reintroduce actual numbers of 
staff to match the level of care needs and the number of 
residents under their care in long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The 
individuals who signed the petition wish to offer the following: 
that Saskatchewan currently offers a variety of facility options 
to house youth offenders according to the assessed level of risk 
to their community. Saskatoon has Yarrow Youth Farm, or had 
Yarrow Youth Farm, and also Saskatoon has Kilburn Hall. The 
government closed Yarrow Youth Farm to create an open 
custody wing in Kilburn Hall to accommodate Yarrow’s 
residents. The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth 
declared he cannot endorse such a rationalization and that 
Kilburn Hall is a more institutional environment that could 
intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a 
caring home environment for youth who have committed 
minor offences and to provide support to help these young 
people redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, is it my 
honour to stand in recognition of Victims of Crime Awareness 
Week. We have all heard stories from individuals whose lives 
have been affected by acts of violence, sexual assault, theft, and 
other tragedies. Now in its 10th year, this special week is 
intended both to make people aware about the services available 
to victims and to thank those who dedicate their time to helping 
those affected by crime. 
 
Last year our province’s 160 victim support workers helped 
nearly 9,000 people through periods of distress. I’m proud to 
say that soon our province-wide expansion of police-based 
victims services will be complete. These critical services will be 
available in every corner of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our aim is to help those victimized by crime. If 
you or someone you love is a victim of crime, I would 
encourage you to reach out to the police, the Ministry of Justice, 
or a local community organization for these supports. 
 
It is because of the people sitting up in the gallery today that 
these services are available and truly help those who need them 
most. Thank you for making this difference in so many lives. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
proclamation of Victims of Crime Awareness Week. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

World of Whitetail Dinner and Auction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on February 28th I had the 
pleasure to attend the 13th annual World of Whitetail Dinner 



April 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6953 

and Auction, as I know you did too, Mr. Speaker. As always, it 
was a great event, sold out, and great prizes on the auction 
block. All of the proceeds raised from the event go towards the 
important work World of Whitetail supports all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hunting has always been an important part of our province’s 
heritage, an important part of my own life and that of my 
family. The World of Whitetail plays an important role in 
promoting hunting, conservation, and research efforts in 
Saskatchewan, aiming to ensure responsible management of our 
province’s exceptional wild game resources and habitat. 
 
World of Whitetail also does fine work in developing the next 
generation of hunters and encouraging youth to get in touch 
with their natural environment. Mr. Speaker, they recognize that 
it’s important for experienced hunters to take our children, 
nieces, and nephews out into the field in order for our 
province’s hunting proud tradition to continue. 
 
And so I ask all members to join me in thanking all the 
members of the 2015 banquet committee, Don Fenwick, Joe 
Warbeck, Rick Stadnek, Murray Everett, Greg Mallett, Brian 
Miller, Lane Hodnefield, and everyone else who helped make 
this event, and World of Whitetail, such a great success. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Honouring Police Officers 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently I had the privilege to attend the Saskatoon Police 
Service Exemplary Awards Banquet. The awards were for the 
40-Year Bar, 20-Year Medal, 30-Year Plaque, 20-Year Plaque, 
Superintendent’s Award of Commendation, Chief’s Award for 
Community Service, Chief’s Team Award, and Chief’s Award 
for Excellence. 
 
Stories were shared of the bravery of these Saskatoon police 
officers and what they exemplify, Mr. Speaker. The stories 
were extremely moving and demonstrate the heroics our 
courageous women and men in uniform face in order to keep us 
safe. One particular story that stuck out was of a man who 
barricaded himself in his home armed with a rifle. Four 
individuals managed to flee the residence, but the man fired 
shots, causing the officers to take cover behind a parked car. 
The police managed to rescue the people that were hidden in 
areas around the home, while also taking on gunfire. 
Amazingly, the crisis negotiators were able to negotiate with 
the man to exit his home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing a safe 
environment for all Saskatchewan people to call home. Without 
the work of exceptional police officers such as those honoured 
at that event, this would not be possible. With their help, we are 
honouring our commitment to community safety and wellness 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating the award winners and all police officers across 
the province for their outstanding contributions. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatoon Lawn Bowlers 
Compete in International Tournament 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize a team of world-class athletes, 
some of whom I’m proud to say live in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana. Jean Roney, Clem Grant, Jordan Kos, and 
Carolyn Jones are lawn bowlers from Regina and Saskatoon 
who have been finding nothing but success over the last few 
months. 
 
In July of last year, their team won gold at the provincial lawn 
bowling playdowns at the Nutana Lawn Bowling Club, a club 
that has for many years been a fixture in the Buena Vista 
neighbourhood, and it’s helped people of all ages stay active 
and forge new friendships. 
 
After winning provincials, the team went on to win the national 
title in Winnipeg that August, and I’m happy to report to the 
House that their team then went on to represent our great nation 
at the Tiger Bowls invitational tournament held over a number 
of days in Hong Kong and Shenzhen, China. Their team 
finished eighth out of 46 teams and had the opportunity to test 
their mettle against some of the best lawn bowlers in the world. 
 
Another remarkable thing about their team is the wide ranges in 
age between the players. Their youngest player is only 14 and 
their oldest is 79, living proof that lawn bowling is a great sport 
that can be enjoyed by anyone at any age. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing this remarkable 
lawn bowling team and thank them for being such great 
ambassadors for our province and our country on the 
international stage. I also ask all members to join me in 
thanking everyone at the Nutana Lawn Bowling Club for 
everything they’ve done over the years to organize, develop, 
and promote the sport of lawn bowling in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Veteran Honoured by Republic of France 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Often our military 
veterans are forgotten until Remembrance Day every year, but it 
is difficult if not impossible to forget a man as full of life as 
Chan Katzman. 
 
This past December, Chan was awarded the rank of Knight of 
the French National Order of the Legion of Honour by the 
president of the republic of France. As part of the D company of 
the Regina Rifles, Chan and his company fought on the beaches 
of Normandy for the historic D-Day battle. Although 150 men 
went into battle with Chan, only 48 made it through that battle. 
 
Trying to enlist in 1940 when he was only 17 years old, Chan 
remembers having to go back to the office in Prince Albert a 
week later to lie about his age. From there he did training in 
Prince Albert, Dundurn, Nova Scotia, and England before 



6954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

heading to Normandy for D-Day. Mr. Speaker, Chan’s story 
about enlisting and losing so many friends on the battlefield 
unfortunately is all too common. In so many of his interviews 
Chan says, “We were all scared. Anybody who tells you he 
wasn’t scared was a liar.” 
 
Yet it is because of brave men and women like Chan that we 
have so many freedoms in Canada today. I would like to ask all 
members, please join me in thanking Sir Chan Katzman for his 
service to our country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I, along 
with the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, attended the 14th 
annual Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards hosted by the 
Moose Jaw and District Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Speaker, 
this event showcased many successful entrepreneurs and 
businesses in the Moose Jaw area. Forty-nine local businesses 
were nominated for the awards in 10 different categories, plus 
all nominees were eligible to win the Business of the Year 
Award. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s award winners were: Canadian Tire for 
community involvement, Alliance Wellness & Rehabilitation 
for customer service, Common Café & Bakery for Young 
Entrepreneur Award, Prairie Storm Paintball for business 
innovation, and Smoke’s Poutinerie for the Marketing Award. 
Other winners included Hopkins Dining Parlour for the 
Heritage Award, Moose Jaw Hydroseeding for New Business 
Venture, Chow McLeod for job creation, Evans Florist for the 
Pioneer Award, and Green Sister Gardens for the “Green” 
Business Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two major awards went to Alliance Wellness 
& Rehabilitation for the Business of the Year Award, and Dave 
Reidy from Henderson Insurance was honoured as the Business 
Leader of the Year. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the many 
nominees and winners as well as the Moose Jaw and District 
Chamber of Commerce for putting on this great event. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Health Region Resolves Wait Time Backlog 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, in 2010 Saskatchewan’s 
health system began a thorough transformation of how surgical 
services are planned and delivered. This transformation was to 
provide sooner, safer, and smarter care for patients. The 
Saskatchewan surgical initiative set ambitious goals including 
providing access to surgery within three months of the surgeon 
booking a procedure. Earlier today the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region announced that as of March 31st, only 182 
patients were still waiting more than three months for a 
scheduled surgical date. Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable 
accomplishment. Five years ago, about 6,000 patients in the 

region were waiting more than three months for surgery. 
 
I’d like to echo the Minister of Health’s congratulations 
delivered to the region at a special celebration held this morning 
at the Regina General Hospital. The hard work and dedication 
of region staff as well as the patient and family advisors have 
made this possible. After facing increased demand and 
unexpected capacity issues, the RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region] established a priority project three years ago to 
redouble their efforts to resolve the wait times backlog. Today’s 
announcement confirms they have been successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in celebrating the results of the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s efforts to redesign 
processes, improve safety, and improve the quality of surgical 
care in our province. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Discussion of Ambulance Service Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — Last week we learned that Sara Bucsis-Gunn 
had a conversation with the Rural Health minister about 
massive ambulance bills. After the Rural Health minister’s 
defensive statement at the end of Health committee on 
Thursday afternoon, Sara sent my office an email. Here’s what 
Sara said in that email: 
 

While trying to give him perspective on the situation that 
my family was in, and once again being told that this was 
not a priority, the minister then started to suggest that the 
Regina community was very generous, and fundraising is 
always an option. This angers me on so many levels, all I 
can do is cry. 

 
Sara asks, “Why should I have to fundraise for access to 
life-saving medical transportation over and over for my child?” 
What is the Premier’s answer to Sara’s question? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member opposite, and to Sara, I want to say to members of the 
House that I had a chance to listen to the tape, driving home on 
Thursday. And it’s my view . . . and I have a great respect for 
Sara. She’s lost a child. In fact the person she was talking to 
that day has also lost a child in tragic circumstances. But with 
all due respect to her and to the Leader of the Opposition, I just 
do not believe that it’s fair to characterize what the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health said in terms of being . . . that she 
should simply, or that anyone should rely on community 
fundraising. That’s not what was said by the minister. 
 
And I hear the Leader of the Opposition saying he has also 
heard the call. He was on the phone for a hour and 15 minutes 
with this grieving mom, as he should be. He took all the time in 
the world for her, as he should, listened to what she had to say, 
talked about the choices we make in government, talked about 
the ambulance funding that we provide, talked about some of 
the programs we provide for those on low income. And Sara, 
quite rightly, as she should do, she wanted to make the point 



April 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6955 

she didn’t think it was enough, that there were too many people 
falling through the cracks. And I understand that. That’s a part 
of the decisions we make and part of the discourse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, towards the end of the hour and 15 minutes, the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health did say, well you know, 
we live in a province where people want to help out. And there 
are steak night fundraisers in health care, and I’m sure they 
happen in that member’s riding. They happen in my riding as 
well, Mr. Speaker, for people who have costs that may not be 
covered by the system, and so people come around those folks 
and raise money. The minister was simply saying that this 
happens in Saskatchewan, that this might be an option in this 
particular case, given the fact that the low-income support 
wasn’t going to be particularly applicable in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did listen to the tape, and I listened to the call. 
And I’m proud of the fact that the minister spent the time that 
he did, that mostly he was listening, that he canvassed all the 
options, including community fundraising. Mr. Speaker, I hope 
all of us as legislators, when given the opportunity, would 
spend that much time with a constituent or someone even who 
has now relocated, about such a serious matter as this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister raised this issue with 
Sara 30 minutes into the conversation, and he raised it twice, 
Mr. Speaker. And I do not think it’s appropriate when there is a 
mom like Sara — desperate for assistance, desperate for help, 
going to government, clearly showing the story and the facts of 
her life — for charity and for fundraising to be presented as an 
option. And the minister has said that in his confession on 
Thursday in committee. Mr. Speaker, that is not appropriate, 
and I agree with Sara very much so.  
 
And the minister also agreed only for ultra-low-income 
individuals would there be help, recognizing that Sara and her 
family have been left in the lurch. On social media Sara 
Bucsis-Gunn has warned Saskatchewan people: 
 

If you need help affording Sask Health care in an 
emergency, be prepared to have a steak night. That’s what 
Saskatchewan Health minister for rural Saskatchewan told 
me. He also had great suggestions for other charities I 
could have tried. 

 
Now in Sara’s email to my office after the minister’s statement 
last Thursday, she said this: 
 

I feel the need to defend our family as we did fundraise. 
We used that money for lifts and wheelchair ramps and 
vans, as what we had access to didn’t even come close to 
covering the costs of her needs. I have never in my life 
heard of a family fundraising for ambulance bills. 

 
Does the Premier agree with Sara that Saskatchewan families 
should never have to rely on fundraisers like steak nights to pay 
for ambulance bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure members 

understand that the ambulance system we have now, where 
there will be some who aren’t covered by low-income support, 
who aren’t fully supported by I think the 70 per cent subsidy 
that we put into ambulance, this is the same system that has 
been in the province for a long time, including under members 
opposite when they were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what folks have done with ambulance 
bills over the years, whether it was under our term or theirs, but 
in this regard, while I have the utmost respect for Sara, for her 
courage to raise this issue, for what she’s gone through as a 
mother, I did listen to the conversation. And for the member 
opposite to characterize the response of the Minister of Rural 
and Remote Health as simply saying that this is her answer, and 
it’s an answer for everybody with respect to the ambulance 
issue, that they should have a steak night fundraiser, is just 
fundamentally not the accurate representation of what the 
minister was saying. That’s not what he said. 
 
He talked about all of the issues. They had a good and lively 
discussion and debate about whether or not it was adequate. In 
Sara’s view it wasn’t. And the minister talked about other 
choices we made to fund STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] — it wasn’t funded in the province before — that we 
have increased other . . . made choices with respect to cancer 
drugs that other provinces don’t make, to cover those, and that 
Health budgeting is about these issues. And then well into the 
call, maybe it was 30 minutes, maybe it was longer, he said, in 
Saskatchewan we know from time to time communities come 
together and support each other. He was a member of the 
Kinsmen Club. He referenced that. That’s what Kinsmen’s all 
about. That’s what Telemiracle does in many respects, Mr. 
Speaker, as well. 
 
And so all of these are part of the solution for health care and 
for families. And sometimes the solution’s not quite enough, as 
we’ve seen in this case. The minister has indicated the issue of 
ambulance fees are constantly under review, and are being 
reviewed today. 
 
But again I would say to the member opposite, to characterize 
what that minister said in the way he has — someone who has 
also lost a child, who was involved in the discussion, one 
grieving parent to another, for a big part of that call — for him 
to characterize what that minister did, as he has done is, I don’t 
think acceptable, and I don’t think fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there was no answer in the 
Premier’s response about whether families should have to 
fundraise to pay for medically necessary ambulance trips, Mr. 
Speaker. Sara talks about transporting Leandra while she is 
turning blue to a hospital, Mr. Speaker, because they could not 
afford another bill. When Leandra died, she had $7,000 in 
ambulance bills that their family was facing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has record revenue. This policy is wrong. This 
policy needs to be fixed, Mr. Speaker. And for a government 
responsible at a time of record revenues, where they’ve 
shovelled millions out the door for things like lean — and the 
minister talked about that in his call as well, Mr. Speaker — for 
them not to be able to find the dollars to fix this is wrong, 



6956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the Premier, Mr. Speaker, listened to the recording, he would 
know that there’s a lot of frustration that Sara has, especially for 
rural families that have to require transfers to larger hospitals 
and larger services. She talks about how incredibly unfair 
ambulance fees are for parents of sick children in southern 
Saskatchewan: “I just don’t understand how you guys can shut 
down pediatric ICU services in Regina which forces people to 
take their children via ambulance or air ambulance to Saskatoon 
for service and not provide any kind of funding for it to 
compensate.” She says, “Let’s make a whole plan, not a half 
plan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sara’s been very clear with her views. She has 
released the audio. She has written letters, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
very clear this government does not get how this is wrong. The 
Premier avoided that in his last question altogether, his last 
response. Does the Premier agree with Sara that our current 
ambulance system is unfair for rural residents and parents of 
sick kids who can no longer rely on pediatric services in our 
capital? Will he finally do something about it, other than 
presenting fundraising and steak nights as the option for these 
families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there he goes again, 
with respect to just the last part of what he had to say, because 
that is not the right and accurate characterization of what the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health did on the call. I invite 
people watching this, I invite any member to listen to the whole 
call. And you’re right. Sara is very upset about some things and 
understandably so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of things we’ve fixed in health care 
or tried to fix since 2007 when we were getting elected, when 
we were elected, things that were left behind unaddressed by 
the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, including the fact that we had 
a real lack of emergency service in rural Saskatchewan, partly 
because they closed 52 hospitals across the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, one thing we work to do is to identify 
STARS as a real opportunity to provide better emergent service 
in rural Saskatchewan. And I think just this last Friday, STARS 
had a fundraiser, had a fundraiser like they do. We give them 
$10 million a year and STARS — that’s half of the budget — 
STARS fundraises the rest. And so if members opposite have 
bought a calendar from STARS, they participated in fundraising 
for ambulatory care. If anybody in the province supports them, 
buys a lottery ticket or a calendar or goes to an event, they’re 
involved in fundraising. Some of the events might serve steak. I 
mean, they’re dinners actually, just like we’re talking about 
here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if now the members opposite are 
saying that’s not acceptable in the case of STARS either and 
government should fund it all. I don’t think they’re saying that. 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s make sure . . . We are going to have this 
debate about where we’re at with respect to ambulance fees, 
and the government’s currently reviewing it, as the Minister of 
Health has said. But to have this debate, we do not have to take 
words that were said by a member earnestly — and I think with 

compassion, as I heard the call — and twist those words into 
something that they’re not. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Health Services in Craik and District  
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, listen to the response that the 
minister gave to Sara. We’ll see there was one that was 
argumentative. We’ll see that there was one, Mr. Speaker, that 
was not listening to the really legitimate questions and concern 
she has. The only option given to Sara, Mr. Speaker, the only 
option as identified by the minister was this fundraising option. 
The other programs available for ultra-low incomes, which 
Sara’s family would not qualify for . . . For every other day 
Saskatchewan families, it’s fundraise or have insurance. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Speaker, where we see some issues with 
respect to what the Rural Health minister has said, the Rural 
Health minister received a letter this morning from the Right 
Reverend David Ashdown who chairs the Craik and district 
health committee. It says, “We are deeply concerned about a 
number of factual errors in your response in the Legislative 
Assembly on April 15.” The letter goes on to say, “We do not 
know on what basis you gave the answer you did in the 
Legislative Assembly; however it was clearly inaccurate, and 
we strongly request that you immediately make a public 
correction.” 

 
The Premier also received a copy of this letter, Mr. Speaker, 
which outlines the factual errors that the Rural Health minister 
made. What does the Premier have to say to the people of Craik 
and area? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what errors 
the members are speaking of. We’ve said time and time again 
from the beginning of this case, Craik has been brought forward 
to us, that we are committed to having a full-time physician in 
Craik, four-day-a-week physician. That will happen. There is 
currently different candidates that have toured the facility, a 
couple of others that are interested. And that will be put in 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
We’ve also committed to the permanent nurse practitioner 
which has been in place. Admittedly, the current one is on 
maternity leave. That position will be filled, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve committed to X-ray and lab services to remain. We’ve 
committed to emergency services that, if they present 
themselves, physicians can attend to those or nurse practitioners 
can attend to those as they present themselves. In the case of 
emergencies that can’t be addressed at that facility, Mr. 
Speaker, EMS [emergency medical services] or STARS can be 
called in. 
 
We have committed to no further plans for renovations to that 
facility, that their stabilization and their acute care bed will be 
in a temporary acute care, and flex bed will be left in place for 
issues that should arise, Mr. Speaker. So I think we’ve been 



April 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6957 

perfectly clear on this case from the very beginning. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t sound as though 
the minister has read the letter from the Right Reverend. 
Contrary to what the Rural Health minister claimed in question 
period last week, the Right Reverend David Ashdown’s letter 
says there was no openness to negotiate with the doctor, Mr. 
Speaker, in Craik. Quote, quote from the Right Reverend David 
Ashdown: “You were not prepared to hear the doctor’s 
concerns or consider his proposal for changes. That is not 
negotiation.” 
 
The Archbishop’s letter challenges the Rural Health minister’s 
claim that two applicants have toured the facility. And it 
challenges the Rural Health minister’s claim about locum 
coverage: “Clearly the ongoing medical coverage promised on 
March 2nd, 2015 by both you and the Premier is simply not 
happening.” 
 
So again, what does the Premier have to say to the people of 
Craik and area about how his Rural Health minister got it so 
wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
explained in the Assembly before, so I won’t eat up a lot of 
question period time on going through the details of the 
consultation; the meetings with the reeve; with Reverend 
Ashdown; with the doctor time and time again; and 
innumerable phone calls; about 32 I think respondents or letter 
writers and concerned citizens from Craik that we have 
documented, that wrote admittedly numerous pieces of 
correspondence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Time and time again, contact with the former physician went 
unanswered. Mr. Speaker, in fact, a draft contract that was 
delivered to the doctor at the end of January, a number of weeks 
— I’m going by memory now, Mr. Speaker — three or four 
weeks later, when I met with him again in my office, welcomed 
him and in fact invited him in after he hadn’t contacted the 
health region, hadn’t contacted the ministry, again on behalf of 
my office, we invited him in. At that point he admitted he 
hadn’t even read the draft contract, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think consultation isn’t one-way, Mr. Speaker. It takes two 
parties. We’ve done what we can and, as it is, we have to move 
on. We have to place a physician in that facility permanently. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments about 
their so-called willingness to negotiate are simply inaccurate. 
We know how they’ve dug in their heels, Mr. Speaker, and 
have shown no willingness to work with the people in Craik 
whatsoever. 
 
But the community of Craik is upset, Mr. Speaker, because the 
promises that that minister and that Premier made about what 
would be provided for locum coverage, claims that they made 

about tours that were to happen, Mr. Speaker, on the ground 
they’re saying that this information isn’t correct. The people of 
Craik and area blame this mess on the health region. They 
blame it on two Health ministers and a Premier, Mr. Speaker, 
that won’t take their concerns seriously and refuse to listen to 
their proposals. 
 
Because the Sask Party government has let them down, the 
community is actively recruiting a doctor on an open 
fee-for-service practice in Craik. But they’re still begging for 
this government to step up to the plate and do its part for rural 
health care, Mr. Speaker. Last month they wrote to the Rural 
Health minister and asked him to immediately convene a 
meeting with the town, the RM [rural municipality], and the 
health regions in order to find an acceptable solution. But, Mr. 
Speaker, you know what? They’ve never heard back. 
 
Will the Premier tell either of his Health ministers to do their 
job, convene a meeting this week, Mr. Speaker, and hammer 
out a solution that is acceptable to the people of Craik and area? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of trying to 
sound funny, I do believe the member across, he may not have 
called me a liar, but I do believe he told me that my pants are on 
fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the allegations the member across is bringing is 
just, at this point it’s beyond belief, Mr. Speaker. We have 
assurance that there has been two physicians that have toured 
the facility. We know that there’s at least two others that have 
been showing interest up to a couple of weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker. Time and time again, we find these assumptions 
coming in the Assembly. And I admit it, it gets frustrating, Mr. 
Speaker, that they assume that because, you know, a certain 
party isn’t getting exactly what they’ve asked for, there’s no 
consultation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, my office has been open. We’ve received numerous 
phone calls, responded to numerous phone calls and letters, had 
numerous meetings with the reverend, with the reeve, with 
other stakeholders from the area, Mr. Speaker. I think 
consultation has been pretty open. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Quality of Patient Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Louisa Moberly is 79 years old. She has 
Parkinson’s, dementia, and heart troubles. She was in the La 
Ronge Health Centre for a couple of weeks and she suffered 
many falls. Her family wants to know why. Here’s what 
Louisa’s daughter says: 
 

Every time I think about how I found her when I got to 
Saskatoon, when we found her in emergency, you wouldn’t 
believe the shock, then the horror, and the anger. We were 
just bawling. 

 
Louisa’s family is concerned about staffing levels, about 



6958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

communication, and about lack of standards. Do either of the 
Health ministers have anything to say to Louisa’s family today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously this is a very serious situation that took place in La 
Ronge at the long-term care facility. The health region has 
indicated that it does meet the requirements to be deemed as a 
critical incident. An investigation is under way to determine the 
nature of what happened in this case. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
that investigation is under way. It would be, I think, not prudent 
for me to comment on unsubstantiated conversations about 
what may have actually taken place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look forward though to finding out what exactly the facility 
does determine as a part of their investigation. We would then 
use that information, as we do in all types of critical incidents, 
to make changes so that these types of incidents don’t occur 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Louisa’s life has been tough. She deserves 
dignity and security in her senior years. Her family wants her 
moved to Pineview Terrace Lodge in Prince Albert to be close 
to them so they can help care for her, but her family has been 
told the wait-list is too long. So there’s no room for Louisa in 
Prince Albert, and there’s no long-term care bed for her in La 
Ronge either. 
 
To the minister: how long are the wait-lists in these facilities 
and where is Louisa supposed to go? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
office has reached out to her family directly, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to work with the family, not only through this 
investigation period, but also to try to address some of the 
concerns about where in fact she will reside after she’s 
discharged from hospital, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
aware that her bed would have been given away while she was 
sent to acute care but, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly look into 
this. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that the facility feels very much 
sympathetic to the family and to Louisa in this situation. I know 
the care team, Mr. Speaker, is completely devastated that there 
has been some commentary in public realms, Mr. Speaker, 
alleging that this may have been a result of abuse, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s certainly nothing to indicate that that in fact is a part of 
this case, and I know that they’re very devastated by that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re waiting to find out exactly what 
happened through the investigation so that we can work with 
the health region to determine what corrective actions would 
need to take place to ensure that this doesn’t happen to any 
other resident. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for School Division 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Prairie Spirit School 
Division has sent home a letter with students saying that the 
Sask Party government’s budget was even worse than expected. 
Prairie Spirit anticipated a shortfall of $6 million. They said that 
would mean fewer staff working directly in schools with 
students, less funds to support students with diverse needs, less 
funds to support extracurricular activities, less funds for student 
programs, and less funds for building and maintenance needs. 
 
That’s what Prairie Spirit anticipated when they thought there 
would be, when they anticipated a $6 million shortfall, but 
there’s actually a $7 million shortfall because of this 
government’s funding. What does the Education minister have 
to say to students, parents, and teachers in Prairie Spirit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Prairie Spirit chose to send 
a letter to the parents immediately preceding the budget, 
assuming they were not going to get an enrolment increase, 
assuming they were not going to get transition funding. We 
were troubled by that. In fact they received transition funding, 
so I would have thought that their position would have been 
significantly better than what they had estimated. So we are 
more surprised the letter doesn’t say how the $7 million was 
arrived at. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they have received an 
increase in operating funding each and every year under our 
government as well as substantial capital investments. Mr. 
Speaker, in 2007-2008 that school division received $79.135 
million; 2015-2016 $103.42 million, an increase over seven 
years, excluding capital, of 31 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
substantial increase and it has gone up in each and every year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll take Prairie 
Spirit’s word over that of the minister’s on this one. 
 
Over the past several years Prairie Spirit has been pushing the 
Sask Party government to act, but this government has plugged 
its ears. The letter the school division sent to parents late last 
week says: 
 

Despite this extensive advocacy for our students, no 
changes have been made to address the inequities in Prairie 
Spirit’s funding. 
 
It is both disheartening and disappointing that our local 
MLAs paid for full-page advertising to support the 
government rather than advocate for our students to receive 
equitable funding. 

 
How on earth is it acceptable for a government MLA or MLAs 
to take out full-page ads to attack the school division instead of 
standing up for the students that they’re supposed to represent, 
Mr. Speaker? To the Education minister: when will this 
government get its misplaced priorities straightened out in 
education? 



April 20, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6959 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the enrolment in 
Prairie Spirit was 8,824. It’s now 10,395, an increase of 18 per 
cent. During that time operating funding has gone up by 31 per 
cent. In addition to that, that school division has received more 
capital funding per capita than any other school division in the 
province. 
 
And I’m going to list some of those things: $2.9 million for 
block capital, 360,000 for additional child care upgrades, one 
and a half million dollars for pre-K [pre-kindergarten] upgrades, 
$9.9 million for 32 relocatable units, $3 million for preventive 
maintenance, one and a half million dollars for emergent 
funding projects, $19 million towards an addition and major 
renovation at Stobart Community High School, $29 million for 
a brand new Warman middle years school, $24 million for an 
addition to Martensville High School to accommodate hundreds 
more students. 
 
As well as that, Mr. Speaker, we are proceeding with the 
equivalent of four brand new joint-use schools for Warman and 
Martensville, so that each of those cities will see a joint school 
facility to open in fall of 2017, Mr. Speaker. We’re doing a lot 
more than the members over there ever did. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Relations. 
 

SaskAlert Goes Province Wide  
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to stand before you and announce to the members of the 
Saskatchewan legislature that after a great deal of planning and 
many months of vigorous testing that SaskAlert, 
Saskatchewan’s new emergency publicly alerting program, has 
gone province wide. 
 
SaskAlert enables the Government of Saskatchewan, 
participating communities, government Crowns and agencies, 
and Environment Canada to quickly inform residents, and those 
people travelling within or through our province, of any 
impending emergencies where life or property is threatened. 
Mr. Speaker, these alerts will be shared directly with residents 
when they need it most through traditional channels such as 
local television and radio, as well as online at saskalert.ca and 
on The Weather Network website and smartphone app. 
 
By partnering with provincial media outlets, alerts can be 
tailored for broadcast across the province or, if necessary, focus 
on an individual community or region, improving efficiency 
and getting information to those in need. I’m very happy to 
report that as the SaskAlert program grows and more partners 
come on board, so too will our ability to share alerts directly 
with the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our provincial first responders can attest when 
faced with an emergency, three key factors often come into 
play. They are: having sufficient time, having accurate 
information, and being prepared. SaskAlert can greatly 
influence these factors by sharing potentially life-saving 

information within seconds of it becoming available, 
information that will help individuals prepare for an imminent 
emergency and protect themselves, their families, their homes, 
and their communities. SaskAlert will not only be used to 
broadcast information when an emergency is imminent, Mr. 
Speaker. It can also be used to share information with the public 
as a situation develops and evolves, information like when a 
severe weather system is approaching or if a highway has been 
washed out or where an emergency evacuation centre is located. 
 
As we all know, Saskatchewan is a very large and diverse 
province where weather can change in an instant. It’s not 
uncommon for us to experience tornadoes and plow winds, 
blizzards, and flooding annually. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
thousands of Saskatchewan residents have faced these 
emergencies in the last four years alone, and that’s a benefit of 
this program. SaskAlert’s flexibility allows for localized alerts 
to be issued based on the threat that a specific community might 
be facing. 
 
Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment to 
thank not only the ministry staff who have spent so much time 
developing and testing this program, but also the community 
leaders and media partners who have signed on to make this a 
reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to welcome this announcement here today. This is a very good 
measure and a good step, and certainly it’ll be important to 
track it through implementation. Certainly we’ve advocated and 
spoken to the importance of establishing such a broad-based 
system. I’m thankful to all those that have played a role in 
seeing this through to development. 
 
I’m glad too, you know, that they have the various means to get 
this message out. I wasn’t sure if they were just going to leave 
that with the voice of the member from Canora-Pelly or if they 
were going to formalize that through other mechanisms, and 
I’m pleased to see those here today. Certainly as the minister 
has said here today, getting this information out in a timely way 
that allows communities and families to protect their property 
and to protect their families is incredibly important. 
 
I know that certainly technologies enable us to communicate in 
a way that we haven’t before around irregular weather, around 
potential wind damage, around hail, around flooding and water, 
and certainly we welcome this announcement. 
 
I think of so many communities and so many families that have 
been impacted in the past on this front. We know that irregular 
and volatile weather is very much a reality within our province, 
and we see this as a positive measure for which we’d like to 
welcome. I know in the past, in the past number of years, as 
technology has been improved, I know that many people rely on 
even Twitter, they say, to track some of the storm activity. And 
certainly that’s not a sufficient inventory or warning system, 
although certainly #saskstorm is interesting. 
 
What is better is what’s being brought forward here today, is an 
organized system through government and with many partners 
to ensure that Saskatchewan people and communities have the 



6960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2015 

information that they so deserve. So it’s a pleasure to welcome 
this step here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 178, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2015 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 
reading of Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move, to facilitate the work of committees this 
afternoon and this evening, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:34.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6949 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6949 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6949 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6951 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6951 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6951 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6951 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6951 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 
 World of Whitetail Dinner and Auction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 
 Honouring Police Officers 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6953 
 Saskatoon Lawn Bowlers Compete in International Tournament 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6953 
 Saskatoon Veteran Honoured by Republic of France 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6953 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6954 
 Health Region Resolves Wait Time Backlog 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6954 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Discussion of Ambulance Service Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6954 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6954 
 Provision of Health Services in Craik and District  
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6956 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6956 
 Quality of Patient Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6957 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6958 
 Funding for School Division 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6958 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6958 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskAlert Goes Province Wide  
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6959 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6959 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6960 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


